USX Reports Drop in Net Of 15.2% for the 2d Quarter
LEAD: The USX Corporation, which operates the nation's largest steel business and has major energy holdings, yesterday reported a 15.2 percent drop in second-quarter earnings.
The company's results were hurt by lower earnings in steel and a $99 million charge for a loss from the expected sale of the exploration and production properties of its Texas Oil and


White House Crime: Punish or Expose?
LEAD: The U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington has set a nearly impossible standard for prosecuting high-profile cases that demands exposure as well as punishment.
A divided three-judge panel has set aside Oliver North's convictions for crimes related to the Iran-contra scandal.
Two judges concluded that the prosecutor failed to prove that he made his case without the aid of Mr.


A.F.L.-C.I.O. Declines A Stand on Abortion
LEAD: The governing board of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. decided by voice vote today to remain neutral on the abortion issue but said it resented government intrusion into personal matters.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Golf Club Admits Blacks
Bowing to pressure from civil-rights groups and companies withdrawing advertising from the P.G.A.
Championship, an Alabama country club agreed to accept blacks.
Page A13.
Ryan Wins No. 300
Nolan Ryan, at age 43, captured his 300th major league victory last night, going seven and two-thirds innings in the Texas Rangers' defeat of the Brewers at Milwaukee.


Golf;   Shoal Creek Club Agrees To Begin Admitting Blacks
LEAD: Bowing to pressure from civil-rights leaders and an increasing number of corporate sponsors who have withdrawn television advertising from next week's P.G.A.
Championship there, Shoal Creek Country Club agreed today to accept black members into its previously all-white membership.
In return, the civil rights leaders agreed to call off picketing of the championship.


Hiring Quotas Exist, but Employers Won't Tell;   Showing Necessity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jamaica and Barbados Offer Force to End Trinidad Unrest
LEAD: Jamaica and Barbados have offered assistance to the Government of Trinidad to help it restore public order after the widespread looting and violence produced by an attempted coup.


Evolution in Europe;   Anti-Government Protesters Rally in a Bucharest Square
LEAD: Scores of anti-Government demonstrators rallied tonight in University Square in the capital's center, the site of a 53-day demonstration that was violently broken up by the police in mid-June.


Steinbrenner Whine Fails 'Smell Test'
LEAD: George Steinbrenner's reign of tyranny as the Yankees' principal owner was also a reign of propaganda.
Whatever the problem, he shouted loud enough and long enough that it was always somebody else's fault.
When the team stumbled, it had to be the fault of the dismissed manager, the dismissed pitching coach or the dismissed players.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   The Power Of Account Planning
LEAD: NEW YORK has always been a tough market for small agencies.
To succeed, most rely on their creative reputations for producing the innovative work not usually found at many larger agencies.


Hiroshima Study Finds No Genetic Damage
LEAD: A 40-year study of thousands of Japanese who survived the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki shows radiation exposure did not cause genetic damage that could lead to human mutations, a researcher said today.


We Shouldn't Resent Japan's Achievement
LEAD: To the Editor:


Eating Well
LEAD: IF you can't get the student to the classes, take the classes to the student.
Some such philosophy was in the works when the Institute for Preventive Medicine at Methodist Hospital opened a satellite center on the second floor of the Rice Epicurean Market on San Felipe here in Houston.


Bolton Sullivan, Executive, 94
LEAD: Bolton Sullivan, the founder and retired president of the Skil Corporation of Chicago, died Thursday at his home in Lake Forest, Ill.
He was 94 years old.


Minority Role in Broadcasting Yields Far Bigger Effect on Radio Than TV
LEAD: After Federal and local law-enforcement officials arrested Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington on drug charges in January, Cathy Hughes devoted a week of her morning radio talk show on WOL-AM to issues raised by the arrest.


Blinder Files for Bankruptcy
LEAD: Blinder, Robinson &amp; Company, once the largest penny-stock brokerage in the world, has filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of Federal bankruptcy laws.


Arrests Made in Killing of 9-Month-Old in the Bronx


Priscilla L. Loomis, 99; Active in Charity Work
LEAD: Priscilla Lockwood Loomis, who received an award from Mayor Edward I. Koch in 1981 for 75 years of volunteer charity work, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Huntington, L.I.
She was 99 years old and formerly lived in Manhattan.


Platinum Rises $10 an Ounce On Signs of Japanese Buying
LEAD: Platinum futures prices surged more than $10 an ounce yesterday amid several bullish factors, including signs of buying by the Japanese, the world's biggest platinum jewelry consumers.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about a bombing in Israel misidentified the hometown of a Canadian tourist killed in the explosion.
It is Willowdale, a suburb of Toronto.


Pretoria Announces an End To Unit Accused in Slayings
LEAD: The South African military announced tonight that it had disbanded a clandestine unit held responsible by its adversaries for the assassination of political dissidents.


Navy Finds an Object That May Be Jet Door
LEAD: Navy searchers using a remote-controlled deep-sea submarine have found what could be the cargo door that was torn off a United Airlines jumbo jet last year, hurling nine people to their death over the Pacific.


In Wisconsin, Indian Feasts The Way They Used to Be
LEAD: HELEN SAGLIN, a Chippewa, remembers childhood meals of wild rice, game, cornmeal soup and fry bread.
Now, as a member of the Tekakwitha Club, a Roman Catholic women's organization on the Lac du Flambeau Reservation in north-central Wisconsin, Ms.
Saglin is cooking similar meals for tourist groups interested in American Indian foods.


SALVADORAN JUDGE SEEKS HELP OF U.S.
LEAD: A judge's request that two United States officials testify in the investigation of the killings of six Jesuit priests last November has prompted a spirited debate between American officials here and in Washington.


Market Place;   Less Optimism On Japan Stocks
LEAD: THE Tokyo stock market, once again, is tumbling.
And as in the 30 percent plunge from January to April, the villians are high interest rates, a weak yen and higher oil prices.


Donald L. Ranard, 73, U.S. Aide Who Disclosed Seoul's Lobbying
LEAD: Donald L. Ranard, a longtime Foreign Service official who played a key role in uncovering the role of South Korean lobbyists in Washington in the mid-1970's, died on Saturday at Georgetown University Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Centreville, Va., and Romney, W. Va.
Mr.
Ranard's family said he died of leukemia.


Economic Scene;   East Germany's Morning After
LEAD: IF one tottering socialist economy can manage the transition to capitalism, goes the conventional wisdom, that economy is East Germany's.
But getting there, suggests Steve H. Hanke, an economist at Johns Hopkins University, is unlikely to be half the fun.
For paradoxically, East Germany's great asset - instant access to the markets and wealth of West


Consolidated Freight Shifts Top Executives
LEAD: Consolidated Freightways Inc., a big transportation company badly hurt by losses at an air freight operation it acquired, has accepted the resignation of its president and chief executive, Lary R. Scott.


Ex-Aide to Bush Saw U.S. Data In S.&amp; L. Deals
LEAD: Robert L. Thompson, a lobbyist who used his Bush Administration contacts to help the buyers of insolvent savings and loan associations, was able to review and suggest modifications to internal Government documents affecting his clients' financial interests, according to testimony and documents released by a


Grizzled Castro-Fighter Still Man With a Mission
LEAD: The Cuban Government calls him a terrorist.
A goodly number of Cuban exiles in Miami call him a patriot.
And American officials have veered, at different times, between one view and the other.


Gull Disease Closes 4 Islands
LEAD: Four privately-owned islands in Lake Champlain will be quarantined because of a mysterious disease that killed 4,000 to 5,000 ring-bellied sea gulls, a state official said today.
The birds, almost all fledglings, died of a disease that seems to have subsided, said Bob Inslerman, a wildlife manager for the State Department of Environmental Conservation.


40 ARE STILL HELD
LEAD: Gunmen from a militant Muslim group released the wounded Prime Minister of this Caribbean island nation today, but they continue to hold other members of the Government who were taken hostage four days ago.


The Prado Finds Out What It Has and Where
LEAD: When Alfonso Perez Sanchez joined the Prado Museum in 1960, the young art historian was given the mundane title of head of the storeroom and the testing job of preparing an inventory of the institution's vast collection.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I don't look out the window.


The Perpetual Crime Wave Crests, and a City Shudders
LEAD: The killing of four children in nine days by gunfire intended for others has pierced New Yorkers' instinctive imperviousness to the violence that increasingly surrounds them in a city where 2,000 people are likely to be murdered this year.


Bridge
LEAD: Bridge and other intellectual games are excluded from the Olympics, but the organizers of the Goodwill Games in Seattle have proved more flexible.
Twenty-five Soviet players are there, and will compete today and tomorrow against players from the Seattle area.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 27
July 20
July 28
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.1
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
215.6
216.3
226.0
Distillate stocks
118.6
117.1
111.5
Crude imports, daily
7.3
6.6
6.6
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.0
2.0
Crude stocks
386.6
383.7
330.1
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
93.7
93.7
91.0


Reorganizing the Yankees;   Vincent Directive and Steinbrenner Response
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the documents released by Commissioner Fay Vincent yesterday and the four-paragraph statement issued by George Steinbrenner.
Agreement And Resolution


U.S. Proposes Steps to Curb Pollution If Plans by Los Angeles Fall Short
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency proposed far-reaching pollution-control measures today for the Los Angeles area, with some to be used if new state and local efforts failed to bring pollution levels within legal limits.


Media Business;   Editor Leaving Philadelphia Inquirer
LEAD: The executive editor and president of The Philadelphia Inquirer, Eugene L. Roberts Jr., announced unexpectedly yesterday that he would retire on Sept. 1.


Frohnmayer Shifts Stand On Meetings
LEAD: Faced with a lawsuit filed by four major newspapers, John E. Frohnmayer, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts and its advisory body, the National Council on the Arts, today decided to open to the public the entire four-day meeting, beginning tomorrow, at which the council will review grant applications.


The Media Business;   House Passes Airwaves Bill
LEAD: The House of Representatives approved a bill late Monday night that would help ease overcrowding of the airwaves by transferring many radio frequencies from the Federal Government to private users and state and local governments.
The House passed the bill on a voice vote without dissent.


Swinging Briefcases by Day, Rock Guitars by Night
LEAD: ERIC ONORE is a typical young American lawyer.
He wears wing-tip shoes and pin-stripe suits.
He specializes in civil law and divorce.
Most days are as exciting as watching Wite-Out dry. ''I've evicted a family,'' he said, when asked about recent accomplishments.


Prices on Treasury Bonds Ease
LEAD: Prices of long-term Treasury bonds eased yesterday in lackluster trading, causing rates to edge up.
Dealers described the market's mood as indecisive.
Some dealers said a pause was normal after two sessions of sharp advances, but others described the market as confused and contended that the recent price gains had left the market vulnerable to any determined selling.


Heath Is Suspended
LEAD: Mke Heath, the Detroit Tiger catcher, was suspended for two games by the American League yesterday for bumping Umpire John Hirschbeck.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: THE Broadway Barber Shop, between 103d and 104th Streets, and Kay Demetriou, its owner, have been Upper West Side fixtures for four decades.
Three generations of families have had their hair cut by Mr.
Kay, as he is called, and six days a week for more than 40 years passers-by have been rapping on the shop's window and waving to its proprietor.


Endowment Restriction Is Called Unwise
LEAD: Six constitutional law experts today told a commission reviewing the policies of the National Endowment for the Arts that it was unwise to demand that recipients of grants certify under oath that they would not use Federal money to create obscene works.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Saved by the Rain
Rain saved Horst Skoff of Austria from defeat and three West German players advanced at the Austrian Open tournament at Kitzbuhel, Austria.
Skoff, one of the favorites, trailed Christian Saceanu of West Germany, 4-6, 4-5, when the match was interrupted by a thunderstorm.


Norman Pleshette, Obstetrician, 87
LEAD: Dr.
Norman Pleshette, an obstetrician and gynecologist in Manhattan for almost 60 years, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.


Wine Talk;   A Voice Of the Mets Has a Nose For Wine
LEAD: RUSTY STAUB is chatting with guests, a couple of young executive types, at his restaurant on Fifth Avenue at 47th Street.
They are staring at him, wide-eyed.
Could he be telling them about his first major-league homer, off Don Drysdale of the Dodgers, when he was 19 years old and playing for the old Houston Colt .45's?


Protesters in Soviet Georgia Block Railway, Causing Food and Fuel Shortages


Book Notes
LEAD:
A Big Sayles Advance


Company News;   A.T.&amp;T. to Cut Computer Jobs
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it would shrink its computer equipment operations by up to 650 people through job transfers and possible layoffs.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Business Day yesterday, headed ''The Favorite Stocks,'' misstated the performance of several stocks.
BellSouth closed on Monday at $53.50 a share, up 87.5 cents; Bell Atlantic, $47.625, up $1.25; Nynex, $75, up 87.5 cents; Ameritech, $59.75, up $1.625; Pacific Telesis, $41.75, up 12.5 cents; U S West, $36.125, up 25 cents; General Motors, $47.375, unchanged; Bell Canada, $32.50, unchanged, and Sears, Roebuck, $33.875, up 12.5 cents.


C.D. Yields Fall for 9th Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts have fallen for the ninth consecutive week, and some analysts say they expect further declines.


Xerox Profit Declines 27%
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation today reported a 27 percent drop in second-quarter earnings and cited declines in its insurance business.


Besieged Amazon Unionists Say Phoned Death Threats Are Collect
LEAD: Osmarino Amancio Rodrigues, secretary of the National Council of Rubber Tappers, said here today that he and his associates were getting phoned death threats collect.


Microwave Cooking
LEAD: SALADS are not the first thing that springs to mind when you're considering the capabilities of the microwave oven, but for the robust salads of summer, it can be an efficient, cool helper.
For variety, vegetables can be cooked in one dish, rather than separately timed in a plethora of little pots of boiling water.


Evolution in Europe;   Soviet-Albanian Ties Restored
LEAD: The Soviet Union and Albania have agreed to normalize relations, which were severed in 1961 during Moscow's rift with Beijing, the Soviet press agency Tass reported.
The Albanians sided with China in the ideological dispute.
The agreement was reached during talks in Bulgaria in June and in Tirana Monday, Tass said.


GENE TREATMENTS FOR HUMAN ILLNESS MAY BE TRIED SOON
LEAD: The revolution in human gene therapy, so long ballyhooed and debated, began today in earnest as a Government panel approved experiments with two therapies designed to treat human disease by inserting new genes into cells.


COMMUNISTS WIN MONGOLIA BALLOT
LEAD: The Communist Party won a majority in this country's first free legislative elections but will invite opposition groups to join the Government, the party chairman said today.
The election was held Sunday.


Shootings Jolt Children to New Views of Guns
LEAD: The closest Leonardo Laziza has come to a real gun was when he saw one, at eye level, on a police officer's hip, tucked inside a holster.
But Leonardo, a 6-year-old from Boerum Hill in Brooklyn, said he could identify two kinds of firearms, ''a pistol and a bazooka,'' both from movies and cartoons.


Abondoned-Car Owners in New York Now Face Heavy Penalty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baseball;   His Role on Olympics Becomes Uncertain, Too
LEAD: The actions taken against George Steinbrenner by major league baseball on Monday have raised questions about his ability to remain as a vice president of the United States Olympic Committee, a position he cherishes and one in which he has worked hard.


Horse Racing;   Royalty at Saratoga: The Horses, Not People
LEAD: The illusion of high society and the reality of superior horses will return to New York racing Wednesday when Saratoga Race Track opens for the 122d time.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-8


Company News;   I.B.M. Reduces Some PC Prices
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation announced price cuts of up to 34 percent on some personal computer models that it plans to discontinue at the end of October.


Bankruptcy Action Is Taken by Grossinger's
LEAD: Grossinger's Hotel and Country Club, the Catskill resort, has filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in Federal Bankruptcy Court in White Plains and probably will be liquidated, according to its federally appointed trustee.


Currency Markets;   Tumbling U.S. Dollar Could Hit New Lows
LEAD: Weakened by a sluggish economy and the expectation of lower interest rates, the American dollar is tumbling, and many economists expect it to reach or come close to all-time lows against several leading currencies.


Company News;   Motorola to Ship Wristwatch Pager
LEAD: Motorola Inc. began taking orders for a combination wristwatch and beeper and said it would begin shipping the devices in eight to 10 days.
The two-ounce black plastic watch, which can be used in all of the nation's metropolitan areas, stores the telephone number and time of the six most recent calls it receives and has a suggested retail price of $300, the Schaumburg,


Evolution in Europe;   East Germans Tell How Bonn Paid for Prisoners
LEAD: East Germany's Interior Minister said today that the former Communist Government had released 33,000 political prisoners to West Germany from 1964 to 1989, against indirect payments from Bonn that started at the equivalent of $10,000 a head and ended up at about $60,000.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: MY barbecues this summer have featured much more pork than beef.
Pork is a tender and mild meat that can be enhanced by all sorts of marinades.


Reorganizing the Yankees;   Yankees Owners Not of One Mind
LEAD: The Yankees' 18 limited partners, an eclectic group that George Steinbrenner culled from business associates, friends and the fan population, appear to be far from united in seeing his 33-year-old son follow as the Yankees' general partner.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Economy


Savings Crime Bill Advances
LEAD: The House today overwhelmingly approved legislation that would strengthen criminal penalties for crimes involving savings and loan institutions and create a special national commission to study the causes of the savings and loan debacle.


Traditional Rivals
LEAD: The University of Arkansas may be headed to the Southeastern Conference, but Athletic Director Frank Broyles wants to keep a few rivalries from ending.


Central Figure Is Convicted In '85 Killing of Drug Agent
LEAD: A jury today convicted Ruben Zuno Arce, a brother-in-law of a former Mexican president and the most important defendant in the 1985 torture and killing of an American drug agent in Mexico.


Ford and Fiat Announce Joint Venture
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company and the Fiat Group of Italy today announced a joint venture combining their $5 billion worldwide tractor, farm and industrial equipment operations.


Chung Hyun Ri Journal;   Korean Spat: It's a Wall! No It Isn't! Is Too! Is Not!
LEAD: Amid the layers on layers of defenses leading up to the edge of the demilitarized zone, it is easy to miss one more, added almost as an afterthought 12 years ago: a steep grassy slope, topped with barbed wire, that falls off into a 20-mile cliff of cement facing North Korea.


Man's Body Found in Rubble From Blast in North Carolina
LEAD: Investigators found a body of a man in the rubble of a gutted downtown block on Monday while looking for clues to the cause of a weekend explosion that destroyed at least eight busineses, a Federal agent said.


Baseball;   Faced With Suspension, Steinbrenner Sought an Alternative
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent wanted to suspend George Steinbrenner for two years, but Steinbrenner opted for life instead.


No Indictment in Teaneck Killing, But New State Inquiry Is Ordered
LEAD: The New Jersey Attorney General said last night that a state grand jury had not indicted a white Teaneck police officer in the fatal shooting of a black teen-ager in April, but that the case had been ''contaminated'' by errors by the Bergen County Medical Examiner and would be submitted to a second grand jury.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.00
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.49
7.50
7.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.32
7.37
7.36
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.26
8.28
7.60
30-YR.


A Plan Aimed at Improving Schools
LEAD: The nation's governors today approved plans intended to give backbone to their national education policies, but the package was greeted with skepticism by some education groups.


Books of The Times;   The Bomb as Horror and Warning
LEAD:
The Bomb
By Makoto Oda
Translated by D. H. Whittaker. 216 pages. Kodansha International. $18.95.
Hiroshima
Three Witnesses
Edited and translated by Richard H. Minear
Illustrated. 393 pages. Princeton University Press. $40 cloth; $15 paper.


House Panel Votes to Cut Off Bomber
LEAD: In a blow to the Bush Administration, the House Armed Services Committee voted today to end production of the Stealth bomber and cut nearly $2 billion from the Pentagon's proposal for the ''Star Wars'' anti-missile program.


Critic's Notebook;   Artist as Art, or, Sui Too Can Be Generis
LEAD: The rejection of Karen Finley and three other experimentalists for grants from the National Endowment for the Arts has made the term ''performance artist'' the subject of considerable debate and wide attention.
People who have no conception of the range or purpose of the form now use the words with alacrity, as a synonym for anything outrageous.


Review/Television;   He Wouldn't Cooperate, And He Finally Won
LEAD: Bill Moyers and Studs Terkel come not to bury John Henry Faulk but to praise him.
They were friends of the Texas performer, who died in April and who is best known for his victory over blacklisters in 1962. ''The Man Who Beat the Blacklist: John Henry Faulk'' may be seen at 9 tonight on Channel 13 and at 10 P.M.


Election Finance Change Is Rejected
LEAD: The Senate rejected an amendment late tonight that called for a voluntary system of public financing of Senate campaigns.


Echoes of Wars Fade As Beach Is Called Safe
LEAD: Not far from where Andy Chepaitis presided today atop his lifeguard chair, trench mortar shells pounded the beach in World War I and .50-caliber machine guns raked the dunes in later wars where troops trained before going overseas.


Arab Leaders to Meet In Egypt in November
LEAD: Arab leaders will meet in Cairo in November in the first Arab summit talks to be held in Egypt in more than 13 years, Chedli Klibi, secretery general of the Arab League, said today.


Man Is Sought in Park Attack
LEAD: The police continued their search last night for a man who attacked a young couple with a baseball bat -seriously injuring both - as they sat on a bench near Conservatory Pond in Central Park Monday night.


Reorganizing the Yankees: Horse Breeder at the Ball Park;   Racing Has Been a Focus for Steinbrenner's Son
LEAD: What's the difference, he was once asked, between owning race horses and owning a baseball team?


Business People;   After 3 Years of Growth, Imo Creates New Posts
LEAD: Imo Industries has grown so much in the three years since it was spun off from the Transamerica Corporation that it has created the posts of president and chief operating officer.
It is bringing in Robert W. Womack to fill them.


I.R.A. Says It Killed Tory M.P. in Britain
LEAD: The Irish Republican Army said today that it killed Ian Gow, a Conservative member of Parliament, because he was a close friend of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's and helped to develop British policy in Northern Ireland.


Brett Out With Injury
LEAD: George Brett of the Kansas City Royals, who was knocked down while covering first base during a play on Monday night in Cleveland, is expected to be out of action for several days, according to the Royals' trainer, Mickey Cobb.
The 37-year-old infielder was bounced to the ground by Mitch Webster of the Indians, who was attempting to beat out an infield roller, and suffered a sprain and a bruise near his right collarbone.


BLAME IS PLACED FOR VALDEZ SPILL
LEAD: Drinking by the ship's captain, a fatigued and overworked crew and inadequate traffic control by the Coast Guard all contributed to the enormous oil spill by the Exxon Valdez off the Alaskan coast last year, the National Transportation Safety Board ruled today.


Boxing: Notebook;   Handshake With King Is Binding for Trump
LEAD: Donald Trump has had a hard time lately keeping his financial empire afloat, but he has caught a few breaks in a boxing operation that for a while also appeared to be in trouble.


Food Notes
LEAD:
A City Harvest Fair


Housing Insurance Change Voted
LEAD: Despite the threat of a veto from President Bush, the House overwhelmingly voted today for changes in the troubled Federal Housing Administration insurance program, which has been losing $4 billion a year because of bad loans.


Earnings Drop 47% At Chrysler &lt;
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation today reported a 47 percent decline in second-quarter profits, reflecting lower vehicle shipments and the increased cost of offering bigger incentives to car and truck buyers.


The Talk of Greenwich;   Vandal? Indubitably. But Barbarian? Hardly
LEAD: Rene Anselmo, like many residents here, is a man of wealth and taste.
He drives a Bentley.
He modeled his mansion on the Petit Trianon in Versailles.
He has donated money to plant thousands of daffodils and tulips along local roads.
He even replaced the chain-link barricade at a nearby elementary school with a rail fence more in keeping with this town's country flavor.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Harrows Stores, Hygrade Furniture Transport and the Marriott Financial Center Hotel to Goldberg Fossa Seid Advertising, New York.


Bengal Goes to Jail
LEAD: A Cincinnati Bengals cornerback, Lewis Billups, was sentenced in Cincinnati yesterday to serve 30 days in jail for pointing a gun at two undercover police officers.


Oil Spill From Tanker Collision Reaches Land


7 Are Indicted in 'Narcotics Terrorism'
LEAD: Seven members of a drug gang that authorities say committed at least three murders to protect its Elizabeth-based operations have been charged with racketeering and conspiracy in a 32-count Federal indictment released today.


Review/Film;   Emilio Estevez in Reprise of Billy the Kid Role
LEAD: ''Kid'' is the operative word in describing the ''Young Guns'' approach to the Billy the Kid legend, since these films regard Billy as more of a gun-toting cut-up than a true desperado.
As played again by Emilio Estevez in ''Young Guns II,'' Billy tends to giggle at tense moments and, during important ones, to mumble.


Baseball;   Amid Turmoil, Yanks Continue Their Surge
LEAD: By the end of the week, Mark Leiter could be back in Columbus.
There are no assurances, no guarantees that he will remain until the end of the season, when the Yankees finally play their last game in October and then go home.


In School of Other Tongues, English to Get a Say, Briefly
LEAD: For the first summer in 75 years, English will be officially spoken today on the Middlebury College campus.
But it is for one day only.


Defendant In Jogger Case Takes Stand
LEAD: Rejecting furious pleas from his fellow defense lawyers, the lawyer for one of the defendants in the Central Park jogger trial called his client to the witness stand yesterday before a jury in a Manhattan courtroom.


Business Technology;   Storing Summer's Solar Heat for the Winter
LEAD: The biggest problem with solar heating systems is that the sun shines most in the summer, when the heat is not needed, and least in the winter, when it is.
But a team at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst has found a storage medium that will hold July's heat for February: the ground.


F.A.O. Schwarz Toy Stores Bought by Dutch Company
LEAD: F.A.O.
Schwarz, the 128-year-old toy store that has delighted generations of children, has been acquired by the Netherlands' leading department store chain for an undisclosed amount.


Jockey's Remains Identified
LEAD: Body parts that washed up in a garbage bag at Seven Presidents Park beach have been identified as the remains of a New York jockey.
Crews removing timber and other waste from beaches on Thursday discovered the bag, which contained a head, arms and legs.
The Monmouth County authorities used fingerprints to identify the dead man as Pedro Ortega, 26 years old, of the Bronx, an apprentice jockey who rode at New York's Acqueduct and Belmont Park race tracks.


Review/Music;   The Rorem Reverse: Singsong for Voice As Instruments Sing
LEAD: Ned Rorem's ''Auden Poems,'' a song cycle that was given its world premiere on Sunday evening at the Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival, is a study in esthetic schizophrenia.
Mr.
Rorem proves again and again in his setting of seven W. H. Auden texts of great musical potential that he is quite capable of writing richly expressive, eminently singable music.


U.S. Is Suspending Hearings On New Disability Payments
LEAD: With money for administrative expenses running short at the end of the fiscal year, the Social Security Administration has suspended hearings in September for people seeking disability benefits.


The Army Takes a Beach in Connecticut and Pronounces It Safe


Baseball;   Ryan Beats the Brewers for Victory No. 300
LEAD: Nearly a week later, Nolan Ryan was still disappointed that the party in Arlington, Tex., last Wednesday night, with friends and relatives from Alvin, Tex., to the West Coast present, had not ended with a 300th major-league victory.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Prisoners in France Protest Freeing of Pro-Iran Terrorist
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand's decision to pardon a pro-Iranian terrorist who was serving a life sentence on murder charges has touched off a wave of protests in French jails, with prisoners complaining that they were not given similar treatment.


Dow Off 12.13; Transport Average Drops
LEAD: Stock prices were mixed yesterday, but the Dow Jones transportation average fell sharply amid continuing reports that UAL Inc. was having trouble arranging financing for a proposed union buyout.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about the Marlboro Music Festival in Marlboro, Vt., misstated the professional affiliation of a musician at the festival.
The musician, Donald Weilerstein, was a founding member of the Cleveland Quartet but left the ensemble last year.


Melba This Peach Isn't
LEAD: Roseanne Barr, purveyor of vulgar entertainment for the TV audience, ran afoul of President Bush last week.
The President said he was offended by Miss Barr's singing of ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' at a professional baseball game in San Diego.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   People
LEAD: *
Steve Hayden, the chief creative officer of BBDO's Los Angeles and San Francisco offices, has taken on the additional role of chairman of the company's West Coast operations.


Corrections
LEAD: A television review yesterday about ''Police Chiefs'' incompletely identified the role of Alan and Susan Raymond in an earlier program, ''An American Family.'' They did the photography; the program was produced and directed by Craig Gilbert.


Gain for Hepatitis Drug
LEAD: An advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration recommended the marketing of interferon alpha, the first drug shown to work against a form of viral hepatitis.
Page B7.


Charles M. Mapes, Engineer, 89
LEAD: Charles M. Mapes, a communications consultant and retired engineer with A. T. &amp; T., died on Friday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.
He was 89 years old and lived in Suffern.


Business Technology;   The Race for Anti-Infection Drugs
LEAD: A small biotechnology company based in Seattle has taken the lead in the race to introduce a class of drugs that build up the body's defense against infections.
Analysts say the drugs could prove the most important product of genetic engineering yet.


George E. Echols, Oldest U.S. Veteran, 105
LEAD: George E. Echols, who fought in France in World War I and was the nation's oldest known war veteran, died last Thursday at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center, the Department of Veterans Affairs reported.
He was 105 years old.


3 Arrested in Killing of Infant in Bronx
LEAD: The police arrested three men yesterday in the killing of a 9-month-old on Monday.
The infant was shot through the door of his grandmother's apartment on the Grand Concourse in the South Bronx.


Reorganizing the Yankees;   Other Owners Either Silent Or Still Quietly Surprised
LEAD: A day after George Steinbrenner was stripped of control of the Yankees, his fellow owners generally maintained their sedate postures.


Evolution in Europe;   Vietnamese in Bulgaria: Bitter Times
LEAD: Through the barred ground-floor windows of shabby workers' dormitories in a quarter of Bulgaria's capital known as Little Saigon, Vietnamese men sell scarce convenience store staples like Coca-Cola, instant coffee and cigarettes along with Canadian whisky and other hard liquor.


Prices Paid to Farmers Unchanged in July
LEAD: The prices farmers get for raw products were unchanged from June to July, but the overall commodity price index was still 2.7 percent above a year before, the Agriculture Department said today.


Horse Racing;   Draw for Hambletonian
LEAD: Carl Allen and his son, Rod, could easily race against each other in the 65th Hambletonian at the Meadowlands on Saturday.
And their horse, Royal Troubador, could just as easily follow in his father's footsteps, too.
The sire, Super Bowl, was the last horse to win the Triple Crown, taking the Yonkers Trot, the Hambletonian and the Kentuck


Finance/New Issues;   Rates Decline In Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates declined modestly at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.
It also marked the third consecutive week that the average rates have declined.


Finance/New Issues;   Fannie Mae in Pricing Of Mortgage Securities
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac, priced a total of $1.25 billion in new securities yesterday.


Cheaper to Phone Germany Than Jersey?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Secrecy Tied to Hanford Tanks' Trouble
LEAD: Senior Energy Department officials said today that the department had failed to deal appropriately with radioactive waste tanks at the Hanford nuclear reservation in Washington State despite more than a year of strenuous efforts by the Energy Secretary, James D. Watkins, to replace a culture of secrecy that had allowed safety problems to fester.


Company News;   Power Plant Sale
LEAD: The FPL Group and the Jacksonville Electric Authority signed a letter of intent to buy an 846-megawatt coal-fired electric generating unit from the Georgia Power Company of Atlanta for $810 million.
FPL, a utility holding company based in North Palm Beach, Fla., said it would have a 76 percent stake in the plant near Forsyth, Ga., and Jacksonville Electric would own 24 percent.


The Sound of Two Houses Clapping
LEAD: The crackling roar in Congress this week comes from yet another avalanche as billions more dollars go plunging into the savings and loan crevasse.
But this could also be the week in which Congress sends a far more welcome reverberation.
The Senate and House are each poised to vote on legislation that would deter such monumental scandals by breaking the connection between special interests and special treatment.


Hiring Quotas Exist, but Employers Won't Tell
LEAD: To the Editor:


Company News;   New California Park Is Proposed by Disney
LEAD: Intent on creating a second significant attraction in Southern California, home of Disneyland, the Walt Disney Company disclosed plans today for a big park and resort with an ocean theme in Long Beach, Calif., about 20 miles west of Disneyland.


Catholic Schools Turn to Ads to Fill Classrooms
LEAD: Using market research to advertise their brand of ethically oriented education, Roman Catholic elementary and secondary schools have been waging a secular war against shrinking enrollment nationwide.


Finance/New Issues;   Sears Lifts Offer To $300 Million
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, the nation's largest retailer, is offering $300 million in notes through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The size of the issue was increased from a planned $250 million.


Albert Rose, a Research Scientist Known for TV Tube, Dies at 80
LEAD: Albert Rose, a research scientist whose work in converting optical images to electrical signals led to the development of the modern television picture tube, died on Thursday at the Princeton Medical Center in New Jersey.
He was 80 years old and lived in Princeton.


UAL's Stock Plummets By $16.875
LEAD: UAL's stock plunged $16.875 yesterday after sliding $6.125 on Monday, amid rumors that financial support for the $4.4 billion union-led buyout of the airline may be evaporating.
The stock closed on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday at $140.


Jill Esmond Dies at 82; Stage and Film Actress
LEAD: Jill Esmond, a film and stage actress who was the first wife of Laurence Olivier, died on Saturday at her home in Wimbledon.
She was 82 years old.
No cause of death was given.
Ms.
Esmond, who appeared in Hollywood films including ''The White Cliffs of Dover'' and ''Random Harvest,'' studied at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London.


Ashton, After Delay, Ships New Program
LEAD: After more than a year's delay, the Ashton-Tate Company today began shipping an updated version of its flagship product, a program that is considered a key to the company's return to profitability.
Dubbed dBase IV Version 1.1, the new program seeks to correct flaws in the original dBase IV announced in October 1988.


Baseball;   Mets' Find Themselves In Continuing Doldrums
LEAD: ''A little valley we're in,'' Manager Bud Harelson calls it. ''A dry spell,'' Darryl Strawberry calls it.
And Mackey Sasser says: ''You can't play every month like June.''


Company News;   Freeport-McMoran In Stock Swap Deal
LEAD: Freeport-McMoran Inc. agreed to acquire the publicly held shares of its Freeport-McMoran Oil and Gas Company affiliate in a stock swap worth about $241 million.
Holders of the stock will get about three shares of stock in the parent company for every 10 shares held, the company said.
Freeport-McMoran valued the oil and gas unit at $10.50 a share.


Sales of New Houses Up 3&gt;8%; Some Predict a Turnaround
LEAD: Sales of new homes surged 8 percent in June, the sharpest increase since November, the Government said today.


Steinbrenner Places Son at Helm As Vincent Plots Yanks' Course
LEAD: One day after George Steinbrenner was permanently banned from running the Yankees by Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, he officially designated his son Hank Steinbrenner yesterday as his successor.


About Education
LEAD: In a contest between child care in France and the United States, American children are the losers.


Ad Executive Slain in Village While Speaking on Pay Phone
LEAD: An advertising executive was shot and killed Monday night while talking on a public telephone near his Greenwich Village apartment building, the police said.
The executive, John Reisenbach, was using the pay phone because his home phone was disabled.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
A Castro Fantasy


What About Souter's Human Resume?
LEAD: It's not hard to sympathize with Justice Thurgood Marshall who, in a television interview, left the impression that he faulted President Bush's nomination of Judge David H. Souter to the Supreme Court.


Michel Guy, Culture Official, 63
LEAD: Michel Guy, a former Minister of Culture and director of the annual Autumn Festival in Paris, died on Monday after a long illness, associates said today.
He was 63 years old.


Metro Matters;   Enemies List Getting Shorter: Some Hate It
LEAD: Now hatred is by far the longest pleasure; Men love in haste, but they detest at leisure. - Lord Byron
$/


Finance/New Issues;   Oklahoma Issue
LEAD: The Oklahoma Industries Authority is selling $75.96 million in tax-exempt hospital revenue bonds tentatively priced to yield a maximum of about 7.17 percent for an issue due in 2014 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
For shorter maturities, the issuer is offering yields ranging from 6.20 percent in 1993 to 6.40 percent in 1995, 6.75 percent in 2000 and 6.90 percent in 2002.


Football;   Rookie Latecomer No. 1 for Now
LEAD: In their first week of training camp, the Giants were starved for defensive linemen.
Today, they got help when Mike Fox, their second-round draft choice, signed and immediately became the starting left defensive end.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Apple Computer Inc., Cupertino, Calif., said it reached an intellectual-property-rights agreement with Outbound Systems Inc. that will allow Outbound to continue to offer its products.
Details were not disclosed.


Judas Priest's Lead Singer Testifies
LEAD: The lead singer for the rock band Judas Priest testified today that he once recorded a phrase backwards, but he denied planting hidden messages in his music to promote suicide.


Fighting Reported Near Embassies and President's House in Liberia
LEAD: Liberian rebel forces seeking to oust President Samuel K. Doe today seized a key section of Monrovia that includes the American Embassy and other diplomatic missions, the State Department said today.
But later press reports said Government forces had recaptured part of the area in a fierce counterattack.


Green Is the Sauce For Late Summer
LEAD: A GREEN sauce whets my appetite better than a sauce of a different color.
White sauce sounds bland, brown sauce might be heavy, red sauce lacks delicacy and orange sauce is often too sweet.


Touche Sets $19.75 Million Settlement
LEAD: The accounting firm of Deloitte &amp; Touche has agreed to pay $19.75 million plus expenses to a former audit client, the Inter-Regional Financial Group, to settle a lawsuit that was in its 12th week of trial in state district court in Minneapolis, the two sides said yesterday.


Evolution in Europe;   Cost of Paying East's Debt Growing Problem for Bonn
LEAD: When the Government of Chancellor Helmut Kohl sent West Germany on the fast track toward unification with East Germany, one of its calculations was that the merger would translate into millions of votes.
But as the bills for reunification come in and West Germans nervously contemplate a tax increase to pay for it all, the issue is becoming more politically risky.


Colts Trade Chandler
LEAD: Chris Chandler, the Indianapolis Colts' disgruntled quarterback, was traded to Tampa Bay yesterday, a week after suing the Colts for breach of contract.


Baseball;   Rijo Helps Reds Snap 8-Game Losing Streak
LEAD: Jose Rijo pitched, hit and ran well, and Hal Morris had two hits and scored twice as the Cincinnati Reds reawakened to beat the Los Angeles Dodgers, 5-2, tonight to snap an eight-game losing streak.


Media Business;   Compromise Cable Vote
LEAD: In a move toward moderate cable re-regulation, the Senate Commerce Committee yesterday approved a compromise measure that would allow the phone companies to act as a delivery system for cable programming, but would not permit them to compete in the programming itself.


Company News;   Triton Is Planning To Sell Some Assets
LEAD: The Triton Energy Corporation announced plans to sell some assets to raise money to pay long-term debt and undertake new exploration.
Triton said it expected to raise $150 million, most of which will go toward paying down $250 million in long-term debt.


Stealing Slang
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in some copies of Sports Pages yesterday, about the events leading to Commissioner Fay Vincent's disciplinary action against George Steinbrenner, the New York Yankees' principal owner, incorrectly reported Mr.
Vincent's initial decision.
A baseball official has since said that Mr.
Vincent intended to suspend Mr.


U.S. Panel Urges Sale of Drug To Fight a Form of Hepatitis
LEAD: By GINA KOLATA


Slide of the Yankees
LEAD: George Steinbrenner has always been a quotable man, nearly always at someone else's expense.
But his most revealing remark may have been an unintended commentary on himself.
It was 1981.
He had just fired Gene Michael as the manager of the New York Yankees and offered him a front-office job. ''Why would you want to stay manager and be second-guessed by me,'' he said, ''when you can be one of the second-guessers?


Rig Count Falls in Week
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States dropped last week by 26, to a total of 996, according to a widely watched index of drilling activity released on Monday by Baker Hughes Inc.
The oil industry toolmaker said the total was still well above the 870 of a year ago.
The count reflects the number of rotary rigs exploring for oil and gas as of last Friday.


F.D.I.C.'S CHAIRMAN EXPECTS 1990 LOSS ON BANK INSURANCE
LEAD: Giving one of his bleakest forecasts to date, the chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said today that ever-weakening real estate markets and a near-record number of bank failures were likely to produce the third consecutive annual loss for the fund that insures deposits at commercial banks.


U.S. Helps Underwrite Guatemala Terror
LEAD: To the Editor:


The New Dealer's Guns: More Bullets, Going Faster
LEAD: The pistols used in the four recent killings of children are members of a new generation of large-capacity semiautomatic weapons that have become standard among drug dealers and robbers, the police said.


Company News;   Pic 'N' Save Corp. In Buyback Plan
LEAD: The Pic 'N' Save Corporation, which has been under pressure from an investment group that has sought control of its board, announced a plan to repurchase as much as $150 million of its stock and scale back operations.


Finance/New Issues;   American Express Notes Yield 8.73%
LEAD: The American Express Credit Corporation, a unit of the American Express Company, yesterday entered the bond market with a $200 million offering of notes due 1994 through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Amoco Oil Co., Chicago, a subsidiary of Amoco Corp., named W. Douglas Ford vice president of operations planning and transportation.
He replaces Rodger W. Murtaugh, who is on assignment for Amoco Production Co., another subsidiary.


Cuomo Vetoes Bill to Keep Children Out of Foster Care
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today rejected a bill aimed at keeping children out of foster care by providing housing subsidies to families without shelter.
It was one of the few major bills that Mr.
Cuomo had rejected in a year when he faces re-election.


Interco Debt Pact Includes Conversion of Bonds to Stock
LEAD: Interco Inc., a St.
Louis-based shoe and furniture maker that has been burdened with debts incurred to avoid a hostile takeover in 1988, announced plans yesterday to reorganize its finances and avoid bankruptcy.


Souter Nomination Stirs Abortion Rights Groups
LEAD: Abortion rights groups are building major direct mail campaigns around the nomination of Judge David H. Souter to the Supreme Court, both to raise money and to encourage senators to press the abortion issue in confirmation hearings in September.


Working Less in Japan
LEAD: More Japanese companies have switched to a five-day workweek as the country moves to erase its workaholic image, a Labor Ministry survey showed today.
The nationwide survey of 5,000 companies with more than 3,000 employees showed 58.4 percent had gone over to the five-day week, an increase of more than five percentage points from a year ago.


Court Orders Blue Cross to Pay For Transplant in an AIDS Case
LEAD: A New York City man suffering from an AIDS infection won a court order yesterday requiring Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield to pay for a bone-marrow transplant from his identical twin.


Georges Conchon, 65, Prize-Winning Writer
LEAD: Georges Conchon, a prize-winning novelist and screenwriter, died on Sunday in a Paris-area hospital after a sudden illness, his family said Monday.
He was 65 years old.


Company News;   Shares in Cetus Plunge by 26.6%
LEAD: Shares of the Cetus Corporation, a genetic engineering concern, fell 26.6 percent in response to a regulatory delay in approving a drug the company has developed to treat kidney cancer.


A Girl Trout Needs a Boy Trout The Way a Fish Needs a Bicycle
LEAD: THEY call this stark, spectacular crevice of Idaho the Magic Valley after a trick of nature that sends more than a million gallons of water a minute down its vast canyon walls.


MOYNIHAN REVISES PLAN FOR TAX CUT
LEAD: In an effort to make his proposal for a Social Security tax cut more attractive to his fellow Democrats, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan today offered a modified version that would stretch out the tax cut over five years instead of two.


ALCOHOLISM CITED IN PILOT'S DEFENSE
LEAD: One of three former Northwest Airlines pilots accused of flying while intoxicated had a higher tolerance for alcohol because he is an alcoholic, his lawyer said today.


Casey Steinbrenner
LEAD:
The outlook wasn't brilliant for the Yankee nine that day: They were anchored in last place, with less than half the season to play.
As their errors, losses, throwaways grew far too numerous to name, A menacing silence fell upon the veteran patrons of the game.
A few, amid deep despair, turned to the New York Mets.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture on Monday about a decaying swimming pool in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn was published in error.
It showed a small pool from the complex, not the main pool.


Construction Spending Was Unchanged in June
LEAD: Construction spending, which fell for two straight months, was flat in June, the Government reported today.


Mozambique Will Allow Opposition Parties
LEAD: President Joaquim A. Chissano has announced that for the first time in Mozambique's history, opposition parties will be allowed to compete for power.
Mozambican rebels welcomed the move.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about new-home sales in June misidentified an economist and, because of an editing error, misidentified the Congressionally chartered corporation for which he works.
The economist is Mark Obrinsky; he is on the staff of the Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, not the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac.


Company News;   Daisy Systems
LEAD: The Daisy Systems Corporation, once a high-flying leader in the electronic automated design business, said the company and its Daisy/Cadnetix Inc. unit had filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
Daisy Systems, based in Mountainview, Calif., said it had liabilities substantially in excess of its tangible assets.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''As far as the Government is concerned, it's unconditional surrender.''
- Gregory Shaw, a Trinidadian spokesman.
[A1:5.]


Don't Let Congress Hobble the Cable Industry
LEAD: To the Editor:


East Europeans Need Private College Aid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bank Stock Prices Decline On Warning by Economist
LEAD: Bank stock prices fell yesterday after a televised allegation by a Stanford University economist that several of the nation's largest banks were ''very close to true insolvency.''


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Pizza Hut Promotion Features Ninja Turtles
LEAD: Entertainment Marketing and Communications International Ltd. yesterday announced a sponsorship deal linking Pizza Hut Inc., a subsidiary of Pepsico, and the Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles cartoon characters.
At the heart of Pizza Hut's agreement is the sponsorship of a 40-city rock-concert tour, with musicians appearing as singing turtles, scheduled to begin in September in New York.


Drug Is Found to Cure Some With a Deadly Liver Disease
LEAD: For the first time, researchers have been able to cure patients with chronic hepatitis B, a devastating and often progressively debilitating liver disease that afflicts more than a million Americans and is the ninth leading cause of death worldwide.


PROVISION ON AIDS IS IN HOUSING BILL
LEAD: In surprisingly quick action, the House today approved a bill overhauling Federal housing programs for the next fiscal year and approving $27.9 billion to pay for them.
The spending would include $150 million to help people with AIDS.


George W. May, Executive, 64
LEAD: George W. May, founder of Firecom Inc. of Woodside, Queens, a manufacturer and installer of alarms, died on Sunday at Glen Cove Community Hospital on Long Island.
He was 64 years old and lived in Locust Valley, L.I.


Embattled Futures Chief Resigns
LEAD: Karsten (Cash) Mahlmann resigned today as chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, the world's largest futures exchange, a day after Federal regulators charged an affiliate of his financially troubled commodities firm with misusing customer funds.


N.B.A. Salary Cap Rises
LEAD: The National Basketball Association salary cap, the maximum that teams can spend on player salaries, jumped more than $2 million yesterday, to nearly $12 million.


Augusta and Baltusrol May Admit First Black Members
LEAD: Leaders of two of the most prestigious all-white golf clubs in America said today that the events of Shoal Creek have made the search for black members at their clubs a major priority.


Chronicle
LEAD: JULIA ROBERTS didn't exactly love Abbeville, S.C., where she worked on a film recently.
In an interview in this month's Rolling Stone, the actress, who starred in the film ''Pretty Woman,'' called the town ''horribly racist'' and ''living hell.''


Ending Feud, India's Leader Dismisses Powerful Deputy
LEAD: Prime Minister V. P. Singh dismissed his powerful deputy today for making unsubstantiated charges of corruption against other members of the Cabinet, Indian news agencies said.


Dr. Edward Kline, 81, Retired Official of G.E.
LEAD: Dr.
Edward Mahon Kline, an educator, cardiologist and retired medical director of the General Electric Company, died on Monday at his home in Southport, Conn.
He was 81 years old.


Hawkins and the Yankees Leave the Game Early


Civil Rights: The House's Turn
LEAD: Now it's the House's turn to do right by civil rights and reaffirm law weakened by Supreme Court interpretations.
The Senate last month passed a civil rights bill.
If tradition holds, the House will pass a strong version of the same bill.
Then, after the August recess, both chambers can agree on a strong Civil Rights


Review/Opera;   How Getting Laughs in Mozart Is Serious Business
LEAD: Although the axiom that comedy is more difficult to perform than tragedy is a cliche of criticism, it might even be true.
But like many an old saw, this one doesn't always cut deep.
The fact is that unless we are talking about the heady level of ''Falstaff'' or ''The Marriage of Figaro,'' opera rarely demands more of singers than low comedy skills.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: THE death of a family pet may be a child's first experience with the loss of a person or animal he loves.
In some ways it is more emotionally complex than coping with the death of a human being; for instance, the animal may be younger than the child, or may have been with the family since before the child was born.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Sabatini and Capriati Gain
Gabriela Sabatini and Jennifer Capriati led nine of the top 10 seeded players to victory at the Player's Challenge championships yesterday in Montreal.
But second-round play was also marked by three retirements and one default because of injuries.


In Siberia, Baker and Shevardnadze Mix Business With Pleasure


Suitor Meets on Bid for Kay
LEAD: Executives of Ratners Group P.L.C., which is trying to acquire Kay Jewelers Inc. for about $410 million, met yesterday to reconsider the terms of its offer to Kay stockholders and bondholders.
The company's plans were not disclosed, and no announcement about the offer was made last night.


Currents;   Up Above, A Blimpful Of Colors
LEAD: THAT blimp on the horizon is becoming hard to miss.
Over the past few years, the Goodyear Air Ship, also known as the Goodyear Blimp, has been illuminated in designs in red, yellow, blue and green.


Company News;   Whirlpool Venture
LEAD: The Whirlpool Corporation and the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company formed a venture to operate Whirlpool's 750-employee vacuum cleaner plant in Danville, Ky.
Terms were not disclosed, but Whirlpool will retain a large minority interest in the venture.
Whirlpool vacuum cleaners at the plant under the Kenmore name for Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.


Currents;   Designs for Humanity: Glasses, Car Seat, Razor
LEAD: THE results of the 1990 ID Magazine Design Review are in.


Steinbrenner's Son Passes One Hurdle to Power
LEAD: Hank Steinbrenner, designated by George Steinbrenner as the chosen successor to run the Yankees franchise, has cleared one of the three hurdles necessary to make his father's wish a reality and appears assured of clearing the second.


Defendant in Rape of Jogger Denies Taking Part in Attack
LEAD: Yusef Salaam repeatedly and emphatically denied yesterday that he had had any part in the rape and near-fatal beating of a jogger in Central Park.


Health;   The Quiet Comeback of Electroshock Therapy
LEAD: For Big Nurse in ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest,'' it was a tool of terror, and in the public mind ''shock therapy'' has retained the tarnished image given it by Ken Kesey's novel: dangerous, inhumane and overused.


Currents;   My Style? It's Wonderful. Simply Wonderful!
LEAD: ONE of the most riveting social documents to appear in recent months is ''The AD 100,'' an ''exclusive guide to the world's finest interior designers'' by the editors of Architectural Digest.
The guide is being sent this month to all subscribers and is also available on newsstands for $10.


Gorbachev Joins His Main Rival To Shape New Economic Program
LEAD: In a move that could signal a break in their political stalemate, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has joined with his main rival, Boris N. Yeltsin, to create a commission to produce a program of economic change for the Soviet Union by Sept. 1.


S.I. Ferry: Still a Bargain at Twice the Price
LEAD: Commuters on the Staten Island ferry began paying a quarter more for the ride yesterday, prompting a few to grumble and groan but leaving most still satisfied that the fare, even raised to 50 cents a round trip, remained one of the best bargains in New York.


Miniature Houses, But Grand Visions
LEAD: Eric Lansdown chisels grand visions down to manageable size.
He builds fancy miniature houses endowed with architecturally correct details.
The houses come complete with painted ivy and trees in front, stains and chipped bricks - in short, ''everything but cracked windows,'' he said.


Boot-Camp Jail To Begin in Fall At Rikers Island
LEAD: The New York City Correction Commissioner said yesterday that a ''high impact incarceration plan'' - similar in some ways to the state's boot-camp program for prisoners - would begin at Rikers Island in September.


Don't Let Congress Hobble the Cable Industry;   Telephone and Video
LEAD: To the Editor:


Radio Free Europe on the Air From Prague for First Time
LEAD: Radio Free Europe began broadcasting directly from Prague today after 40 years of transmitting news to Czechoslovakia from abroad.


The Media Business;   Time Warner's Sports Unit
LEAD: Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that it was forming a sports marketing company called Time Warner Sports to expand the corporation's sports ventures and acquire a broad array of sports rights.


Palace Guard Closes In on a Breach of Confidence
LEAD: The most talked-about items in the last two issues of Paris Match magazine were the ones that did not appear in Britain.


Fort Howard Chief Quits
LEAD: Paul J. Schierl, who has battled illness since arranging a management-led buyout of the Fort Howard Corporation two years ago, resigned today as chief executive after 16 years.


A Plea for Help
LEAD: This column is an appeal for a special kind of help from Americans who do not live in the big cities - for those of us who do.


Whereabouts of 500,000 Gallons of Oil Is Baffling in Texas Spill
LEAD: Coast Guard officials said today that they were uncertain what had become of much of the estimated 500,000 gallons of oil that spilled four days ago when a tanker collided with two barges in the Houston Ship Channel.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Omnicom Net Rises 16%
LEAD: The Omnicom Group said second-quarter earnings rose 16 percent, to $17.4 million, or 67 cents a share, from $15.1 million, or 58 cents a share, in the period last year.
Revenues rose 24 percent, to $298.5 million, from $241.7 million in the 1989 period.


Arkansas Goes to S.E.C.
LEAD: Arkansas jumped to the Southeastern Conference today, severing its 76-year ties to the troubled Southwest Conference and possibly starting a restructuring of college football leagues.


Chronicle
LEAD: ROGER CRAIG has thrown in the towel after posing in it for Macy's ads.
The running back for the San Francisco 49ers, who posed earlier this summer for an ad for Calvin Klein underwear, said that his wife did not like his modeling career.


House Passes Farm Bill Limiting Subsidies
LEAD: The House approved a 1990 farm bill today that limits commodity subsidies, but not to the low levels sought by members criticizing agriculture spending.


Dukakis Signs His State's Disputed Budget
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis today signed the $13.4 billion budget the Legislature sent to him on Saturday, ending seven months of bitter negotiations.


Chandler Deal Fails
LEAD: Chris Chandler, the disgruntled Indianapolis quarterback, was back at square one yesterday after the Colts announced the failure of a deal to trade him to Tampa Bay.


New York City Tells All Agencies To Use Same Process for Contracts
LEAD: Striving to make its $6 billion annual spending for goods and services more orderly, New York City issued rules yesterday that will, for the first time, require all agencies to follow the same basic process in letting contracts, for needs from day care to data processing.


U.S. and Japan Agree On Telecommunications
LEAD: Japan agreed today to open up its telecommunications market further to foreign companies, meeting an Aug. 1 deadline for possible American retaliation, United States officials said.


Judge Rejects Los Angeles County's Voting Plan
LEAD: A Federal district judge today rejected the county's redistricting plan for electing county supervisors, calling the proposal ''a nonsensical distortion'' and insensitive to minority members.


P.&amp; G. Sues on Satanism
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, which has previously fought rumors that its 108-year-old moon and stars trademark is a satanic symbol, said this week that it had sued a Kansas couple for claiming the company was associated with satanism.
The suit, filed Monday in Federal District Court, contends James and Linda Newton of Parsons made libelous and malicious statements about Procter &amp; Gamble by saying it supports ''the church of Satan.


Monterey Journal;   Trees and Trademarks: The Disputes Run Deep
LEAD: It's been said that only God can make a tree.
But now mere mortals are stepping forward to argue about who owns a tree's image.


Market Place;   Bond Investors Gain Overseas
LEAD: WHEN it comes to global bond investing, sometimes all that matters is getting the currency right.
In July, the principal determinant of profit was investing in bonds denominated in almost any currency other than the dollar.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Cracks in a Foundation


Mets Tie in 9th on Teufel Homer, Win in 12th
LEAD: The Mets turned into August tonight with the kind of desperate action reserved for pennant races.
And, in three and a half hours of their ripest melodrama of the season, they survived when Tim Teufel had a pinch-hit home run for a tie with two down in the ninth inning, and then rose up to topple the Montreal


Disputed Art Show Opens Peacefully
LEAD: The widely disputed exhibition of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe opened in Boston today without serious protest after a highly unusual broadcast of the show's most sexually explicit pictures on Tuesday night by the local affiliate of the Public Broadcasting Service.


Who Robbed the S.&amp;L.'s? Congress.
LEAD: The most captivating news story in my home state last year concerned an attempted robbery of tragicomic proportions.


A Skinny Loft Gains Space and Style
LEAD: WHEN Tony Origlio and Kip Vanderbilt first saw their loft in 1985, it looked like a bowling alley with a dazzling view.
Although the 70-foot-long loft had a 13th-floor view of the Hudson River and the skyscrapers of midtown Manhattan, it was just 12 feet wide.


Stewart Wins by 1-0 On Pinch-Hit in 11th
LEAD: Doug Jennings, a pinch-hitter, broke up a pitching duel with a run-scoring single in the 11th inning and Dave Stewart went the distance as the Oakland A's defeated the Seattle Mariners, 1-0, today.


A Legal Leg for Designers
LEAD: AFTER years of legal wrangling, the design field in New York state has taken a step toward professional legitimacy with the signing by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of a bill that provides for state certification of interior designers.


Dismissal of Buckey Charges Ends Longest Case in U.S.
LEAD: The longest and most expensive criminal proceeding in American history came to an official end today when a Superior Court judge dismissed all charges against Raymond Buckey, a central figure in the McMartin Pre-School child molestation case.


Trump Shifts Casino Posts
LEAD: A management shake-up was announced on Tuesday at Trump Taj Mahal, the newest and most expensive casino in Donald J. Trump's troubled empire.


Budget Planners Announce Talks
LEAD: President Bush and Congressional negotiators are planning uninterrupted bargaining sessions at Camp David, Md., or a similarly isolated spot outside Washington in early September to work out a final compromise on the 1991 Federal budget, senior lawmakers in both parties said today.


Frederick Gloeckner, Horticulturist, 88, Dies
LEAD: Frederick Carl Gloeckner, a New York horticulturist, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Company News;   New Chairman of G.M. Promises Period of Stability
LEAD: Robert C. Stempel, the new chairman of the General Motors Corporation, promised on his first day in office today that the auto maker would not pursue a strategy of reorganization like the one that caused turmoil in the world's biggest auto maker in the 1980's.


About New York;   Offering a Hand, With a Stitch And a Smile
LEAD: ''I was always a heavy kid, and there were no clothes for me,'' Saundra Lewis said. ''I would ask my mother for a new dress and she would say, 'We'll have to see about that.' ''


Salary Cap Goes Up
LEAD: The National Basketball Association raised its team salary cap yesterday, and the teams immediately raised their trading intensity.


Industry Group Approves Incorporation of Accountants
LEAD: In a sharp break with tradition, the directors of the leading oversight body of the accounting profession voted at their July meeting to allow accountants to organize their practices as corporations.


Pentagon Has Earned No Environmental Role
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ed Emshwiller, 65; Made Experimental Movies and Videos
LEAD: Ed Emshwiller, who created avant-garde films and videotapes, died on July 26 at the Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital in Valencia, Calif.
He was 65 years old.


Treasury Bonds Post More Gains
LEAD: Interest rates resumed their decline yesterday as prices of Treasury securities rallied on new evidence of a weakening economy.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-9


Canadian Output Down
LEAD: Canada's economy shrank in May, marking the first back-to-back monthly decline since the 1982 recession, the Government said on Tuesday.
Gross domestic product in May fell two-tenths of 1 percent after declining one-tenth of a percent in April, Statistics Canada said. ''It reflects the fact that we're close to the edge of recession,'' said George Saba, an economist at Montreal Trust.


REBELS IN TRINIDAD FREE ALL HOSTAGES
LEAD: A violent, five-day drama that saw the Prime Minister and half of the Cabinet taken hostage by heavily armed Muslim militants ended peacefully today when 112 gunmen and their religious leader laid down their weapons and freed their remaining 46 hostages.


Review/Music;   Philip Glass Ensemble Plays for a Silent Film
LEAD: The hazards and delights of cultural interchange were on abundant display on Friday at Alice Tully Hall, where the Philip Glass Ensemble performed his score for a showing of the otherwise silent film ''Powaqqatsi.'' The title, a Hopi word, means ''an entity, a way of life, that consumes the life forces of other beings in order to further its own life.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Company News page in Business Day yesterday about the Walt Disney Company's plans for a theme park in Long Beach, Calif., misstated the company's business relationship with two attractions on the site in some copies.
Disney leases and operates the Queen Mary ocean liner and the Spruce Goose airplane; it does not own them.


The Media Business;   Chargeurs Buys Pathe
LEAD: A French industrial group, Chargeurs S.A., today bought Pathe-Cinema S.A., the film company that the Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti tried to buy earlier this year.


Pan Am's Losses Shrink
LEAD: The Pan Am Corporation yesterday reported a net loss of $49 million for the second quarter, about half the size of last year's $101 million second-quarter loss.
The New York holding company for Pan American World Airways attributed the narrower deficit to sharply higher airline revenue.
Pan Am's revenues for the quarter rose 12.2 percent, to $1.02 billion, from $909.4 million a year earlier.


Met Opera Appoints a General Director
LEAD: Joseph Volpe, who began 26 years ago as an apprentice carpenter backstage at the Metropolitan Opera, was appointed the company's chief administrative officer yesterday, effective immediately.
He succeeds Hugh Southern, who was forced to resign in June after only seven months as general manager.


Kodak Profits Rise Sharply
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company said today that its earnings had risen nearly fivefold in the second quarter from results that were depressed by a large restructuring charge a year ago.


Company News;   Fiat Disclosure
LEAD: Fiat S.p.A. has an option to buy the Ford Motor Company's 20 percent stake in their new farm vehicles venture, Fiat's managing director, Cesare Romiti, said in a newspaper interview to be published on Thursday.
Fiat and Ford said on Tuesday that they were placing their tractor, farm and industrial equipment businesses into a new company 80 percent owned by Fiat and 20 percent by Ford.


Islanders Sign Two
LEAD: Jari Gronstand, a defenseman, and Bill Berg, a left wing, signed multiyear contracts with the Islanders yesterday.


Currency Markets;   Dollar Makes Some Gains, But Traders Remain Wary
LEAD: The dollar regained some ground in foreign exchange trading yesterday, but traders warned that the United States currency remained weak.


Chronicle
LEAD: Seven members of UB40, the British reggae group, were deported from the Seychelles Islands yesterday after being arrested on suspicion of possessing marijuana.


The Media Business;   TV Ratings Spying Case
LEAD: A former employee of the Arbitron Company attempted to give confidential information about the company's television ratings to its principal rival, the A. C. Nielsen Company, the Department of Justice charged yesterday.


George Napack, Engineer, 65
LEAD: George Napack, a chemical engineer and a retired vice president of the Hatco Chemical Corporation, died on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 65 years old and lived in Westfield, N.J.


Leading Indicators Remain Level
LEAD: The Government's main gauge for forecasting the direction of the economy did not budge in June, the Commerce Department said today in a report that analysts said was a sign of a listless economy in the months ahead.


Saratoga Opening Day Just About Perfect
LEAD: Meadow Star, Fourstardave and 24,552 horseplayers were the biggest winners this afternoon on a nearly flawless 122d opening day at Saratoga Race Track.


15,000 Indians Protest Lack of Response to Rape of 2 Nuns


Outdoors Is Indoors As Garden Decor Moves to the Parlor
LEAD: FROM Manhattan to Berkeley, Calif., and from Atlanta to Newport, R.I., green thumbs and greenhorns are patronizing stores with names like the Potted Plant, the Elegant Earth, Victory Garden and Devonshire.
Following in the path of mail-order businesses like Smith &amp; Hawken and Gardener's Eden, which have already spread the word on the well-honed garden, this new breed of shop is bringing the sweet smell of earth (or at least the illusion of it) indoors.


Daily News Files Suit To Halt Labor Panel
LEAD: The Daily News asked a Federal court yesterday to stop a State Board of Inquiry from examining negotiations between the paper and its unions.


Topics of The Times;   Melons at the MOMA
LEAD: At the entrance to ''Matisse in Morocco,'' on display at the Museum of Modern Art until Sept. 4, is a National Geographic magazine photograph of Tangier in 1906.
The city is sun-baked, steamy and tired.
Just beyond it is the Tangier painted by Matisse.
Fertile, colorful, exuberant, the city is paradise.


Health;   Asthma Death Rate Reported Up 30%
LEAD: The nation's death rate from asthma has increased by more than 30 percent in seven years, and nearly 10 million Americans are now affected by the disease, Federal health officials say.


Company News;   Oppenheimer Buyout Is Set
LEAD: The Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company said today that it would take part in the acquisition of the Oppenheimer Management Corporation from British and Commonwealth Holdings P.L.C. for about $150 million.


Curionopolis Journal;   Is Gold Worth This? Amazon Is Being Poisoned
LEAD: Slipping a .38 revolver into the waistband of his blue jeans, Norberto Neves de Sousa led fellow environmental agents down a forest path to an Amazon gold-mining camp.


Currents;   Making the Children Feel an Urge to Scribble
LEAD: ''SO many people grow up with their parents saying 'Don't draw on the furniture,' '' said the painter Gary Komarin.
Mr.
Komarin and his wife, Sharon, a former nursery school teacher, aren't that way.


Brother of Man Killed by Police Sues New York
LEAD: The brother of a 24-year-old man shot to death by a police officer outside a party in the Bronx has sued the city, claiming wrongful death.


Evolution in Europe;   Bulgarian Opposition Leader to Become President
LEAD: After a bewildering series of turnabouts, Bulgaria's Parliament today elected the leader of the main opposition political coalition to the national presidency.


Health;   Pet Owners Go to the Doctor Less
LEAD: Elderly people who own pets visit their physicians less often than those who do not have pets, and dog owners have the fewest visits of all, a study has found.


Nationwide Reunion Celebration For Blacks
LEAD: TERI SMITH looks forward to family reunions.
They are times for her aunts, uncles, cousins, sisters and brothers to gather to talk of their new babies, travels, childhoods, deceased relatives and dreams.
Ms.
Smith will also learn more about families from a broader perspective at the six Black Family Reunion Celebrations being held in various cities around the country.


Senate Votes to Curb Donations From Outside Campaign Groups
LEAD: The Senate tonight passed the first major campaign finance bill since the Watergate era, a comprehensive package that would bar political action committees from Federal campaigns, infuse public money into Congressional campaigns and offer candidates vouchers for television advertising.


Nynex Plans Pedestrian's Mobile Phone
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation plans to spend at least $100 million to build a second cellular telephone network in Manhattan by Christmas of next year, company officials said yesterday.


Former Associate Sues Rinfret Over Business
LEAD: A former business associate of Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor, has filed a lawsuit charging that Mr.
Rinfret went back on a promise to give him a share in his investment businesses.


Company News;   Shares of UAL Continue to Slide
LEAD: Worries that a $4.4 billion employee-led bid for the parent of United Airlines may be crumbling because of financing difficulties sent the shares of the UAL Corporation tumbling for the third straight session yesterday.
UAL's stock slid $4.125 a share, to close at $135.875, in active trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Tokyo Stocks and Yen Fall After Iraqi Invasion
LEAD: Japanese stock prices fell sharply in afternoon trading today and the yen fluctuated wildly against the dollar after Iraq invaded Kuwait.


Topics of The Times;   An Ordinary Immortal
LEAD: Anyone consulting The Complete Baseball Book on Tuesday afternoon would have found only 19 names on the list of pitchers with 300 major league victories, including Denton T. Young and Robert M. Grove.
But by midnight E.S.T., one more name had joined Cy and Lefty on that rarified roster - L. Nolan Ryan.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Common Stock


IRAQ ARMY INVADES CAPITAL OF KUWAIT IN FIERCE FIGHTING
LEAD: Iraqi troops crossed the Kuwait border today and penetrated deeply into the country and into Kuwait's capital city, senior Administration officials said late Wednesday.


Steinbrenner Not Out of Woods
LEAD: As George Steinbrenner continued to go quietly into the final days of his tenure as the Yankees' boss, his aides continued trying to practice the political art of damage control yesterday.


Sidney Brill, Civil Engineer, 64
LEAD: Sidney Brill, a civil engineer and the owner of a public-works construction company, died on Monday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Bay Shore, L.I.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Chronicle
LEAD: Last week ''Roseanne'' was the top-rated television show, with a 14.6 rating and a 26-point audience share, according to the Neilsen ratings.
Also last week, ROSEANNE BARR, the show's star, sang the national anthem at a baseball game in San Diego, then grabbed her crotch and spat on the field.


Helping Hands Change Tire on Road to Airport
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senate Roll-Call on Campaign Financing
LEAD: Following is the 77-to-23 roll-call vote by which the Senate voted today to prohibit its members from accepting speaking fees from special interest groups.
A yes vote was a vote to prohibit such fees and a no vote was a vote to permit them.
Voting yes were 53 Democrats and 24 Republicans.
Voting no were 2 Democrats and 21 Republicans.


Cardinals Pick Torre To Replace Herzog
LEAD: To the surprise of hardly anyone, Joe Torre was named manager of the St.
Louis Cardinals yesterday.
The hiring ended a monthlong search for a successor to Whitey Herzog, who, in the middle of his 11th season as skipper, resigned on June 6 with the Cardinals in last place in the National League East.


Edward F. Landau, 74, Research Chemist, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
Edward Frederick Landau, a retired research chemist and holder of six patents, died on Monday at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 74 years old and lived in West Orange.


McDonald's Waste Study Planned
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation, which has resisted efforts in some localities to ban its plastic packaging, has agreed to a conduct a joint study with the Environmental Defense Fund on the way it uses and disposes of its packaging and other solid waste.


Fuel Emergency Is Declared For Avianca Jet
LEAD: Air traffic controllers took the unusual step Tuesday night of declaring a fuel emergency on an Avianca Airlines flight headed for Kennedy International Airport because of confusion over how much fuel it had left, one of the controllers and Federal aviation officials said last night.


Review/City Opera;   A Solid 'Figaro' Opens A Season
LEAD: In its 46-year history, the New York City Opera has had many mandates, sometimes conflicting ones.
It has been a home for young American singers, a champion of American opera, a forum for innovative productions, a source of unusual repertory.
But one of its humbler jobs has been to present solid, competent performances of standard-repertory operas in conventional productions at moderate prices.


Currents;   Images of a Homeland in West Africa
LEAD: THE decorative arts of Africa are usually chronicled in books about masks, bronzes, jewelry, textiles and tools made by men.
In ''African Canvas: Art of West African Women'' (Rizzoli, $60), the photographer and journalist Margaret Courtney-Clarke documents a lesser-known form: the art of rural dwellings.


Consumer Rates;   Fund Yields Are Down
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week ended yesterday.


Sharp Rise in AIDS Infection Is Reported in Third World
LEAD: Eight to ten million people around the world are now infected with the virus that causes AIDS, and the incidence of the infection is rising dramatically in some parts of the world, the World Health Organization reports.


America's Neck and a New Noose
LEAD: Even before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, America's energy situation was looking increasingly ominous.
Fact one: Imports accounted for a record 50 percent of the oil consumed by the U.S. during the first half of 1990.
Fact two: The oil cartel, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, this week raised its target price for oil by 17 percent.


Revolving-Door Child Care
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Phil D. Fine, Lawyer, Dies at 64; Key Force in Boston Development
LEAD: Phil David Fine, a lawyer who played an important role in several major development projects in Massachusetts, died Tuesday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 64 years old and lived in Boston.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Apr.-June
Change
1990
From '89
Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp.
$ 7,700,000
*
Eastman Kodak Co.
384,000,000
+398.7
Fleming Cos.
20,300,000
+16.7
Grumman Corp.
26,700,000
+36.9
Itel Corp.
8,400,000
-2.3
Loews Corp.
192,900,000
-41.4
Masco Industries
11,100,000
-61.1
Nacco Industries
9,900,000
-26.1
National Steel Corp.


De Klerk and Mandela Agree on Talks
LEAD: After a three-hour meeting today, President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela indicated that they had overcome a crisis between them and would resume negotiations on the country's future as planned next Monday.


Briefs
LEAD: *
BSN Corp., Dallas, a sporting goods company, said it would solicit offers for the company's assets.


New Program on AIDS To Focus on Infections
LEAD: The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases is setting up a program to help scientists design new drugs to treat the infections that kill people with AIDS.


Evolution in Europe;   Bulgaria to Share Arms Export Data
LEAD: The new director of a Bulgarian arms-export concern long presumed in the West to have supplied weapons to terrorist organizations said today that his company was willing to share with Western governments information on arms that might have ended up in terrorist hands.


Past Creates Wave of TV Nostalgia
LEAD: IRA GALLEN took a gulp of Naya Natural Spring Water from a Lone Ranger cup. ''Hi-yo, Silver,'' he toasted happily before answering his ringing Snoopy telephone.


Afghan on a Sudden Trip to Moscow
LEAD: As Afghan rebel leaders and Pakistani officials await the results of talks on Afghanistan between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, attention here and in Kabul is riveted on the sudden and mysterious trip to Moscow by the Afghan leader, Najibullah.


U.S. Tells of Plan to Sell 130 S.&amp; L.'s
LEAD: The Government announced plans today to sell 130 more failed savings institutions and about $50 billion in securities and real estate properties by the end of the year.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
International Business Machines Corp., Armonk, N.Y., named Earl F. Wheeler, a general manager of programming systems, as senior vice president.
I.B.M. also named Dr.
James C. McGroddy, director of its research division, and Mary Lee Turner, director of corporate communications, as vice presidents.


Man Who Shot Wife As a Mercy Killing Is Granted Clemency
LEAD: Florida officials today approved clemency for an 81-year-old man convicted of shooting his ailing wife in what he said was a mercy killing, and he is to be freed from prison on Thursday.


Evolution in Europe;   2 Germanys Reach Accord on Election Rules
LEAD: The Governments of East and West Germany and their main political parties reached basic agreement today on holding a national election in a unified country on Dec. 2.


Home Improvement
LEAD: LINING a closet with cedar paneling helps keep moths and insects away from woolen clothes.
Cedar's aroma, which is pleasant to people, is a repellent to insects.
Cedar is also safer than chemical repellents, like mothballs, which can be accidentally eaten by children.


The Guns of America
LEAD: Four innocent children killed in nine days in New York City, by bullets fired from semiautomatic weapons but intended for someone else.


Huge Financial Stakes for Golf Tours Looming Over Issue of Racial Exclusion
LEAD: The decision by Shoal Creek Country Club to admit black members seems to have stemmed the flight of advertisers from the telecasts of next week's Professional Golfers' Association Championship, and one company, Spalding Sports Worldwide, said yesterday that it might reverse its position and buy commercials on the television broadcast of the tournament.


Bridge
LEAD: Players from the New York metropolitan area were outstandingly successful in the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in Boston last week, with at least a share in all the major titles.


Talking Deals;   Moscow's Call To De Beers
LEAD: THE historic diamond deal announced last week by the Soviet Union and De Beers Centenary, a Swiss subsidiary of the huge South African mining group, took months of meetings and four sets of shuttle negotiations between London and Moscow.


To Expand Javits Center, Reopen the Coliseum
LEAD: To the Editor:


Company News;   Cyanamid Buyback Stock
LEAD: The stock of the American Cyanamid Company rose today after the pharmaceuticals company said it planned a stock buyback program that analysts said might total $600 million.
Cyanamid's stock rose $1.50, to $56.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company said it planned to ask its board to authorize a share repurchase program on Aug.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Miscellany
LEAD: Travel Agent Magazine has been sold by Capital Cities Media Inc. to a partnership headed by Richard Friese, who will serve as the weekly's publisher.
Friese's partnership also publishes Unique Homes Magazine.


Ex-Koch Deputy Favored As Head of Port Authority
LEAD: Stanley Brezenoff, the first deputy mayor in the Koch administration, has been designated to be the next executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   People
LEAD: *
John P. McLaughlin, a senior vice president and director of account management, has been promoted to executive vice president of Gray Kirk &amp; Evans.


Council and Dinkins Offer Competing Plans on Police
LEAD: Struggling to find a political response to the recent shootings of four children, the New York City Council yesterday proposed adding hundreds of officers to the police force.
Hours later, Mayor David N. Dinkins rebuffed that plan as unrealistic and offered his own.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Education page on July 25 about changes in leadership at several universities misstated Clark Kerr's tenure as chancellor of the University of California at Berkeley.
He was chancellor of the Berkeley campus from 1952 to 1958, and president of the University of California system from 1958 to 1967.


Jan Stussy, Artist, 68
LEAD: Jan Stussy, a West Coast artist with works in many museums and private collections, died on Tuesday at his home in West Los Angeles.
He was 68 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Dr.
Norman Pleshette, a Manhattan obstetrician, omitted a survivor.
She is his wife, Marjorie.


Two Who Lost Arts Grants Are Up for New Ones
LEAD: Members of the council that advises the chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts say they expect fireworks at a meeting here on Friday when they take up recommendations for new grants for two of the four sexually explicit performance artists who were denied grants in June.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
8.00
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.43
7.49
7.69
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.26
7.32
7.36
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.19
8.26
7.60
30-YR.


Childbirth: A Guide That Can Enlighten
LEAD: Childbirth, so often touted as a natural occurrence, can also be a daunting one for women who confront an array of modern technological procedures in large medical institutions.


Ultimate's Ex-Leader Heads Digital Products
LEAD: Theodore M. Sabarese, an entrepreneur who built a computer company called the Ultimate Corporation into a $200 million business, hopes to do the same with the Digital Products Corporation in his new posts as president and chief executive.


Testimony Shows Both Sides Of Defense Lawyer's Gamble
LEAD: Just after 10:30 yesterday morning, Yusef Salaam swept across the Manhattan courtroom, a tall, lean figure with a young man's face who was there to answer charges that he raped and tried to kill a young woman in Central Park one night.


10 Die as Rival Palestinians Clash in Lebanon
LEAD: Rival Palestinian guerrillas clashed with rockets and heavy machine guns in their largest district in Lebanon today, and the police said 10 people were killed and 50 wounded.


Company News;   I.B.M. in Deal to Shed Its Typewriter Unit
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation confirmed today that it would spin off its low-technology businesses - typewriters, keyboards and personal printers - into a new subsidiary.
Clayton &amp; Dubilier Inc., a New York leveraged buyout firm, is to become the primary owner of the new unit, the company said.


Review/Dance;   Walking on the Wall, Or Maybe It's a Floor
LEAD: Imagine a couple rolling around a bathroom floor for 50 minutes.
Then imagine that this ''floor'' is actually an upright wall in a theater, providing an audience with an aerial view as the performers move on the vertical plane by means of toeholds or harnesses.


Calendar: Crafts and Cottage Gardens
LEAD: American Gardens, New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park, the Bronx; (212) 220-8747.


Charles H. Willard, Lawyer, 85
LEAD: Charles H. Willard, a retired partner of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, a Manhattan law firm, died on Monday at his home in Somers, N.Y.
He was 85 years old.
He died of pneumonia, his wife, Nancy, said.
Mr.
Willard, who specialized in practice relating to banking, joined the firm in 1930 and became a partner in 1950.


6 SAILORS DROWN AS FREIGHTER SINKS
LEAD: Six sailors were drowned yesterday after their freighter, her lifeboats and rafts too poorly maintained to use, was pummeled by Hurricane Bertha's 90-mile-an-hour winds and broke up in the Atlantic about 400 miles east of New York.


New Europe Alliance In Economics Accord
LEAD: The leaders of Italy, Czechoslovakia, Austria, Hungary and Yugoslavia, meeting for the first time as a new regional alliance, agreed today to step up political and economic cooperation to promote stability on the changing continent.


Health;   Personal Health
LEAD: The Incidence of breast cancer is rising among American women.
One woman in 10 will eventually get this disease, up from one in 11 just four years ago.


American Legion to Sue U.S. Over Agent Orange
LEAD: The American Legion, the largest veterans' group in the country, said today that it was bringing suit against the Government for failing to complete a study of the health of thousands of Vietnam War veterans exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange.


Don't Let Congress Hobble the Cable Industry;   Fiber Optic Highway
LEAD: To the Editor:


Puppy Killing Brings Prison
LEAD: A man convicted of killing a puppy with a butcher knife was sentenced Tuesday to three and a half years in prison under the state's recently toughened law on cruelty to animals.
Everston Eugene Webb, 22 years old, was sentenced for aggravated cruelty.
Testimony at his Circuit Court trial indicated he killed the dog on May 11 because it was tearing up his yard.


From Honda, an Exotic Challenge
LEAD: The Acura NSX sports car that will be roaring down American roads later in August has swooping lines, a heart-stopping 168-mile-an-hour top speed and a long list of other characteristics that the Honda Motor Company says a competitive ''super car'' should have.


Company News;   Washington Bank
LEAD: Washington Bancorporation filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The company listed known liabilities of $61.7 million and assets with undetermined market value.
The company said its main banking unit, the National Bank of Washington, would be unable to restore its capital to required levels.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Chiat/Day Lays Off 30 In New York
LEAD: CHIAT/DAY/MOJO, the Venice, Calif., agency that seemed to have the golden touch in the last decade, announced yesterday that it had laid off 30 employees in its 150-person New York office, which has lost three major accounts this year.


Final Arguments Begin in Barry Trial
LEAD: Final arguments began today in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug and perjury trial, with the prosecution asserting that he was ''a general who joined the enemy'' in the war on drugs and the defense countering that the Government had used ''mustard gas'' tactics to apprehend a man who used drugs only occasionally.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Economy


Roll-Call in Senate On Speaking Fees
LEAD: Following is the 77-to-23 roll-call vote by which the Senate voted today to prohibit its members from accepting speaking fees from special interest groups.
A yes vote was a vote to prohibit such fees and a no vote was a vote to permit them.
Voting yes were 53 Democrats and 24 Republicans.
Voting no were 2 Democrats and 21 Republicans.


Dow Drops 5.94; Bank Stocks Off Sharply
LEAD: Stocks fell slightly yesterday, with bank shares giving ground amid fears that the industry could be facing difficult times.


U.S. Releases Funds for Hearings on Benefits
LEAD: Richard G. Darman, Director of the Office of Management and Budget, has agreed to release $5 million to let the Social Security Administration hold hearings next month for people seeking disability benefits, White House officials said today.


Tigers Pound Hawkins
LEAD: The summer is still not over for Andy Hawkins.
There are two months remaining, perhaps a dozen or so starts left for him to remove the memory of his strange season.
He should want to forget the whole thing right now, but he doesn't.


The Talk of Saratoga;   Horse Season Opens (Oh, and Races Too)
LEAD: In August, people come to Saratoga for more than the horses, or the waters (mineral).
They come to soak up the romance of the track: Costume balls, tip sheets, barber shop quartets, racing forms, champagne breakfasts at the morning workout, sunshine and a glimpse of Mellons, Vanderbilts and Whitneys being put through their social paces.


Stocks Plummet in Tokyo
LEAD: Japanese stock prices fell sharply today and the yen fluctuated wildly against the dollar after Iraq invaded Kuwait.
Page D15.


Liberian Says He'll Crush Rival, Then Doe
LEAD: A Liberian rebel leader, Charles Taylor, said today that he would let President Samuel K. Doe's army help him crush a rival rebel chief before moving in to oust Mr.
Doe himself within 10 days.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Sports Pages yesterday about Donald Trump and boxing misstated Bill Cayton's managerial relationship with Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion.
Although estranged from Tyson, Cayton is still formally his manager.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Hoya Museum Crystal to Atlas Citron Haligman &amp; Bedecarre, San Francisco.
The account had been with Cadwell Davis Partners, New York.


Evidence Shows Youth's Hands Up When Teaneck Officer Killed Him
LEAD: New medical evidence that a black teen-ager had his hands up when he was fatally shot in the back by a Teaneck police officer caused the New Jersey Attorney General to order a new investigation, people close to the case said yesterday.


In the Mind of the High-Tech Child
LEAD: THE New Math is ''so simple, so very simple, that only a child can do it,'' the satirist Tom Lehrer sang in the 1960's.


Zawatson Proves to Be Feisty Newcomer for Jets
LEAD: When Dave Zawatson went to grammar school in Cleveland, he was left-handed, but the teachers at St.
Angela's Catholic School insisted that everybody do everything right-handed.
That hard-learned lesson seems to be coming in handy for for the Jets' offensive lineman at training camp these days.


Child Custody in New York
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Group of Blacks Sees Hiring Bias By Morgenthau
LEAD: A group of prominent black legislators, clergy members and leaders of community groups asserted yesterday that District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan was systematically excluding blacks from policy-making roles in his office.


Purchasers Report Fall In Growth
LEAD: A monthly survey released yesterday by the National Association of Purchasing Management indicated a steep decline for the nation's manufacturing economy in July, reversing a three-month growth trend.
Economists said the survey gave more credence to assessments that the economy is slowing, perhaps slipping into a recession.


Index Is Steady On Confidence
LEAD: Confidence in the nation's economy among consumers was about the same in July as in June, according to a monthly study.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Disability Hearings Rescued
The Administration will free enough money to avert a disruption in Social Security hearings for people seeking disability benefits.
Page A14.
Barry Trial Nears End
Summing up, the prosecution called Marion Barry a turncoat in the war on drugs, and the defense attacked ''mustard gas'' tactics.


Books of The Times;   A Sensuist's Ramble in the Realm of the Senses
LEAD:
A Natural History of the Senses
By Diane Ackerman
331 pages. Random House. $19.95.


Charles (Red) Barrett, Pitcher, 75
LEAD: Charles (Red) Barrett, who holds the major league record for the fewest pitches in a nine-inning game, died at his home Saturday after a long illness.
He was 75 years old.
While pitching for the Boston Braves in 1944, he faced 27 batters and threw only 58 pitches in a 2-0 victory over the Cincinnati


Ryan Savors His Milestone With a Feeling of Relief
LEAD: The glare from all those bright lights that have followed Nolan Ryan and the Texas Rangers for the last two weeks will shine elsewhere for a while.
The questions about his past and his future will not come so often, and from so many strangers.


Players Wait for Steinbrenner But the Owner Doesn't Show
LEAD: Players waited and reporters waited and photographers waited, but there was no George Steinbrenner yesterday.
Not at Yankee Stadium, where he was expected to appear and meet with the players in perhaps his final session with them as the principal owner.


Close to Home
LEAD: THE bus was going east on 57th Street, and when it reached Madison Avenue, I took my eyes off my paperback and peered out the window.
We were passing the building in which I worked at my first job.


Company News;   MCI-Telecom Deal
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission has approved the $1.25 billion merger of the MCI Communications Corporation and Telecom USA Inc.
MCI said the merger to be completed before the end of the month, pending state regulatory approvals.
MCI plans to acquire all of Telecom's outstanding common shares for $42 each, or about $1.25 billion.


Missing Words, and Election Chaos
LEAD: Because of two missing words, and a law that puts a premium on the absurd, an insurgent candidate is working hard to invalidate scores of nominating petitions in the Bronx.
The spectacle makes one more eloquent argument for reform of New York State's notoriously niggling Election Law.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article yesterday about a Senate subcommittee hearing on the savings and loan crisis misidentified a lobbyist who used his Washington contacts to help buyers of insolvent savings and loan associations.
He is Robert J. Thompson.


Fixing and Polishing Broken Metal
LEAD: PAUL KARNER of Restoration and Design Studio said he would restore ''anything in metal,'' from knives and candlesticks to sterling silver hand mirrors.
Mr.
Karner also repairs many small items with sentimental value. ''But they say it was their grandmother's and they want it,'' he said.
So he fixes it.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION - 10 A.M.


Pentagon Drafts Strategy for Post-Cold War World
LEAD: The Pentagon has drafted a blueprint for United States military strategy in the 1990's with the assumption that once Soviet forces withdraw from Eastern Europe it would take Moscow up to two years to mobilize for a major invasion.


To Americans Abroad, Paris Isn't All Feast
LEAD: Chauffeur-driven cars, drinks by the swimming pool, year-round tans and bottomless expense accounts may not be the happy fate of most American expatriates.
But to a good many people back home at least, those are just some of the privileges they think are enjoyed by their fellow Americans abroad.


Acknowledging Barry's Drug Use: Lawyers See Risk and Advantage
LEAD: After months of denials from Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. that he had ever used illegal drugs before his arrest in January, his lawyer's acknowledgment to the jury on Wednesday that the Mayor had been an occasional cocaine user may have seemed a startling admission.


President at CPC Adds Chief Executive's Title
LEAD: CPC International Inc., a big but relatively unfamiliar company behind a host of famous food brands, yesterday named its president, Charles R. Shoemate, to the top post of chief executive, as well.


INDICTMENT NAMES QUEENS LAWMAKER IN MISUSE OF FUNDS
LEAD: Representative Floyd H. Flake, a powerful Queens minister who rode his popularity into Congress four years ago, has been indicted on charges of diverting tens of thousands of dollars in church funds to his own use.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on July 26 about Soviet staff members of the United Nations Secretariat misstated the position of Gail Bindley-Taylor, vice president of the United Nations staff union.
She said the status of the Soviet staff members was confused; she did not say they were ''secretive.''


Sweeping 20 Miles of Jersey's Littered Shore
LEAD: Thirty-two-year-old William Crenshaw has served 11 months of his sentence for drug possession and has only four months left before he is eligible for parole, so he figures he will stick with the beach cleanup crew, rather than trying for an easier job on work release.


Law;   Courts Try Computers and Stash the Paper
LEAD: Presented with tons of documents every year and not enough room to store them, state court administrators are embracing computer technology that they hope will eliminate the need for case files.


The Iraqi Invasion: Global Reverberations
LEAD:
OIL PRICES Spot market prices surged, with the American benchmark crude rising to $23.11 a barrel, up $1.57.
The invasion stirred fears of slower economic growth, higher inflation and OPEC domination of the world oil market.
But price increases should be limited by a near-record stockpile worldwide.


Dow Slumps 34.66 Points, But Oils Soar
LEAD: Inflation fears touched off by the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait pushed most stock prices lower yesterday, including airlines and other users of petroleum products, but sent oil and oil-service stocks sharply higher.


Review/Art;   African and Other Portraits, Side by Side
LEAD: Within the art world, there has been a tendency for some time to approach the art of other cultures in one of two ways.
One way is based on an assumption that aspects of art are universal and that what one culture values in art is a standard by which the art of other cultures can be measured.
Behind the second is a conviction that other cultures are so radically different from our own that no common ground exists and that any attempt to measure the art of those cultures in anything other than its own terms is unjust.


Editorial Notebook;   East Germany's Hero City
LEAD: To understand the swift collapse of East German Communism, see Leipzig.
There one can dine in the fine restaurant in the Gewandhaus symphony hall, facing what is still called Karl-Marx-Platz, the epicenter of the upheaval that ended four decades of Marxist rule.


Evolution in Europe;   As Merger Nears, German Envoys Study Real Estate
LEAD: The other day, West Germany's deputy chief delegate to the United Nations walked up to the front door of a forbidding gray mansion at 58 Park Avenue, rang the bell and was admitted.


Trevino Backs Toyota
LEAD: Lee Trevino will play in the P.G.A.
Championship next week in Shoal Creek, Ala., but without wearing shirts bearing the Toyota name after the Toyota Motor Corporation pulled its commercials from the telecast in protest of exclusionary membership practices at the Shoal Creek Country Club, the tournament site.


Review/Art;   The Genius And Panache Of Africa's 'Parisians'
LEAD: DURING the last six years, New York City has been treated to several outstanding, and sometimes provocative, exhibitions of African art, thanks to the Museum of Modern Art, the Brooklyn Museum and especially the Center for African Art.
Now the American Museum of Natural History is being heard from, and its ''African Reflections: Art From Northeastern Zaire'' is equal to the best of its predecessors.


Review/Film;   Spike Lee's Middle-Class Jazz Musician
LEAD: SPIKE LEE is an exhilarating mix of brilliance and bravado, of artist, businessman and preacher.
In his stylized visions of our racially tense society - the small-scale sexual comedy ''She's Gotta Have It,'' the inventive musical ''School Daze'' and the astounding political and moral drama ''Do the Right Thing'' - he dares viewers and the Hollywood establishent to keep up with his honesty and humor, his passion and visual flair.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Apr.-June
Change
1990
From '89
Bear Stearns Cos.
$ 33,500,000
-29.6
Coastal Corp.
22,100,000
-37.4
Continental Airlines Inc.
96,800,000
+201.6
Halliburton Co.
47,100,100
+50.0
Horsham Corp.
19,500,000
+45.5
Jostens Inc.
34,100,000
+9.6
Meredith Corp.


The Iraqi Invasion;   Telephone Service Is Cut Off Between U.S. and Kuwait
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said that all telephone service between the United States and Kuwait was cut off without explanation yesterday at 6:37 P.M.
Eastern daylight time.


Theodore Birnbaum, Executive, 73
LEAD: Theodore Birnbaum, a New York business executive, died on Wednesday at St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old and lived in Ossining, N.Y.


16 Months After Valdez Spill, Oil Bill Nears Final Passage
LEAD: The Senate today unanimously approved legislation that is designed to prevent oil spills and to insure that oil companies and carriers pay for damage.


Factory Orders Fell 1.5% in June
LEAD: Orders to factories for manufactured goods declined 1.5 percent in June, the Commerce Department said today.
It was the third time this year that the monthly total of orders declined from the month before.


Review/Pop;   Betty Garrett Remembers When
LEAD: Late in a one-woman show that is rich with salty show business anecdotes, Betty Garrett recalls a meeting with Louis B. Mayer at which the MGM studio boss poked her, knocked her out of her chair and stamped on her toes while pontificating on the do's and don'ts of movie stardom.


Istomin Pays Mozart
LEAD: Eugene Istomin will be the soloist with the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra in Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 21 in C (K. 467) at Avery Fisher Hall tonight at 8.
The program, to be conducted by Gerard Schwarz, also includes Schubert's Eighth Symphony and his incidental music for ''Rosamunde.'' The program will be repeated evening at 8 P.M.


German Company to Buy Fireman's Fund
LEAD: Allianz A.G., Europe's largest insurance company, announced yesterday that it would buy the Fireman's Fund Insurance Company, the American property and casualty insurer, for $3.3 billion in cash.


Chronicle
LEAD: When a Spanish photographer tried to snap a photo of MADONNA jogging in Barcelona, her chief bodyguard, MARCUS JOHNSON, got rough.
But later he went to the newsroom of El Periodico de Cataluna to apologize in person to the photographer, JUAN VALGANON, the paper reported yesterday.
Mr.
Valganon was bruised in the encounter.


Company News;   Trims at Midland
LEAD: Midland Bank P.L.C. said it was cutting 4,000 jobs from its work force of 33,000 by the end of 1991 through attrition and voluntary departures.
Midland also reported a profit of about $:22 million, or about $40.5 million, in the first half of the year.
That compared with a net loss of $:383 million in the corresponding period in 1989, when the bank raised its provisions for bad loans to third world countries.


Company News;   Sears in Talks On Ward Link
LEAD: Rumors swept through Wall Street today that two of the nation's largest general merchants -Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and Montgomery Ward &amp; Company - had begun merger talks but had terminated them.


Invasion Shakes Up Markets
LEAD: The dollar rose, gold prices jumped and most of the world's stock markets fell as the news of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait spread around the world yesterday.


The Iraqi Invasion;   Sketches of the Iraqi and Kuwaiti Leaders
LEAD:
Saddam Hussein


The Iraqi Invasion;   Tokyo Sees No Threat To Its Reserves of Oil
LEAD: Japan today deplored the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq, saying it was watching developments with ''great concern'' but no immediate fear of a serious energy shortage.


Chronicle
LEAD: The National Gallery of Art received nearly $3 million yesterday from funds established by the late LILA ACHESON WALLACE, co-founder of Reader's Digest.
The money, $2.9 million, was given by GEORGE V. GRUNE, who is doubly involved with the gift as chairman of the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund and chairman and chief executive of Reader's Digest.


Division Chief For Grand Met
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.'s food sector has put Peter M. Thompson in charge of its division that oversees Pillsbury International, Haagen-Dazs and Grand Met Foodservice U.S.A.


Anti-Semitism Hasn't Tainted Solidarity Rift;   What Problem?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Company News;   Clorox Completes Cyanamid Deal
LEAD: The Clorox Company completed the previously announced purchase of the household products business of the American Cyanamid Company for $465 million.
Clorox will finance the acquisition from cash on hand and bank borrowings.


New Jersey Says Coroner Erred In Teaneck Case
LEAD: New Jersey's Chief Medical Examiner has said that the Bergen County Medical Examiner erred in the case of a black teen-ager shot by a police officer here by misidentifying where the bullet entered the youth's body and failing to match the wound to the bullet hole in the youth's jacket.


Bear Stearns Income Off
LEAD: Bear Stearns Companies said yesterday that its earnings tumbled about 30 percent in the fourth quarter and full fiscal year, reflecting a continued slowdown in investment banking and retail brokerage.


Review/Dance;   A Choreographer and His Themes
LEAD: Eleo Pomare, a provocative choreographer on the New York dance scene for three decades, was honored last Friday evening at the Fiorello Festival of performances at the Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and the Arts.


Jets' Lyons Enjoying Coslet's New System
LEAD: Bruce Coslet, the Jets' new coach, has declared that under the system he's putting together for the team everybody is regarded as a rookie.
There are exceptions, of course, and they are 17th-year place-kicker Pat Leahy and the crafty veteran manning the defensive line, Marty Lyons.


Long-Term U.S. Bonds Tumble
LEAD: Prices of long-term Treasury bonds tumbled yesterday, sending interest rates up, after Iraq invaded Kuwait.
The invasion raised the specter of a resurgence of oil-fueled inflation, which would undermine the values of bonds and other fixed-income securities.


Anti-Semitism Hasn't Tainted Solidarity Rift;   Let Us Not Overstate
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Punching Patriot From Cuba
LEAD: He's tall, quick with a jab and quicker with an answer for why he's perfectly satisfied boxing not for money but for himself and his homeland, although not necessarily in that order.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
From Africa


Manila Rebels Free Aid Workers From the Peace Corps and Japan
LEAD: Communist rebels today released a kidnapped Peace Corps volunteer and a Japanese aid worker but warned the United States and Japan to stay out of the Philippine insurgency.


Market Place;   Food Companies Still in Favor
LEAD: A NUMBER of analysts are recommending food stocks to investors, or in stock market parlance ''overweight'' their portfolios with those issues.


Detroit Beats Yanks, 6-5, in 14 Innings


TV Weekend;   A Selection Ranging From Grim to Glamorous
LEAD: This weekend brings a pop superstar, a song stylist and ''Beauty and the Beast,'' as well as Northern Ireland, Coney Island and Cambodia.


Genetic Link Indicated In Lung Cancer Study
LEAD: A study of 337 Louisiana families suggests that there is a genetic component to lung cancer, researchers say.


Math Education in New York Must Change for a New Century
LEAD: To the Editor:


Girl, 15, Is Shot By a Gunman At a Bronx Park
LEAD: A 15-year-old was shot and critically wounded early yesterday in the Bronx when a gunman opened fire on a group of friends with whom she was standing in a park on the Grand Concourse, the police said.


Dinkins to Announce Illegal-Gun Amnesty Plan
LEAD: Still grappling to respond to public concern over recent shooting deaths, Mayor David N. Dinkins plans to announce a campaign today to remind people who turn in illegal guns that they may be granted amnesty and to vow to make minimum one-year jail terms stick for those who do not and get caught.


Company News;   Chrysler Prices To Rise 0.9%
LEAD: Facing slumping sales and tough competition, the Chrysler Corporation said today that it planned only minimal increases in its average 1991 car prices in an effort to regain market share.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 521 money market mutual funds increased $800.1 million, to $395.42 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 168 institutional funds decreased by $100,000, to $97.97 billion.
The assets of the 251 general purpose funds were up by $541.5 million, to $136.44 billion.


Company's Rise is Built on Credit
LEAD: Credit cards are now being tried in fast-food outlets, grocery stores, movie theaters and other places that have historically not accepted them.
And that is music to Hatim A. Tyabji's ears.


Congress Moves to Overturn A Military Ban on Abortion
LEAD: In a move that could entangle the White House in the abortion issue, Congress is pressing ahead with proposals to overturn a two-year-old Pentagon policy banning virtually all abortions at United States military hospitals overseas.


House Democrats Vow To Stand by Rights Bill
LEAD: As the House of Representatives opened debate today on a major civil rights bill, Democratic leaders vowed to reject revisions that backers say would be the only way to avert a Presidential veto.


New York's Carnival, All Grown Up
LEAD: Parades, music, eye-popping costumes, dancing in the streets: carnival celebrations are the unmistakable signature of African culture from Lagos to New Orleans to Rio de Janeiro.
New York City's carnivals grew up more recently.
In Brooklyn, the West Indian-American Carnival Association puts on an annual festival during Labor Day weekend, and since 1985 the Caribbean Cultural Center has presented a Pan-American carnival in


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Past Into Present


Covenant Report Is Said to Find Sex Misconduct
LEAD: An investigation ordered by the Covenant House board of directors concludes that the Rev.
Bruce Ritter, the charity's founder and longtime president, engaged in sexual misconduct with young men living at Covenant House shelters for runaway youths, according to people who have read the investigation's report.


Chronicle
LEAD: The Rolling Stones will perform in Prague for the first time because PRESIDENT VACLAV HAVEL of Czechoslovakia wants to meet MICK JAGGER.
The concert is scheduled for Aug. 18 as part of festivities marking the country's freedom from Communist rule.


Herbert O. Fisher, 81, Test Pilot and Official
LEAD: Herbert O. Fisher, a test pilot and a retired aviation executive of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, died on Sunday at Chilton Memorial Hospital in Kinnelon, N.J.
He was 81 years old and lived in Kinnelon.


Our Towns;   A Nice Town, But Think Twice Before Parking
LEAD: It's always a hassle when your car is towed.
First you have to find out where the car has been taken, then you have to hand over a lot of money to get it out of the lot.
In Newburgh, that's if you're lucky.


Wisconsin Dells Journal;   Where Beauty's Place Is Behind the Billboards
LEAD: The signs begin nearly 100 miles out, brightly painted billboards spaced at irregular intervals alongside Interstate 94 as it winds north from Illinois: ''Scenic Boat Tours.'' ''Tommy Barlett Thrill Shows.'' ''Visit Wis.
Dells.''


Review/Film;   So Small, So Cuddly, And, Oh, So Marketable
LEAD: Huey, Dewey, Louie and their friend Webby (her full name is Webbigail) are more than adorable little ducklings.
They have become big-money television stars without the help of their Uncle Donald.
Their wildly successful syndicated show, ''Duck Tales,'' is funny enough for children, who warm to the young adventure-prone ducks, and savvy enough for parents, who can appreciate touches like Uncle Scrooge McDuck being interviewed for a television show called ''Life Styles of the Filthy Rich.


Lawyers for Noriega Win Right to Review Records of 3 Banks
LEAD: A Federal magistrate ordered three European banks today to provide records of Manuel Noriega's accounts believed to contain millions of dollars to his lawyers.
The ousted Panamanian dictator says he needs the money for his legal defense on drug smuggling charges.


Margaret Brown, 98, Retired Educator, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
Margaret Brown, a former president of the Panzer College of Physical Education and Hygiene in East Orange, N.J., died on Monday at the Hospital Center at Orange.
She was 98 years old and lived in Maplewood, N.J.


Time for U.S. To Cross Magic Line
LEAD: The Goodwill Games may be history as soon as Ted Turner stops performing the wave in public and takes a meeting with his accountant.


The Iraqi Invasion: A New Gulf Alignment;   Iraqis, Bargaining on Anti-U.S. Sentiment, May Profit by Intimidating the Monarchies
LEAD: Iraq's invasion of Kuwait ushers in a new alignment in which Iraqis, Iranians and Palestinian hard-liners appear to share an interest in subduing the oil-rich monarchies of the region and challenging United States influence in the Arab world.


Chronicle
LEAD: Later this month a committee of the American Bar Association will meet to assess the qualifications of DAVID H. SOUTER, the Federal appellate judge nominated to fill the Supreme Court vacancy left by Justice WILLIAM J. BRENNAN Jr., who retired.
One of the committee's 15 members is WILLIAM J. BRENNAN 3d, the retired Justice's son, who is a lawyer in New Jersey.


Review/Film;   A Garden Of Secrets, Sordid Ones
LEAD: Sexy, humorous, possessed of great elan and very much in demand with women, the screenwriter Dan Gillis has a lot of appealing qualities not normally associated with Jeff Goldblum, the actor who plays him.
With his intense, buggy gaze and his skittish manner, Mr.
Goldblum was an inspired choice for ''The


Savings Inquiry Is Defended
LEAD: In an optimistic assessment of the Government's drive to prosecute criminal fraud in the savings and loan industry, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said at a Senate hearing today that every major accusation of wrongdoing is under investigation by the Justice Department.


Auctions
LEAD:
Pueblo to Plains


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.06
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.43
7.43
7.64
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.31
7.26
7.44
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.29
8.19
7.69
30-YR.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is the first post-cold-war crisis in the economically dependent world.
With the end of the East-West game, small countries can act with impunity to rearrange the neighborhood.''
- Judith Kipper, a Middle East specialist, on Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
[A8:3.]


The Iraqi Invasion;   ISRAELIS CONDEMN BAGHDAD'S STRIKE
LEAD: Israeli leaders publicly condemned the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait today and warned that it would contribute to a further destabilization of the Middle East, but they also appeared relieved by the move.


Savings Cure May Kill the Patient
LEAD: When President Bush gathered with Congressional leaders in the Rose Garden last Aug. 9 for the signing of the savings and loan bailout bill, he triumphantly declared, ''This legislation will safeguard and stabilize America's financial system and put in place permanent reforms so these problems will never happen again.


Wheat Prices Up Slightly; Corn and Soybeans Decline
LEAD: Wheat futures prices closed slightly higher today on the Chicago Board of Trade, but the corn and soybean markets fell, extending Wednesday's losses amid forecasts for more good crop weather in the Midwest.


Evolution in Europe;   Soviet Smokers Vow Strikes As Cigarettes, Too, Disappear
LEAD: It happens like clockwork, all over the city.
A truck pulls up to a boarded-up kiosk, unloads its wares, the sale window opens and within minutes smokers appear out of nowhere to take places in line, hopeful that for this day, anyway, their addiction can be fed.


Law: At The Bar;   The Highwaymen Come Singing, Singing, and Much To The Chagrin of The Originals.
LEAD: Could country music stars like Willie Nelson or Waylon Jennings possibly be confused with Federal Judge Stephen Trott?
Would Johnny Cash or Kris Kristofferson want to palm themselves off as Judge Trott?
And will the real ''Highwaymen'' please stand up and sing?


The Iraqi Invasion;   U.N. Condemns the Invasion With Threat to Punish Iraq
LEAD: The United Nations Security Council voted overwhelmingly early this morning to condemn Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, demanding the immediate, unconditional withdrawal of all of Baghdad's forces from the tiny Persian Gulf nation, and threatening to invoke mandatory sanctions if it does not promptly comply.


More Companies Choosing to Self-Insure Benefits
LEAD: More than 50 percent of the nation's employees with health insurance provided by their employer now work for companies that design and insure their own health benefits, a sharp increase over the past 15 years, an insurance industry group reports.


U.S. Case Against Barry Goes to Jury
LEAD: After two months of testimony, argument and legal maneuvering that transfixed this city and captured the attention of much of the country, the Government's drug and perjury case against Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. went to the jury today.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Madison Avenue Street Fair, Madison Avenue will be closed on Sunday from 37th to 50th Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


2 Teen-Agers Shot As Violence Persists On New York Streets
LEAD: The tide of violence in New York City in the last two weeks - four children killed by stray gunfire, an advertising executive shot dead in the West Village, two cab drivers murdered, a young couple bludgeoned in Central Park - continued yesterday as officials struggled to respond to growing fears.


Saratoga's Proud Place in the Revolution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Macy's Gets A Good Price For 1% Stake
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company, in a move dors about the retailer's financial strength, said yesterday that it had sold a 1 percent stake in the company for a price that values its equity at $1.5 billion - about four times what investors paid when the company was taken private four years ago.


Fed's Uncertain Power Over Banking Companies
LEAD: At a time when Federal regulators are scrutinizing the ailing banking industry more closely than ever, a recent Federal court decision has raised the issue of how much control regulators have over the bank holding companies that own the nation's largest banks.


Results Plus
LEAD:
GOODWILL GAMES
U.S. Boxers on Roll
American boxers challenged the world yesterday at the Goodwill Games, while the world had its hands full with the United States women's basketball team.
The boxers have won 39 in a row since beating the Soviets at the 1986 Goodwill Games in Moscow, and now they have taken aim at the gold medal in Seattle.


Anti-Semitism Hasn't Tainted Solidarity Rift
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Cabaret;   Rupert Holmes Onstage
LEAD: No contemporary songwriter, save Stephen Sondheim, is fonder than Rupert Holmes of writing songs that present teasing little puzzles and games.
In songs like ''Terminal'' and ''By the Way,'' Mr.
Holmes makes a point of finding more than one meaning for the words of his titles.
In other songs, like ''Answering Machine,'' his 1979 hit ''Escape (''The Pina Colada Song''), and ''Letters That Cross in the


Sunday Silence Joins Easy Goer In Retirement After Leg Injury
LEAD: Sunday Silence today joined his rival Easy Goer as an early casualty of the racing season when he was retired from racing because of a torn ligament in his left foreleg.


U.S.-Japan Phone Pact
LEAD: The United States and Japan have resolved a trade dispute over barriers that have blocked foreign companies from the Japanese telecommunications market.


A Very Large Player Has Big Ambitions, Too
LEAD: Ed Cunningham is 6 feet 7 3/4 inches tall and weighs 296 pounds.
He says he does not know his jacket size because he has to have his clothes made to order.


World Bank Aids Poland
LEAD: The World Bank said on Wednesday that it would lend $300 million to Poland to help that country shift from Communism to a market-oriented economy.
The loan will be used to finance imports of basic goods and to provide unemployment compensation, training and employment services to workers who lose their jobs.


Queens Youth Fatally Shot in Fight Over Moped
LEAD: A 14-year-old from Queens was shot and killed on Wednesday night in an argument over a moped, the police said.


Anti-Semitism Hasn't Tainted Solidarity Rift;   One-Sided Picture
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Arianespace Chief
LEAD: Arianespace this week named its Director General, Charles Bigot, to the post of president, replacing Frederic d'Allest as head of Europe's commercial satellite launching program.
Mr.
D'Allest announced his retirement last week.
Mr.
Bigot, who is 58 years old, had served in the consortium's second-highest post since 1982.


Gubicza's Season Ends
LEAD: Mark Gubicza, the Kansas City Royals pitcher, had arthroscopic surgery yesterday to repair a tear in his right rotator cuff.
The right-hander is expected to recover in time for spring training, said Steve Joyce, the team physician, who did the surgery.


Company News;   Factory in France For Allied-Signal
LEAD: Allied-Signal Inc. announced it would build a $160 million plant in France to manufacture polyester fiber for passenger car tires, seat belts and other products.
The company said the plant would be built in Longwy, a city near the Belgian border, for $160 million.
It is expected to begin operating by 1993 and employ about 300 workers.


Debut at the Zoo


The Iraqi Invasion;   West Europeans Join U.S. in Condemning Invasion
LEAD: West European countries today unanimously condemned Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, with Britain and France joining the United States in freezing billions of dollars in Kuwaiti assets to prevent them from falling into Iraqi hands.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Cigna Corp., Philadelphia, a holding company for insurance and health-care subsidiaries, named Dennis H. Ferro managing director of its international investment division.
The company also named Nicholas Taylor managing director of its international investment advisers unit.


Black Journalists Look to Last Ceiling
LEAD: Participants in the 15th Annual Convention of the National Association of Black Journalists spoke today of reaching out to break what they described as the profession's final barrier, to reach the top levels of management and media ownership.


Panel Named for NASA Review
LEAD: Space program officials announced today that two former Congressmen, a former astronaut and several top industry executives and scientists would serve on an advisory committee that is to examine how to manage the nation's future efforts in space.


Outdoors;   New Series of Relief Maps Offers Stunning Views
LEAD: Raven Maps &amp; Images of Medford, Ore., is publishing a series of handsome shaded-relief maps of various areas of the United States that will delight devotees of such documents.


Evolution in Europe;   Soviet Official Talks of Record Grain Crop
LEAD: The Soviet Union, the world's biggest grain importer, could harvest a record 260 million tons this year, but waste and inefficiency may cause food shortages, a top farming official said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Thompson Medical/Slimfast and General Foods USA, to Lubicom Communications, New York, for the Jewish-market advertising of Slimfast weight-loss products and Post Raisin Bran cereal, respectively.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-10
Battle-hardened Iraqi troops stormed into the desert sheikdom of Kuwait, seizing control of its capital and its oilfields, driving its ruler into exile, plunging the Persian Gulf region into crisis and sending tremors of anxiety around the world.
Page A1


Lies? Worse? The View From Queens
LEAD: There was no telling 84-year-old Rebecca Claiborne and 82-year-old Benjamin Lance yesterday that their Congressman, Floyd H. Flake, was capable of stealing money meant to help them.


Heir Apparent Is Seen In Promotion at Grace
LEAD: W. R. Grace &amp; Company, the diversified specialty chemical maker, yesterday named J. P. Bolduc as president and chief operating officer, making him the likely successor to J. Peter Grace.


Homeless Man Is Arrested In Killing of Ad Executive
LEAD: A homeless man was arrested Wednesday night and charged with killing an advertising executive who was making a call at a pay telephone in the West Village, the police said.


Peru Guerrillas Unmoved by Fujimori
LEAD: In his first week in office, President Alberto Fujimori has appealed to two leftist guerrilla groups to open talks aimed at ending their 10-year-old insurgency, but there appears to be little interest from either group.


At the Movies
LEAD:
O'Neal as Conscience


Lawmaker Assails Health Chief
LEAD: Calling Health and Human Services Secretary Louis W. Sullivan ''a disgrace to his race,'' the chairman of a Congressional health committee harshly criticized Dr.
Sullivan today for opposing proposals for Federally sponsored national health insurance.


Rembrandt Exhibition To Tour Europe in 1991
LEAD: Rembrandt will have his first one-man international show next year, when 130 of his works will tour Berlin, Amsterdam and London.


Film Fallout: Bright Lights, Cranky City
LEAD: Six times in the last month, the eastbound lanes of the Brooklyn Bridge were closed for a full night, stranding thousands of unwitting commuters in snarled, honking processions along other escape routes from lower Manhattan.


Heavy Metal Doesn't Make You a Dropout
LEAD: To the Editor:


Go For Wand Captures Test Stakes With Ease
LEAD: Go for Wand removed any questions about her fitness, quality or status as the nation's best 3-year-old filly by scoring a smashing two-length victory today in the Grade I Test Stakes at Saratoga Race Track.


Restaurants
LEAD: When Bouley was first reviewed in 1987, shortly after it opened in TriBeCa, I noted that the restaurant had ''the potential for greatness.'' Overstriving and wobbly execution, though, resulted in too many near misses and a two-star rating.
Today, though, Bouley displays remarkable poise and self-confidence.


The Iraqi Invasion;   In Two Arab Capitals, Gunfire and Fear, Victory and Cheers
LEAD: Iraqi troops who invaded Kuwait before dawn today swiftly gained the upper hand in the capital despite occasionally fierce resistance by outnumbered Kuwaiti defenders.


4,000 Jobs Being Cut By Pratt &amp; Whitney
LEAD: Pratt &amp; Whitney, the big maker of aircraft engines, said today that it would eliminate 4,000 jobs by 1993 because of expected cutbacks in Defense Department contracts.


Hussein Must Be Stopped . . .
LEAD: The seizure of Kuwait sends a further signal that President Saddam Hussein, the megalomaniacal leader of Iraq, must be stopped.
If he is not, the consequences will be perilous for the Middle East and for the world.


For Italians, Some Horrors Will Not Die
LEAD: This has always been a country with a cultivated eye for intrigue and conspiracy, where truth is rarely so careless as to lie on the surface and even the rain does not fall by chance.


Review/Concert;   Philharmonic Opens Free Park Series
LEAD: New York's fickle weather so far this summer has evidently left outdoor-music lovers feeling not only clammy, but also a bit leery.
On Monday, all was well for the opening of the New York Philharmonic's season of free concerts in the parks; a promising afternoon gave way to a gorgeous, cool evening on the Great Lawn in Central Park.


Viola's Six-Hitter Snaps Mets Out of Doldrums
LEAD: The Mets broke out of their ''little valley'' today and started soaring again, and did it with some frontline performances: Frank Viola muzzled the Montreal Expos, 5-1, pitched six-hit ball and won for the 15th time this season.
And Darryl Strawberry brought a ringing end to an 0-for-18 slide with a single and a home run.


The Iraqi Invasion;   Iraqi Invasion, Step by Step
LEAD:
July 17 President Saddam Hussein of Iraq accuses Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates of flooding the oil market and driving prices down, asserting that the move cost Iraq $14 billion in lost oil revenue.
July 18 Iraq accuses Kuwait of stealing $2.4 billion worth of oil from wells along the disputed border with Iraq and of seeking to wreck Iraq's economy by overproducing oil and thus pushing down prices.


Review/Festival Latino;   El Salvador's Violence Hits Home
LEAD: The civil war in El Salvador comes home with predictable violence in ''La Misma Sangre'' (''The Same Blood''), a play by Carlos Velis presented at the Public Theater as part of the Festival Latino.


Backing Pentagon, Bush Says Military Can Be Cut 25% in 5 Years
LEAD: President Bush said today that the nation's armed forces could be cut by 25 percent over the next five years, as America adapts its military strategy to suit the new era of spreading democracy.


Nynex to Establish Office To Address Ethical Issues
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation, which faces criminal and civil lawsuits and regulatory penalties after accusations of impropriety, will create an office of ethics and business conduct, company officials said yesterday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Miscellany
LEAD: *
Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., New York, said the 34 employees of Wexler, Reynolds, Fuller, Harrison &amp; Schule, a Washington public affairs firm, will join the company as a separate unit called the Wexler Group.
Craig L. Fuller was named president and chief operating officer of Hill &amp; Knowlton Public Affairs Worldwide, and Anne Wexler was appointed vice chairman.


Klima Pleads Guilty
LEAD: Petr Klima, a former left wing for the Detroit Red Wings who now plays for the Edmonton Oilers, yesterday pleaded guilty in Pontiac, Mich., to four misdemeanor charges stemming from a 1989 drunken-driving arrest.
He is to be sentenced Aug. 23.
He faces a maximum of two years in prison. (AP)


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   The Hunt For Clients Intensifies
LEAD: AS the competition for new accounts becomes fierce, a growing number of agencies are being forced to learn how to hustle.


Washington Talk;   The Target of Choice For the G.O.P.: Mitchell
LEAD: Move over, Mario Cuomo.
George Mitchell, the mild-mannered, sober-minded and rarely quotable Senate majority leader, is emerging as the Democrat the Republicans love to hate.


Father Defends His Son At Central Park Trial
LEAD: The father of a defendant in the Central Park jogger trial testified yesterday that his son was forced to sign an incriminating statement without understanding it and without detectives first warning him against self-incrimination.


Review/Film;   Whit Stillman's 'Metropolitan,' a Modern Comedy of Manners
LEAD: ''Metropolitan'' was shown as part of this year's New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 23.
The film opens today at the Paris, 4 West 58th Street.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Iraqi Invasion


Ousted India Minister Rallies His Followers
LEAD: Calling Prime Minister V. P. Singh ''spineless,'' India's ousted Deputy Prime Minister today called on millions of his followers and farmers to pour into the capital in a show of strength.


Managua Journal;   What Ended, Battle Begins Over Sandinista Legacy
LEAD: For more than a decade, anyone with doubts about who ran this country could lift his eyes to the Managua skyline, where giant letters on a hillside spelled ''F.S.L.N.,'' the initials in Spanish of the Sandinista National Liberation Front.
Recently, however, the famous letters were altered to form a different message: ''Fin'' -or simply, ''The End.


Our Prison Profiteers
LEAD: They run the new correctional ''hotels,'' and some of their daily rates would make Leona Helmsley blush.


O'Neill Center Presents Readings of 3 Musicals
LEAD: ''Captains Courageous,'' a musical by Patrick Cook and Frederick Freyer from the novel by Rudyard Kipling, will be given the first of three readings, with music, at 8 P.M. tomorrow in the Rose Barns Theater at the O'Neill Theater Center, 305 Great Neck Road, Waterford, Conn.


Evolution in Europe;   Wreckage of Armenian Plane Is Found in Disputed Region
LEAD: The wreckage of a plane carrying 30 people from Armenia was found early today in the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, the Tass press agency reported.


An Evening of Piano
LEAD: The pianist Jean-Yves Thibaudet will play works by Ravel, Brahms and Liszt in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor, on Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y., at 5:30 P.M.
Sunday.
Mr.
Thibaudet's program includes Ravel's ''Menuet Antique,'' ''A la Maniere de Borodine,'' ''A la Maniere de Chabrier'' and ''Gaspard de la Nuit''; Brahms's Variations on a Theme by Paganini, Book I (Op.


The Iraqi Invasion;   INVADING IRAQIS SEIZE KUWAIT AND ITS OIL; U.S. CONDEMNS ATTACK, URGES UNITED ACTION
LEAD: Iraqi troops stormed into the desert sheikdom of Kuwait today, seizing control of its capital city and its rich oilfields, driving its ruler into exile, plunging the strategic Persian Gulf region into crisis and sending tremors of anxiety around the world.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Why a Bishop Quit
The recent resignation of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Atlanta came about after evidence of his ''intimate relationship'' with a woman, church officials said.
Page A12.
A Troubled Savings Rescue
Almost a year after the Federal bailout of the savings and loan industry, economists see problems, including a danger to banks.


In the House: A Vote to Remember
LEAD: Voters in every Congressional district in America have reason to watch how their representatives vote on the campaign reform bill likely to come up in the House today.


Review/Opera;   Tale of Judith, Updated
LEAD: As soon as the lights go up on the set of ''Judith'' we know where we are, and it definitely is not Israel in Biblical times.
We are in the grim land known as German Expressionism, and any doubt as to where the composer, Siegfried Matthus, and the director, Davis Alden, have brought us is erased at the appearance of a black-faced executioner who busies himself hacking off the heads of prisoners with a meat cleaver.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Boeing Co., Seattle, received orders from Linhas Aereas de Mozambique, a Mozambique airline, for two jet transports valued at $117 million.


Reviews/Music;   Shinehead's Lessons In Morality
LEAD: Shinehead has a dual mission, social and musical.
His lyrics promote black self-improvement, saying yes to ambition and unity, no to drugs and broken families.
And his music builds a coalition between hip-hop, the music of young American-born blacks, and reggae, the music of a growing community of transplanted Caribbean people; he sings, raps and ''toasts'' in the style of


Iraq's Naked Aggression
LEAD: Without warrant or warning, Iraq has struck brutally at tiny Kuwait, a brazen challenge to world law.
Iraq stands condemned by a unanimous U.N.
Security Council and major Western oil purchasers.
President Bush's taste for bluntness stands him in good stead: ''Naked aggression'' is the correct term for President Saddam


The Iraqi Invasion;   ARMS FLOW TO IRAQ HALTED BY SOVIETS
LEAD: The Soviet Union tonight announced that it had suspended the delivery of arms and military hardware to Iraq after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the official press agency Tass reported.


On Stage
LEAD:
Many Hats, but Just One Jacket


Chronicle
LEAD: MYRNA LOY became 85 years old yesterday and she celebrated among friends in Manhattan at what was billed as a Montana barbecue.
The host was JAMES KOTSILIBAS-DAVIS, an old friend who was co-author of her biography.


Fairs and Festivals
LEAD:
Tomorrow
SALUTE TO HARLEM FESTIVAL, #125th Street and West Side Highway.
Music, food, giveaways.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 4 to 8 P.M.
Information: 831-4206.
ANTIQUES SHOW, Westchester Hotel, West Red Oak Lane, White Plains.
Tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission, $4.


The Iraqi Invasion;   IRAQ'S ADVANTAGE LIMITS U.S. OPTIONS
LEAD: The Bush Administration faced the sobering reality today that despite a longstanding commitment to defend America's vital interests in the Persian Gulf, there was no easy military means to compel Iraq to withdraw its forces from Kuwait.
With the forces of pro-


Company News;   Kansas Gas Board Rejects Takeover
LEAD: The directors of the Kansas Gas and Electric Company unanimously rejected the hostile offer of $27 a share in cash, or $857 million, from the Kansas City Power and Light Company as inadequate.
In a letter to shareholders, Wilson K. Cadman, the chairman and president of Kansas Gas, said the acquisition ''could have significantly adverse effect on the company's employees, customers and the communities it serves.


Norman Maclean, 87, a Professor Who Wrote About Fly-Fishing
LEAD: Norman Maclean, a professor of English who turned his hand to fiction in retirement and wrote an acclaimed book about fishing, died yesterday at his home in the Hyde Park district of Chicago.
He was 87 years old.


New Face;   Crashing A Socialite's Cozy World
LEAD: ''If J. D. Salinger and F. Scott Fitzgerald had mated and had a child, Nick Smith is what I think would have happened,'' Christopher Eigeman surmised the other day.


Pirates Keep Up With Mets
LEAD: Bobby Bonilla drove in three runs with two home runs and a double today, and Andy Van Slyke and Barry Bonds hit two-run homers, leading the Pittsburgh Pirates to an 8-5 victory over the Chicago Cubs.


Uprising Over, but Trinidad Emergency Persists
LEAD: This normally sleepy Caribbean capital was still abuzz today with talk of the electrifying kidnapping of the Prime Minister, half the Cabinet and about 50 other people.


STEALTH BOMBER BACKED BY SENATE
LEAD: The Senate today rejected efforts to scrap or even curtail production of the Stealth bomber, choosing instead to provide the $4.6 billion that the Air Force has requested for producing two of the planes in 1991 and for continued research and development.


Crash Injures Unser
LEAD: Al Unser Sr. broke his right collarbone and right thigh and damaged some ribs yesterday in a crash while practicing for Sunday's Marlboro 500 at the Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn, Mich.
Unser was expected to have surgery later in the day.(AP)


Books of The Times;   Signposts Along the Way to Khrushchev's Fall
LEAD:
Khrushchev on Khrushchev
An Inside Account of the Man and His Era
By Sergei N. Khrushchev
Edited and translated by William Taubman. 422 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Judge Picks Japan Routes
LEAD: An administrative law judge recommended today that five United States airlines be awarded direct routes to Japan from six American cities.


George J. Fleming, 84; Educator and Author
LEAD: George James Fleming, an author, editor and political science professor who became chairman of the regents at Morgan State University in Baltimore, died Wednesday at the age of 84 at his home in Cockeysville, Md.
His wife, Hazel, said the cause of death was liver and heart ailments.


Frank G. O'Neill, War Prosecutor, 83
LEAD: Frank G. O'Neill, a lawyer who served as chief prosecutor of Japanese war criminals in the Philippines after World War II, died Monday at Milton Hospital in Massachusetts.
He was 83 years old and lived in Milton.


House Votes to Let Airports Tax Airline Tickets
LEAD: The House today overwhelmingly approved legislation that would let airports levy a new tax on airline tickets of up to $12 on a round trip to help pay for improving and expanding the airports.


Allies Assess Japan Policy
LEAD: The United States and the European Community renewed pressure today on Japan to import more foreign goods.


Radja to Roma Team For Two Seasons
LEAD: Under an agreement announced yesterday by the Boston Celtics, Dino Radja of Yugoslavia will play for Il Messaggero Roma rather than the Celtics for the next two seasons, in return for an undisclosed amount of cash.
The Italian team had announced earlier that the 6-foot-11-inch forward had signed a five-year agreement, for terms that the team did not disclose.


The Iraqi Invasion;   Bush, in Freezing Assets, Bars $30 Billion to Hussein
LEAD: In freezing Iraqi and Kuwaiti assets in the United States, President Bush has fenced off an estimated $30 billion from President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, Government analysts say.


Met Golf Passive On Clubs' Members
LEAD: The Metropolitan Golf Association will not exert pressure on any of its 314 member clubs to change their membership policies.


Review/Music;   The Classical Band, With a New Leader
LEAD: The Classical Band, New York's only large-scale period-instruments orchestra, is just a little more than one year old, yet it has already been forced to reinvent itself.


Company News;   Japonica Accepts Plan on Allegheny
LEAD: Japonica Partners agreed with creditors of Allegheny International Inc. to take control of the bankrupt appliance maker on Aug. 15.
The partnership, based in New York and Rhode Island, has been pursuing Allegheny for about a year.
Allegheny, which filed for Chapter 11 protection from creditors in February 1988, owns the Sunbeam Corporation, maker of Sunbeam and


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
New Venture in Miami


Hank Steinbrenner Facing a Vote on Wednesday
LEAD: Whenever the Yankees' limited partners have met in the last 17 1/2 years, they have spent their time listening to the general partner, George Steinbrenner.
Not even suggestions, one limited partner has said, could be made.


U.S. Panel Lets Lilco Drop Evacuation Plan
LEAD: The Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today that the Long Island Lighting Company could scrap its disputed and costly emergency evacuation plan for the Shoreham nuclear power plant now that most of its nuclear fuel has been removed.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   People
LEAD: *
Delbert K. Collins and Michael C. Hall, account directors, have been promoted to senior vice presidents of Leo Burnett Co.


Reading The Text
LEAD: When hearings get under way next month on the nomination of Judge David Souter to the Supreme Court, it would be a relief if senators and others dropped from their vocabularies the weary slogans applied to judges in recent years.
We have had enough of ''activist'' and ''originalist'' and the like.


Crime and the Commissioner: Pressure Mounts for Results
LEAD: Six months after taking office with a mandate from the Mayor to ''take back our streets and our parks, by night as well as by day,'' Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown, while well regarded, has yet to show that he can make a difference.


Why the Bar Exam Is Absolutely Crucial
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senate Is Expected to Back New Term for Futures Head
LEAD: After a Senate hearing tonight, Wendy Lee Gramm, the chairwoman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, was expected to be reconfirmed for another five-year term.


The Barnes Foundation Names New President
LEAD: The Barnes Foundation of Merion, Pa., has named Richard H. Glanton as its new president.
The foundation administers a major collection of 19th-and 20th-century Impressionist and post-Impressionist art.


Campaign Finance Debate Reveals Anxiety in House
LEAD: One day after the Senate ended years of deadlock and approved a major bill to tighten campaign finance laws, the House of Representatives found itself mired today in a dispute among Democrats who feared that the House version could damage their re-election prospects.


Atex Faces 3d Lawsuit Over Video Terminals
LEAD: Atex Inc. has been sued for a third time by news employees who say they were injured while using the computer company's keyboard and video display terminals.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
RICHARD REDUX


AIDS Services To the Homeless To Be Expanded
LEAD: The Dinkins administration plans to provide more testing, treatment and housing for homeless people with AIDS under a broad new program to be announced today.


Economic Scene;   On Measuring Living Standards
LEAD: THE revolutions in Eastern Europe have been driven by people's conviction that their standard of living rotted under Communism.
You cannot find evidence of this decay in the official data. ''Under the Communist regimes, data have simply been faked in some cases, and collected on a very inadequate conceptual basis in other cases,'' according to David Lipton and Jeffrey Sachs, American economists who have been serving as economic advisers to Solidarity in Poland.


Legalize Mace, Official Urges
LEAD: A City Councilman from Brooklyn said yesterday that in light of the recent violence in the city, people should be allowed to carry tear gas in aerosol containers.
The Councilman, Noach Dear, told a news conference at City Hall that people used to carry Mace, a brand of aerosol tear gas, before it was made illegal, and that many still do.


Miss Leventhal Wed in Glen Head
LEAD: Ilysse Ann Leventhal, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis B. Leventhal of Roslyn, L.I., was married yesterday to Franklin Bruce Rimalovski, a son of Frances Hochman of Great Neck, L.I., and Dr.
Alexander B. Rimalovski of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Norman Kahan officiated at the Glen Head Country Club in Glen Head, L


Evolution in Europe;   Germanys' Rival Broadcasters Now in Same Boat
LEAD: For nearly 45 years, public television and radio broadcasting in West Berlin and East Germany followed the dictates of the cold war.


Crackdown in a 'Freer' Korea Puzzles Opposition
LEAD: Two years ago this summer Kim Keun Tae was out of jail for the first time in years, his release hailed as a harbinger that South Korea's new, more democratic Government was willing to tolerate dissent and end a decade of systematic repression.


The Media Business;   Reed Buys Magazine
LEAD: Reed International P.L.C., a British publishing company, said today that it had acquired the Estates Gazette Ltd., a property magazine, for $:59.4 million, about $110 million.
It said it was paying $:50 million for the publishing business and $:9.4 million for the group's property interests.
A further $:5 million may be payable depending on advertising revenue over the three years ending on Dec, 31, 1993.


Atlanta Archbishop Had Tie to Woman
LEAD: The recent resignation of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Atlanta came about after he was confronted with evidence of an ''intimate relationship'' with a single 27-year-old Atlanta singer, church officials said today.


For Children
LEAD: Shows, Nature, Museums
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, #10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Friday (until 8 P.M. Tuesday) and 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on weekends; gift shop and cafeteria are open the same hours, at Fifth Avenue and 65th Street.
Admission: children under 3, free; ages 3 to 12, 25 cents; over 65, 50 cents; others, $1.


Renoir Series Is Extended
LEAD: A retrospective of films by Jean Renoir has been extended through Aug. 23 at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place.
Admission to each program is $6 ($5 for students and the elderly).
Information: 598-7171.
Here is a schedule.
Today
''THE SOUTHERNER'' (1945); ''DIARY OF A CHAMBERMAID'' (1946) and ''WOMAN ON THE BEACH'' (1946), 6:30 P.M.


Debris Explodes, Killing Worker
LEAD: One garbage collector was killed and another critically burned yesterday when a box believed to contain propane exploded, the police said.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on July 26 about Coast Guard action against Joseph Hazelwood, the captain of the Exxon Valdez when the oil tanker ran aground in Alaska, misidentified the California port where the tanker was repaired.
The ship was in dry dock in San Diego, not Long Beach.


Company News;   Pilot Effort At Eastern Is Backed
LEAD: Union pilots who joined a strike against Eastern Airlines have the right to replace trainees hired during the carrier's rebuilding, a Federal judge ruled today.


New Deadline for Draft
LEAD: College juniors planning to declare for the National Football League draft will be required to do so by Feb. 1 under a new set of guidelines set down by Commissioner Paul Tagliabue yesterday.


Review/Photography;   Ladies and Gentlemen, Welcome to My Life
LEAD: Although art galleries will never replace confessionals, many contemporary artists have taken to using their personal experiences as the primary subject matter of their art.
This can be seen as a reflection of what the historian Christopher Lasch has called the culture of narcissism, or else as a reaction to the sardonic emphasis on media experience in the art of the 1980's.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Sports Pages on Wednesday about the Yankees' limited partners misstated a comment by one of them, William Rose Jr., about Hank Steinbrenner's prospects for approval as the team's general partner.
Mr.
Rose said he had heard that at least one partner, not some partners, wanted ''nothing to do with Hank Steinbrenner.


Latin Plan On Trade
LEAD: Central American economic ministers agreed on Wednesday to a plan to eliminate gradually regional trade barriers and called for the creation of a Central American free-trade zone by 1992.


Baroque at Caramoor
LEAD: Paula Robison will be the soloist in a program of Baroque flute and piccolo works in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor, Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y., tonight at 9.
The program includes four Vivaldi concertos, a Concerto in D by C. P. E. Bach, and Jacques Hotteterre's ''Echoes'' for solo flute.


Race, or Racism, in Social Studies?
LEAD: Does New York State's social studies curriculum fairly reflect the nation's racial and cultural diversity?
The question has produced passionate political response.
Sensibly, the State Board of Regents has now approved a committee of teachers, administrators and scholars who can offer a scholarly answer.


Fishing Banned After Texas Oil Spill


Boskin's View on Recession
LEAD: Amid a continuing barrage of weak reports on the economy, Michael J. Boskin, the Presidential adviser, said today that the chance of a recession during the next 12 months, while ''low,'' is ''certainly not zero.''


Reviews/Music;   No Imitation, But Echoes Of a Band
LEAD: Of the 16 musicians in the John Fedchock-Maria Schneider Big Band, which played on Monday evening at Zanzibar and Grill, 550 Third Avenue, at 36th Street, 11 of them, including Mr.
Fedchock, are veterans of the orchestra led by Woody Herman.
So it is not surprising that echoes of the driving power of Mr.


The Iraqi Invasion;   70's-Style Price Shock Not Likely in This Oil War
LEAD: A new round of economic warfare seemed to be under way yesterday, as the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait resurrected both higher oil prices and fears of OPEC domination of the world oil market.
But many ground rules have changed, both for nations that export oil and for those that import it.


Pop/Jazz;   At Lincoln Center, It's Jazz and It's Classical
LEAD: FOR the last three years, Lincoln Center's Classical Jazz series has done what's nearly impossible: delivered jazz in a concert hall that not only sounds good, but that also generates the sort of excitement found in a club.
And the programs have often reflected a critical point of view, too.
In the process, the series, which is to begin tonight and run through Thursday at Alice Tully Hall, has become the most important jazz program in


The Media Business;   Meredith Posts a Loss
LEAD: The Meredith Corporation announced today that it lost $49.9 million in its fourth quarter.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Review/Festival Latino;   'Cronica de una Muerte' In Spanish at the Public
LEAD: As with Gabriel Garcia Marquez's other novels, ''Chronicle of a Death Foretold'' (''Cronica de una Muerte Anunciada'') is suffused with sensuality and mysticism.
Despite the absence of suspense, it is a compelling mystery with the author as investigator trying to understand an event that has become an obsession.


Abused Children vs. the Bill of Rights
LEAD: A hung jury in Raymond Buckey's second trial on charges of molesting children at the McMartin pre-school in California ends that case.
But debate over how far states can constitutionally go to combat child abuse has only just begun.
This year, a divided Supreme Court rebuffed claims under the First, Fifth and Sixth


Lemon's Triple in 14th Lifts Tigers Past Yanks
LEAD: His arrival in late June was nothing spectacular.
Kevin Maas was just another rookie from Columbus, no different from Jim Leyritz or Alan Mills or Oscar Azocar.
But 25 games have come and gone in his big-league career, and Maas has had a sudden impact.


Woolridge to Nuggets
LEAD: The Denver Nuggets yesterday acquired Orlando Woolridge, a forward, from the Los Angeles Lakers for Denver's No. 2 choices in the 1993 and 1995 National Basketball Association drafts, the Nuggets announced yesterday in Denver.


Justice Marshall in Hospital For Observation After a Fall
LEAD: Justice Thurgood Marshall was admitted for observation to the Bethesda Naval Medical Center today after a fall in Chicago on Thursday.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: J. RICHARD MUNRO and DR.
JOSHUA LEDERBERG are new trustees of the National Museum of Health and Medicine Foundation Inc.
Mr.
Monro, former chairman and chief executive of Time Inc. and chairman of the executive committee of Time Warner Inc., and Dr.
Lederberg, a Nobel laureate and exiting president of the Rockefeller University, joined the board of trustees last week.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
A&amp;B Hawaii Inc., a subsidiary of Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc., Honolulu, an ocean transportation company, closed the purchases last week of four commercial properties for a total of almost $55.9 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
International


Fruit of Appeasement
LEAD: Saddam Hussein of Iraq has answered with a roar the long, dithering argument over whether it was wiser to indulge him or try to isolate and block him.
That is why his blitzkrieg invasion of Kuwait, proving his insatiable ambition, has led so many European commentators to remember Hitler.
The same kind of argument went on through the 1930's, until it was too late.


For Immigrants, Fake Documents Are Easy to Come By


John Keating Jr., 70, A Retired Cardiologist
LEAD: Dr.
John Honan Keating Jr., a retired specialist in internal medicine and cardiology, died on Thursday at the Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, N.J.
He was 70 years old and lived in Locust, N.J.


One Strike Away


Patents;   3-Dimensional Images Of Plaque in Arteries
LEAD: A team of researchers at the University of Virginia Medical School in Charlottesville, Va., obtained a patent this week for a system of producing three-dimensional images that delineate hardening of the arteries.


Critic's Notebook;   The Networks Cover Invasion From Afar
LEAD: How can a television news operation cover a war that is over before it begins and to which cameras are not invited?
Well, it rolls out stock newsreel clips, hauls in correspondents and lays on experts.
Such were the weapons available to the evening news programs as they addressed the swift Iraqi conquest of


Reports on Iraq and Jobless Lift Dollar in Volatile Day
LEAD: The dollar climbed slightly today against most major currencies in trading that was volatile as dealers divided their attention between the Persian Gulf crisis and evidence that the United States economy might be on the verge of a recession.


Hawaii Lava Flow Closes Black Sand Beach
LEAD: Lava from Kilauea Volcano has closed the Kalapana Black Sand Beach, one of the island's most popular beaches.


Hotel Is Macklowe's Bid for a Shinier Image
LEAD: Harry Macklowe has quietly opened his elegant hotel, which towers 38 stories over Times Square.
He hopes his stature will soar with it.


Bhutto Must Now Confront Foes on Volatile Issue of Religion
LEAD: Faced with an undeclared ethnic war in her home province of Sind and a tense standoff with India over the disputed territory of Kashmir, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto heads next week into a confrontation with her political opponents on Pakistan's most volatile issue: religion.


To Freedom Staggers To Victory at Saratoga
LEAD: To Freedom remained undefeated but failed to live up to his out-of-town notices while barely holding off Fighting Affair to win the $87,900 Saratoga Special by a head today at Saratoga Race Track.


Iranian Oil-Producing Region Jolted by Strong Earthquake
LEAD: A strong earthquake jolted the Iranian province of Khuzestan today, a little more than a month after an earthquake in the north killed 40,000 people.


Lucy G. Moses, 103, Benefactor Of Hospitals, Schools and Parks
LEAD: Lucy Goldschmidt Moses, a philanthropist, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 103 years old.


America's English Disease
LEAD: America has just passed a milestone.
Unfortunately it's on the way downhill.
Last year, for the first time, the United States invested less in plant and equipment than Japan did, even though Japan's economy is half the size.
The disparity suggests how grossly America is neglecting its future.


Americans in Kuwait: Some Fear but Confidence About Rescue
LEAD: Americans in the besieged capital of Kuwait spoke yesterday of a modern city transformed overnight into a war zone of rattling gunfire and explosions by Iraqi invaders who seized Government buildings, commandeered police cars and chatted on street corners as residents cowered behind locked doors.


PGA Tour to Require Proof of Nonbias at Sites
LEAD: Responding to the recent controversy over membership practices at Shoal Creek Country Club in Alabama, site of the P.G.A.
Championship next week, the PGA Tour today announced a new policy intended to insure that none of its 120 yearly tournaments will take place at private clubs that discriminate by race, religion or sex.


House Approves Civil Rights Bill; Veto Is Weighed
LEAD: As Congress moved closer to a monthlong recess, the House of Representatives today approved a major civil rights bill despite threats by President Bush to veto the measure, which he contends would lead to job quotas.


Review/Opera;   'Boheme' Artists Who Look the Part
LEAD: There was a time, only a few decades ago, when ''La Boheme'' could be successfully staged as a vehicle for great Italianate voices.
Dramatic plausibility, if any, was a bonus.
Operagoers did not mind, apparently, if the roistering bohemians were overage, overfed and as nimble as arthritic water buffaloes.


Steinbrenner Letter Raises Tax Question
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent said yesterday it was ''much ado about very little,'' but a letter that George Steinbrenner sent to the Yankees' limited partners earlier this week raised questions about Steinbrenner's intentions.


Price Plunge Continues For Long-Term Bonds
LEAD: Prices of long-term Treasury bonds continued to crumble and interest rates continued to rise yesterday, as more investors feared that Iraq's invasion of Kuwait would fuel a resurgence of inflation that would undermine the value of fixed-income debt issues.


Review/Dance;   Ideas and Reflections On Time and Memory
LEAD: ''Hey, guys, we made it through Megadance,'' an audience member said as she filed out of Alice Tully Hall on Wednesday night after the concluding program in the Serious Fun festival.
It was a long night, with eight commissioned dances that together ran for about two and a half hours.
The accent was on light entertainment, though, with one charming piece taking the evening's honors.


U.S. JOBLESS RATE CLIMBS THE MOST IN NEARLY 4 YEARS
LEAD: In a mostly grim report that took many analysts by surprise, the Labor Department said today that the nation's unemployment rate climbed three-tenths of a point in July, to 5.5 percent, in the biggest increase since early 1986.


House Roll-Call on Rights Bill
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 272 to 154 by which the House of Representatives today approved a civil rights bill to combat job discrimination.
A yes vote was a vote to pass the bill.
Voting yes were 240 Democrats and 32 Republicans.
Voting no were 12 Democrats and 142 Republicans.
X denotes those not voting.


Ex-Officer and Intruder Die
LEAD: A retired New York City policeman killed a suspected burglar early today before dying of stab wounds, the state police said.
The retired officer, Alex Bodnar, 49 years old, died after interrupting what investigators believe was a botched burglary by Ronald Cummings, 29, of Newburgh.


Hans Paul Verhoef; Dutch AIDS Patient, 33
LEAD: Hans Paul Verhoef, a Dutch AIDS patient who was imprisoned in Minnesota last year because he did not declare that he had the disease when he entered the country, died in the Netherlands on July 23.
He was 33 years old and had been hospitalized since May.
In April 1989 Mr. Verhoef landed at


10-Day Car Sales Up 8.4%, Paced by Big Jump at G.M.
LEAD: Cars of domestically produced cars rose 8.4 percent in late July, helped by sharply higher sales for the General Motors Corporation, the industry leader.


Tatiana Troyanos to Sing At Waterloo Festival
LEAD: The mezzo-soprano Tatiana Troyanos will appear with the Waterloo Festival Orchestra on Aug. 11 at 8:30 P.M for the last concert of the Waterloo Festival, in the tent at Waterloo Village, Waterloo Road, Stanhope, N.J.
Miss Troyanos will appear in place of Marilyn Horne, who canceled because of a scheduling problem.


Diet-Pill Death Raises Questions On F.D.A. Role
LEAD: Turn to the back of most supermarket tabloids and some beauty magazines and you will find them - outlandish ads for miracle diet pills and aids that promise quick weight loss without any exercise or hard work.


Inner-Ear Origin of Attention Deficit Disorder Lacks Proof
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fears on Economy and Oil Churn Commodity Prices
LEAD: Recession fears, inflation worries and conflicting reports from the Persian Gulf ricocheted through the commodity markets yesterday, resulting in price moves with little relation to supply and demand factors.


Fight Is Intensified on Fake Documents for Aliens
LEAD: Armando Huerta arrived here two months ago from Mexico and, like many of the illegal aliens who continue to come to Southern California, went almost immediately to a seedy part of Alvarado Street near downtown Los Angeles.


Review/Opera;   Corsaro 'Butterfly' Revived
LEAD: It is a pleasure to welcome a season at the New York City Opera that heralds a period of promise if not yet much excitement.


Deeper Economic Uncertainties Confront U.S. Policy Makers
LEAD: For the economic policy makers in the Bush Administration, Congress and the Federal Reserve, Iraq's invasion of Kuwait creates a new storm in an already unsettled atmosphere.


Farm Policy's Problem Is Subsidies for Few
LEAD: To the Editor:


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Madison Avenue Street Fair, Madison Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 37th to 50th Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Inner-Ear Origin of Attention Deficit Disorder Lacks Proof;   Dangers of Ritalin
LEAD: To the Editor:


HUNGARY AFFIRMS A NEW PRESIDENT
LEAD: Hungary's first post-Communist Parliament today elected the writer Arpad Goncz, who served a prison term for political activity, as President of the nation.


Workers' Compensation: More to Do
LEAD: Before 1914, workers in New York State who were disabled on the job faced a stark choice: Sue or starve.
Then the Legislature devised a no-fault insurance plan that covered medical costs and two-thirds of lost pay.
Albany closed its 1990 session by voting a deserved increase in worker benefits.
It now needs to restore the compensation system to financial soundness.


Excerpts From Report on Investigation of Father Ritter and Covenant House
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Statement of the Oversight Committee of Covenant House:


Iran Sees Time Nearing For New Ties to Britain
LEAD: Reacting to recent comments by Britain's Foreign Minister about Islam and Salman Rushdie's novel ''The Satanic Verses,'' an Iranian ayatollah said today that Britain had ''almost met'' Iran's conditions for restoring diplomatic relations.


Baseball Was Urged to Delay Inquiry
LEAD: The prosecutor in the Howard Spira extortion case asked baseball to postpone its investigation of George Steinbrenner because he did not want the inquiry to uncover any information ''helpful'' to Spira, the head of the investigation said yesterday.


MOSCOW JOINS U.S. IN CRITICIZING IRAQ
LEAD: The Soviet Union and the United States joined tonight in urging a worldwide halt of arms deliveries to Iraq after what they called ''the brutal and illegal invasion of Kuwait.''


CLOSE G.O.P. RACE FOR TENNESSEANS
LEAD: Of more than 100,000 votes cast on Thursday, only 158 separated the top two candidates today in a Republican primary race for the right to challenge Senator Al Gore in November's general election.


Northwest Imposes Fuel Surcharge
LEAD: In an effort to offset rising fuel costs, Northwest Airlines said yesterday that it would add an $8 fuel surcharge each way on all of its domestic tickets.


Shares of UAL Sink Further
LEAD: The stock of the UAL Corporation sank yesterday for the fifth straight session as investors cited rising oil prices and worries about the health of a $4.4 billion employee buyout bid.
Shares of UAL, the parent of


Iraq Bolsters Invasion Force, Adding to Worry on Saudis
LEAD: Iraq has deployed armored brigades close to the Saudi Arabian border and poured reinforcements into occupied Kuwait, Pentagon officials said today.


Florence King Weichsel, Educator, 82
LEAD: Florence King Weichsel, co-founder and former director of the Children's Studio in Rye, N.Y., a private art school for children that closed in 1972, died yesterday at a convalescent home in Albuquerque, N.M.
She was 82 years old and had moved to Albuquerque from White Plains five months ago.


ARABS TO CONVENE ON IRAQI INVASION
LEAD: After two days of frantic maneuvering, Arab leaders agreed tonight to hold a summit meeting in Saudi Arabia this weekend to deal with Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.


Patents;   A Device to Protect Whales From Grounding
LEAD: Thomas J. Ford, a dentist in Brookline, Mass., patented a device this week to protect whales and dolphins from becoming grounded in shallow water.


New Jersey Approves Trade of Park Land
LEAD: A swap of park land to let the BASF Corporation build a regional headquarters in the International Trade Center in Mount Olive was approved yesterday by the State House Commission.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
2-7
Iraqi forces wheeled into position for a possible attack on Saudi Arabia, while the U.S. and its allies continued to search without success for a way to force Iraq to pull back from its rapid conquest of Kuwait.
Page 1
Iraq has deployed armored brigades close to the Saudi border and poured reinforcements into occupied Kuwait, Pentagon officials said.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: TENNESSEE ERNIE FORD and GEORGE JONES are among the five nominees for the Country Music Hall of Fame.
Also nominated Thursday by the Country Music Association were DON GIBSON, THE LOUVIN BROTHERS and WEBB PIERCE.
Only one of the performers will be inducted at the association's award show Oct. 8.


About New York;   August. Hmmm. Shirt Weather. It Takes Us Back.
LEAD: Put yourself back there, in that irretrievable New York of 55 summers ago.
Kate Smith is on the radio.
Lou Gehrig is at first base.
Bob Hope plays the Palace.
For $1.65 you can catch a movie, a newsreel and five vaudeville acts.


Shrines to Lives Taken in Violence
LEAD: On a street corner in Brooklyn an empty chair stands surrounded by flowers where a young man used to sit and drink beer, before he was killed by a gunman in a passing car.


Concern From F.T.C.
LEAD: Some members of the Federal Trade Commission have said that provisions of the five-year contract between the College Football Association and ABC Sports could violate Federal antitrust laws, The Dallas Morning News reported yesterday.


Panel Established by Judge To Oversee Drexel Portfolio
LEAD: For the first time since its parent company filed for bankruptcy in February, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. lost its ability to exercise independent control of purchases and sales of securities in its portfolio.


Americans Went to Nicaragua to Ease U.S.-Inflicted Suffering
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gramm Commodity Nomination Is Backed
LEAD: The Senate Agriculture Committee, in a voice vote, today approved the nomination of Wendy Lee Gramm to a second term as the head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.


School Custodians Gain, But Not the Children
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Jazz;   Lots of Improvisation And Just a Hint of Melody
LEAD: Lee Konitz, who has long been one of jazz's more idiosyncratic alto saxophonists, is also one of the least direct.
At his first set on Wednesday night at Condon's, where he will be playing through tonight, Mr.
Konitz did everything he could to avoid stating a complete melody; instead he hinted, placing tatters of a song against the bluster of the rhythm section.


Bess Goodykoontz, Education Official In 1930's, Was 95
LEAD: Bess Goodykoontz, an educator who served as Assistant United States Commissioner of Education in the 1930's and 40's, died Sunday at her daughter's home in South Newfane, Vt.
She was 95 years old.


A Defense By Buyer Of S.&amp; L.'s


Has Mayor Forgotten His Promise on Race?
LEAD: To the Editor:


FIGHTING WORSENS IN LIBERIA CAPITAL
LEAD: Government troops and guerrillas loyal to one of Liberia's two rival rebel leaders fired rockets and shells today in block-by-block fighting for the Liberian capital.


Sri Lanka Says Rebels Killed At Least 93 at Two Mosques
LEAD: Tamil separatists stormed two mosques in eastern Sri Lanka and sprayed Muslim worshipers with machine gunfire, killing at least 93 people and wounding 70, military officials said today.


Patents;   Simplifying A Computing Procedure
LEAD: Inspired by origami, the Oriental art of folding paper into ornamental objects, a researcher at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's Bell Laboratories has patented a method for solving large computational problems.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The poet JOHN ASHBERY and the Nigerian novelist CHINUA ACHEBE will share Bard College's Charles P. Stevenson Jr. chair in literature.
The two writers will teach for the two next semesters at the college in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The chair was previously held by the American novelist MARY McCARTHY, who died last


Mideast Anxiety Jolts the Markets
LEAD: Stocks took one of their biggest tumbles of the year yesterday amid widespread anxiety and uncertainty about the Middle East, but the close showed a solid recovery from the far lower levels earlier in the day.


Letter: On Refugees;   Expand Asylum to Include Groups
LEAD: To the Editor:


Candiotti Loses No-Hitter and Game to Yanks in Eighth


Milton Sapinsley, 94, Retired Manufacturer
LEAD: Milton C. Sapinsley, a retired manufacturing executive, died Wednesday at his home in Providence, R.I.
He was 94 years old.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Zahringer and Baldwin Gain
George Zahringer 3d and John Baldwin, two of the New York metropolitan area's most successful amateur golfers, won at the Metropolitan Amateur Championship yesterday at the Piping Rock club in Locust Valley, L.I., and advanced to a semifinal showdown today.


A Long, Hot Summer in the Skies
LEAD: It's summertime and the airlines are sweating.
The normally prosperous travel season is proving a disappointment for the industry, and as a result the airlines are offering discount fares, although with many restrictions, that are unusual at this time of year.


Jackson Urges U.S. Diplomacy
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse L. Jackson called on the Bush Administration today to move quickly, diplomatically and militarily if necessary, ''to secure an end to the military aggression by Iraq.'' In a telephone interview, Mr.
Jackson assailed the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, and said, ''He must know he has pushed us over the line and that his insistence on the occupation of Kuwait and the threat against Saudi Arabia is an extreme act of provocation that would be met with force.


Giants Plan for Life With and Without Bavaro
LEAD: When Mark Bavaro is healthy, he may be the best tight end in professional football.
But he has not been healthy since he tore a knee ligament early last season, a situation that creates major problems for the Giants.


Fuel Emergency For Avianca Jet Said Premature
LEAD: An Avianca jet that was given emergency clearance to land on Tuesday night was not dangerously low on fuel, an official at the Federal Aviation Administration said yesterday.


Total Petroleum
LEAD: Total Petroleum (North America) Ltd. said its board has authorized management to examine a possible spinoff to shareholders of its Canadian oil and natural gas operations.
It said management had retained Morgan Stanley Group Inc. as a financial adviser on the matter and would report to the board later in the year.


German Leaders in Accord On Speeding Up Unification
LEAD: Leaders of the Governments in Bonn and East Berlin moved today to speed up the formal unification of Germany by seven weeks with national elections on Oct. 14.


As India Opens Its Economy, Some Cling to Socialist Ideals
LEAD: At a time when the whole of Eastern Europe is changing, some political leaders in India continue to hold fast to socialist ideals.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Tuesday about Jimmy DeSana, a photographer, omitted the name of his companion.


Violence, Irish and American Style
LEAD: ''The violence in America is completely different: at home it's Catholic and Protestant, but here it's drug related,'' said Peter Evans, one of 450 children from Northern Ireland who ended their summers in New York yesterday.


Texan's Early Strike Makes Democrat Leaders Nervous
LEAD: Riding a hefty lead in fund raising and in the public opinion polls, Clayton Williams, the Republican candidate for governor of Texas, has begun a series of pre-emptive strikes against his Democratic rival, Ann Richards.


Pipeline Ruptures; Dike Contains Spill
LEAD: About 400,000 gallons of jet fuel gushed from a ruptured pipeline as it was being pumped into a storage terminal here early yesterday but workers and a dike kept it from reaching the Arthur Kill, officials said.


Audubon Site Is Dropped For Building
LEAD: Using her powers under an obscure state law, Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan yesterday placed such tight restrictions on money to be used to build a biomedical laboratory on the site of the old Audubon Ballroom that New York City officials said the project was effectively doomed.


Bridge
LEAD: A majority of declarers, faced with a choice, will prefer a clear-cut line of play to a foggy one.
In the diagramed deal from the New York Summer Regional in Manhattan on July 14, South opted for fog and was vindicated.


Guida Expects to Win His 3d Hambletonian
LEAD: Lou Guida, harness racing's most successful owner, will seek his third Hambletonian victory in four years today when he sends out Embassy Lobell at the Meadowlands.


INSIDE
LEAD:
2 Germanys Agree To Rush Unification


Carl Ekern, Football Player, 36
LEAD: Carl Ekern, a former linebacker with the Los Angeles Rams, died of head injuries on Wednesday when the Jeep he was driving ran off a highway near the Kern County town of Ridgecrest, the California Highway Patrol said.


U.S. May Not Support East Europe Aid Bank
LEAD: American support for a new lending organization intended to be the main conduit for assistance to Eastern Europe could be cut off by a dispute between Washington and the organization's management, Bush Administration officials warned today.


Protecting Yourself From Losing a Home
LEAD: In the Northeast, economic problems have led to a rash of residenatial mortgage foreclosures by commercial banks and other lenders.
But conditions in New York and Boston are not typical of what is happening in some other parts of the nation, even though real-estate markets in most places continue to weaken and bank failures are at a near record.


Beliefs
LEAD: At 34 years of age, Mark Smith calls himself something of a ''spiritual wanderer.'' Mr.
Smith, who drives a delivery truck for New York Newsday, is a trained catechist in the Roman Catholic faith of his upbringing.
He has also, he says, ''been in and out of Protestant churches.''


SENATE UPHOLDS BAN OF ABORTIONS
LEAD: Pushing to complete action on a $289 billion military programs bill, the Senate today rejected an amendment that would have overturned a virtual ban on abortions at American military hospitals overseas.


Lyme Disease Vaccine Available for Dogs
LEAD: A new vaccine to protect dogs against Lyme disease has been granted conditional approval by the Federal Government and is available to dog owners in 43 states.


Court Approves Shift at Allegheny
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc. said a Federal bankruptcy court had approved an agreement giving a New York investment group control of the company, which makes Sunbeam and Oster appliances.
The court approval will allow the investors, Japonica Partners, to take control of Allegheny on Aug. 15.
The deal, announced on Thursday by committees representing the company's creditors and shareholders, is contingent on


Dip in Mortgage Rates
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 9.84 percent this week, down from 9.98 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.38 percent, down from 8.41 percent last week.


Island Feud Slowing Japan-Soviet Thaw
LEAD: Japan and the Soviet Union, in their most intense round of diplomatic activity in recent years, tried and failed this week to narrow their differences on a 45-year territorial dispute that has stood in the way of improved relations.


Ritter Inquiry Cites Reports From the 70's
LEAD: Complaints about sexual contacts between the Rev.
Bruce Ritter and residents at Covenant House were circulating for almost 20 years and were referred at least twice to senior staff members at the charity and the priest's Franciscan superiors, a report released yesterday said.


Late Rally Saves The Mets
LEAD: Joe Torre made his home debut as manager of the St.
Louis Cardinals tonight and for a while outmaneuvered the Mets in a war of strategy.
But just when he needed three outs to win, the Mets mounted a dramatic rally, scored three runs in the ninth inning off Lee Smith and snatched the game from Torre's


Mental Health Lawsuit Is Settled in Maine
LEAD: A state judge has approved the settlement of a lawsuit filed on behalf of mental patients who said they were denied adequate medical care at the state's largest mental hospital.


Man Stopped By 2 Officers Is Hiding a Submachine Gun
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday after two patrol officers in a squad car saw that he was carrying a large object hidden under his coat, which turned out to be a 9-millimeter machine pistol with a fully loaded 24-shot magazine, the police said.


Bombs in South Lebanon Kill 11 and Wound 80
LEAD: Bombings in the two largest cities in southern Lebanon killed 11 people and wounded 80 others on Thursday night, the police said today.


Lawmaker Says His Racial Insult of Health Secretary Was Mistake
LEAD: The chairman of a health subcommittee told the House today that he should not have called the Secretary of Health and Human Services ''a disgrace to his race'' when he criticized the Secretary's positions on Thursday.


Miss MacDermott Marries M. J. Arena
LEAD: Kristine Parks MacDermott, a geologist, and Michael James Arena, a software engineer, were married yesterday at the Community Church of Mountain Lakes in Mountain Lakes, N.J., by the Rev.
William Tolley, a Congregational minister.


Big Board Seat Down in Price
LEAD: The price of a seat on the New York Stock Exchange has fallen to its lowest level in more than five years.


Drabek Misses No-Hitter by 1 Out
LEAD: Doug Drabek's bid for a no-hitter was broken up by Sil Campusano with two out in the ninth inning tonight as the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the Philadelphia Phillies, 11-0.


The Hall, Rose and Shoeless Joe
LEAD: Jim Palmer and Joe Morgan, two highly deserving and relatively uncontroversial ballplayers, are to be inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame tomorrow, but the focus of attention for many remains the moral issues of the candidacy of Pete Rose and Shoeless Joe Jackson.


Stotler Move By Creditors
LEAD: Stotler Group Inc., a financially troubled commodity firm based in Chicago, announced last night that an involuntary Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition had been filed against it by three parties that say they are creditors.


Corrections
LEAD: A book review on Wednesday about ''The Bomb,'' by Makoto Oda, misidentified another novel about the atomic bombing of Hiroshima.
It is Masuji Ibuse's ''Black Rain,'' not ''Hard Rain.''


PRICE OF OIL RISES; STOCKS IN RETREAT
LEAD: Oil prices rose again yesterday and the stock market fell sharply in unusually volatile trading as investors feared that higher energy prices brought on by the turmoil in the Middle East could push an already weak American economy into recession.


Democrat for S.E.C. Seat
LEAD: President Bush today nominated Richard Y. Roberts, a former chief of staff of Senator Richard C. Shelby, Democrat of Alabama, to the vacant seat on the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Washington Calls on U.N. To Impose Boycott on Iraq
LEAD: The United States asked other members of the Security Council today to endorse its proposal for a worldwide economic boycott of Iraq and occupied Kuwait until Baghdad agrees to withdraw its military forces from Kuwait.


Coach Dismissed
LEAD: Coach Jerry Peirson was dismissed by Miami University yesterday for giving one of his basketball players a false grade in a class.


A Police Officer is Still the Focus In Bomb Inquiry
LEAD: No one has been charged yet in the death of a Suffolk County narcotics detective who was killed when his car exploded in February.
But Robert Horan, the Nassau County police officer who was originally called the chief suspect, is still the focus of the investigation, law-enforcement officials said.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Governments that engage in blatant aggression must know that the international community cannot and will not acquiesce in nor facilitate aggression.''
- An American-Soviet statement. [6:3.]


Ford Aerospace Unit Fetches $715 Million
LEAD: The Loral Corporation signed a definitive agreement yesterday for the purchase of the Ford Motor Company's aerospace unit for $715 million in cash.


An End to a Great Escape


Guidepost;   The World of Plums
LEAD: Summer offers plums in staggering variety.
Most are sweet and juicy, but some, notably the Santa Rosa, can be tart and astringent near the pit.
Plums are ripe when the skin yields to pressure but is not soft.
Clingstone varieties have pits that cling to the flesh; pits in freestone plums do not.


Subic Bay Journal;   Where American Might Is a Bit High and Mighty
LEAD: Contemplating the grand sweep of Subic Bay, recognized for hundreds of years as one of the best-protected natural harbors in Southeast Asia, it is easy to see why the United States Navy wants to keep its access to the huge naval base here.


Oldsmobile Rebate
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation's Oldsmobile division said it set new incentives on 1990 cars in an effort to clear out vehicles from this model year.
Beginning immediately, cash rebates will be offered on these Oldsmobile vehicles: Cutlass Calais $750; Cutlass Ciera $1,000; Cutlass Supreme $2,000 at participating dealers; 88 Royale $1,500; Custom Cruiser $1,000; 98 Touring Sedan $1,000; Toronado $2,500 and Silhouette $1,250.


Atlanta Trades Murphy
LEAD: Dale Murphy, the seven-time All-Star outfielder for the Atlanta Braves, was traded to the Philadelphia Phillies tonight for Jeff Parrett, a relief pitcher, and two players to be selected later.


Rinfret Releases His Tax Returns For 1989 Only
LEAD: Pierre A. Rinfret today reneged on a campaign promise to release eight years of tax returns, releasing instead only his return for 1989.
They showed that he had an adjusted gross income of $438,286 and paid $128,237 in Federal, state and New York City taxes.


David Goldblatt Weds Ms. Schrag
LEAD: Minna Schrag and David Ira Goldblatt, partners in the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, were married yesterday by Judge Whitman Knapp of Federal District Court in his chambers in Manhattan.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the indictment of Representative Floyd H. Flake incorrectly described Jamaica, Queens.
It has a mix of low- and middle-income residents.


U.N.L.V. Appeals Ban
LEAD: The University of Nevada-Las Vegas has filed a formal appeal seeking to overturn a National Collegiate Athletic Association ban that would prevent the Runnin' Rebels from defending their national basketball championship.


'One Who Confronts'
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is known throughout Iraq and the Arab world by his first name, which means ''One Who Confronts.''


Ship's Survivors Arrive in Maine
LEAD: Soviet rescuers today brought ashore 21 survivors of the wreck of a cargo ship, and the saved sailors said they felt ''very lucky'' to have lived through Hurricane Bertha.


Romania Frees Student Held in 53-Day Protest
LEAD: A student who led a 53-day anti-Government rally has been freed after six weeks' detention, and he denied charges today that he incited protesters to violence.


16 Are Seized in Sales Of Stickers for Autos
LEAD: Sixteen people have been arrested on charges of selling hundreds of counterfeit state automobile inspection stickers to motorists.


Sign Vandal Offers New Highway Signs
LEAD: A millionaire who was arrested last month for spray painting For Sale signs he thought cheapened this wealthy suburb now says he's willing to pay to replace metal highway signs with more attractive wooden ones.


Thomas M. Macioce, 71, Is Dead; Former Chairman of Allied Stores
LEAD: Thomas M. Macioce, a lawyer and former chairman and chief executive officer of the Allied Stores Corporation, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 71 years old and lived in Brookville, L.I.


14 U.S. Oil Workers Missing; Some Believed to Be in Iraqi Hands
LEAD: Fourteen American oil workers are missing in Kuwait, and there are reports that at least some of them may have been taken into custody by invading Iraqi troops and moved across the border into Iraq, Bush Administration officials said today.


Americans Went to Nicaragua to Ease U.S.-Inflicted Suffering;   Still Witnessing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Frohnmayer Is Asked To End Written Pledge
LEAD: The advisory council to the National Endowment for the Arts voted overwhelmingly today to recommend the elimination of an anti-obscenity pledge that artists and arts institutions have been asked to sign before they can receive grants from the endowment.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a music review in Weekend yesterday about Monday's opening of the New York Philharmonic's season of free concerts in parks gave incorrect information for subsequent concerts.


Choctaw Pursuing Justin Industries
LEAD: Choctaw Securities L.P. has engaged the New York branch of Creditanstalt-Bankverein to consider providing financing for a possible effort to gain control of Justin Industries Inc.
Choctaw, an investment partnership in Kansas City, Mo., now controls 11.6 percent of Justin's 8.5 million shares outstanding.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.87
8.00
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.33
7.43
7.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.22
7.31
7.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.32
8.29
7.93
30-YR.


Congress Authorizes $875 Million To Fight AIDS in Hard-Hit Areas
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators agreed today on a bill that would authorize $875 million next year to provide health care to people with AIDS in cities and states hardest hit by the epidemic.


IRAQIS MASS ON SAUDI FRONTIER; ARABS AGREE TO MEET ON CRISIS; BUSH IS READY TO HELP IF ASKED
LEAD: Powerful Iraqi forces wheeled into position for a possible attack on Saudi Arabia today, while the United States and its allies continued to search, without discernible success, for a way to force Iraq to pull back from its rapid conquest of Kuwait on Thursday.


Jury in Barry Trial Meets for 5 1/2 Hours; Reaches No Verdict
LEAD: The Federal jury weighing the 14 drug and conspiracy charges against Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. met for five and a half hours today without reaching a verdict.


Corrections
LEAD: A music review on Thursday about a performance by the Philip Glass Ensemble on July 27 at Alice Tully Hall misidentified a children's choir whose recorded music was used in presenting Mr.
Glass's score for the film ''Powaqqatsi.'' It is the Hispanic Young People's Chorus from Brooklyn, not a South American group.


20-Year-Old Charged In Computer Crimes
LEAD: A Ewing Township man who is alleged to have tapped into the state's computer system and tried to infiltrate a Federal computer was arrested yesterday, the state police said.


Your Money;   Ways to Avoid Emotional Moves
LEAD: Although it is too early to gauge the wisdom of the investors who made sudden market moves - trading for oil shares or dumping stocks - almost as soon as Iraq invaded Kuwait, such moves are generally a mistake for individuals.
Patience is more likely to be rewarded, as it has been since the crash of October 1987.


Battle for the Saudi Soil
LEAD: With Iraq having overrun Kuwait, the crisis in the Persian Gulf appears to be turning into a struggle between the United States and Iraq for influence over Saudi Arabia and its vast oil reserves.
The Iraqi takeover of


Rights Group Says Baghdad Has Seized Exiles in Kuwait
LEAD: Amnesty International said today that it had received reports that Iraqi forces in Kuwait had arrested hundreds of Iraqi exiles opposed to the Government of Saddam Hussein.


Tough Plea Bargaining Planned in Drug Cases
LEAD: Manhattan prosecutors will impose tougher plea-bargaining procedures on defendants caught in a police drug crackdown in Washington Heights, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan said yesterday.


House, 255-155, Approves Restrictions on Financing Campaigns
LEAD: The House of Representatives approved a bill late tonight aimed at slowing the rapidly rising costs of Congressional campaigns after a rancorous debate in which some lawmakers questioned whether the legislation would do any good.


Ex-Civic Leader Is Jailed in Drug Smuggling
LEAD: A Federal district judge has sentenced a former president of the Indianapolis League of Women Voters to nine years in prison for her role in a drug-smuggling ring allegedly operated by her sons.


Transit Police Dept. Will Let Its Officers Carry 9-mm. Pistols
LEAD: New York City transit police officers will be allowed to carry a more powerful handgun that has long been resisted by officials here because of its possible danger to the public, transit police officials announced yesterday.


Making Sense of Senseless Crime
LEAD: New York's summer of pointless violence wears on, prompting frustration, fear and demands for action.
Police Commissioner Lee Brown responds with a bold plan to expand the new police strategy known as community patrol.
He deserves the chance to make it work.


OBSERVER Huzzahs for George
LEAD: Humans need to hate a little.
It's too bad, but so is their compulsion to uglify everything that's beautiful.
We are a superb species, all right, just not quite perfect.
Since we must hate, the sensible thing is to hate in moderation.
For this reason, I have always hated the New York Yankees.


To Village's Disbelief, Farmer Is Indicted in Brother's Death
LEAD: A 59-year-old dairy farmer in the central New York village of Munnsville was indicted today on a charge of suffocating his brother.


CANDIOTTI'S KNUCKLER QUIETS YANKS TILL 8TH
LEAD: Tom Candiotti's junk was precious.
His knuckleball was doing its contortions on its way to the plate and its dirty dancing in front of and behind it.


Books of The Times;   Observing Karel Capek's Centenary
LEAD:
Toward the Radical Center
A Karel Capek Reader
Edited by Peter Kussi
Various translators.
Foreword by Arthur Miller. 412 pages.
A Garrigue Book/ Catbird Press. $23.95, cloth; $12.95, paper.
Three Novels
Hordubal, Meteor, An Ordinary Life
By Karel Capek
Translated by M. and R. Weatherall.


It's Summertime And Road Work Slows the Traffic
LEAD: Ben and Dorothy Lin left Bethesda, Md., at 8:15 A.M. yesterday and hoped to be in Tarrytown, N.Y., about five hours later.
The Lins established this modest goal before they encountered the George Washington Bridge.


Why It Isn't Ungrammatical to Speak the President's English
LEAD: To the Editor:


Able to Cope On 'Wrong' Side
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


T.A. Sherif Weds Kerry Goldberg
LEAD: Kerry Meredith Goldberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Goldberg of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Tarek Ahmed Sherif, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ahmed Sherif of Bonn.
Judge Nicholas H. Politan of Federal District Court in Newark officiated.


College Lifeline
LEAD: TEACHERS are jugglers, balancing competing interests, and, sometimes, competing ideologies, to deliver to their students enough accurate information to help them make reasoned judgments.


Anecdotes in Wood, Paint and Cast Iron


Patricia Bartley Weds Eric Schwartz
LEAD: Patricia Leahy Bartley and Eric Dane Schwartz were married yesterday at the Cathedral of St.
Peter in Wilmington, Del., by the Rev.
William J. Metzger.
Mrs.
Schwartz is a daughter of Robert P. Bartley of Wilmington and the late Joan Leahy Bartley.
The bridegroom is the son of Helen Dane Schwartz of Princeton, N.J., and the late Kenneth Wood


Low-Income Leap to College
LEAD: AMEENAH A. Long had a crisis of confidence recently as she considered the end of four years at Hartford Public High School and the start of her college career.
Four weeks before the graduation ceremonies, she said, ''It hit me -this is it, no more high school,'' only a daunting prospect ahead.


2 Mob Fugitives Hiding In New York, Police Say
LEAD: Two men described as top Mafia leaders, who disappeared in May shortly before their indictment on racketeering charges, are believed to be hiding together in the New York City area, law-enforcement authorities say.


Campus Life: Tufts;   Judge Upholds Exemption On Building Law
LEAD: A judge has ruled in favor of Tufts University in its case against a city planning law.


ARABS' SUMMIT MEETING OFF; IRAQI UNITS IN KUWAIT DIG IN; EUROPE BARS BAGHDAD'S OIL
LEAD: A hastily arranged Arab summit meeting that was to have convened on Sunday in Saudi Arabia to deal with Iraq's invasion of Kuwait fell apart today as Arab leaders sought to mask their divisions and disarray with assertions of brotherhood.


Lynn-Ann Ries to Wed Donald Gries
LEAD: The engagement of Lynn-Ann Ries to Donald Selig Gries, a son of Mrs.
Barrie M. Damson of New York and Robert D. Gries of Shaker Heights, Ohio, has been announced by her parents, Dr.
Edith Dunfee Ries of South Orange, N.J., and William P. Ries of Morristown, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.


Senegal's Spicy Noonday Feast
LEAD: Flying to Senegal from New York, some visitors get their first glimpse of West Africa even before the coastline comes into view.
Still miles from the port of Dakar, Senegal's capital city, the careful observer can spot wooden fishing canoes in bright primary colors bobbing like toys in the Atlantic waves far below.


Photo: Eugene Istomin as guest soloist in the Mostly Mozart series. (Susanne Faulkner Stevens) Review/Concert;   Mostly Schubert Program In Mostly Mozart Series
LEAD: The look seemed somehow right at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday evening.
From an audience that had already thinned out distinctly at intermission, listeners defected after almost every movement.
It might have been the New York Philharmonic performing, say, Schoenberg.


Christine G. Bona Wed To Robert E. Cabana
LEAD: Christine G. Bona, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick E. Bona of Boonton Township, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert E. Cabana, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Cabana of Boonton Township.
Msgr.
John R. Ryan performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Magnificat Roman Catholic Church in Kinnelon, N


Erwin Petilos Is Married To Ms. Penfil in California
LEAD: Elizabeth Kimberly Penfil, a daughter of Dr.
Richard Lee Penfil of Newport Beach, Calif., was married yesterday to Erwin R. Petilos, a son of Dr.
Salvador N. Petilos of Marks, Miss., and Dr.
Teresita D. Petilos of Tenafly, N.J.
Judge Susanne S. Shaw of municipal court in Orange County, Calif., officiated at the home of the bride's father and stepmother, Doreen Ann


Home Is Where the Dead Are
LEAD:
A TRAIL OF HEART'S BLOOD WHEREVER WE GO
By Robert Olmstead.
401 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.


U.S. Says Bush Was Surprised by the Iraqi Strike
LEAD: Despite Iraq's heavy buildup of forces along the Kuwaiti border in late July, the Bush Administration was surprised by the invasion this week and largely unprepared to respond quickly, Administration officials say.


Tax Plan Sticks New Yorkers With Bailout Tab
LEAD: To the Editor:


Isolate Iraq
LEAD: Iraq's Arab neighbors have canceled the summit meeting scheduled for today; they can't bring themselves even to try to stop Saddam Hussein's million-man army and undo his conquest of Kuwait.
That's now the world's business, and it can be accomplished only with unity and leadership that produce hard-hitting sanctions.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: There are all sorts of aphorisms, maxims, adages, sayings - call them what you will - that are true, but so what?


Johnny Mathis on His Mind
LEAD:
CROONING
A Collection.
By John Gregory Dunne.
287 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Portland, Me.
LEAD: To the Editor: In regard to Jane Holtz Kay's portrayal of Portland, Me. (''A Rough-Hewn Maine Seaport,'' Travel, May 13), I found her wording of the following phrase disturbing, if not outright offensive:


Review/Music;   The Cleveland Quartet In Mostly Mozart Bill
LEAD: The Cleveland Quartet offered a Mostly Mozart program with an interesting if subtle thematic thread on Thursday evening at Avery Fisher Hall.
Three of the four works the ensemble and its three musical collaborators played included movements based on quotations from earlier works.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Should Lawrence Taylor Get A Raise?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


The Home Front
LEAD: SUMMER is the relative calm before students storm their local educational institutions, be those institutions public or private, geared to youngsters or adults.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
LEAD:
The American Circus An Illustrated History


Amy Welles Is Married To Geoffrey L. Kahler
LEAD: Amy Bracken Welles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Welles Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Lee Kahler, a son of Dr.
Richard L. Kahler of Rancho Santa Fe, Calif., and Diane D. Kahler of Carlsbad, Calif.
The Rev.
David S. Hoag officiated at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in Mount Kisco, N.Y.


Legal Egos
LEAD:
LAWYERS AND THIEVES
By Roy Grutman and Bill Thomas.
224 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Colombia's Advances in the Drug War Are Costly
LEAD: Almost a year into a violent drug war, Colombia claims that it has cut cocaine production, undermined powerful drug organizations and hounded top drug traffickers.


Race, Ethnicity and the Privileged
LEAD: To the Editor:


Help for Giants
LEAD: With Lawrence Taylor and Leonard Marshall still boycotting the Giants' training camp and five other starters missing while they negotiate new contracts, the team moved to bolster its defense yesterday by picking up a linebacker, Aaron Chubb, on waivers from the Green Bay Packers.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My house has a forced-air furnace that is about 14 years old.
A heating contractor the heat exchange unit is badly rusted and he recommends replacing it because the heat exchanger is so bad and because the old unit had insufficient air flow.
He says that the new furnace would have 90 percent efficiency and would save about 40 percent in gas costs.


Miss Thornton, Banker, Is Wed
LEAD: Suzanne Thornton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Thornton of Barrington, N.H., was married yesterday to Thomas Richard DeNunzio, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph D. DeNunzio of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Charlotte H. Sommers officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich, Conn.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Immigrants Pour Into Israel
More new immigrants moved to Israel last month than at any time since the nation's first years.
But as the immigrants continue to arrive, confusion, dislocation and turmoil is growing rapidly as well.
Page 3.
Ousted Spy Is Candidate
Oleg D. Kalugin, who was denounced and stripped of office for going public with accusations of K.G.B.


Wall Street;   Utilities Get Some Takeover Action
LEAD: BEFORE the eruptions in the Middle East sent the theorists back to their computer keyboards on Thursday, the Dow Jones utilities had been enjoying a rare market rally, gaining nearly 5 percent over the past two weeks.
The reasons were largely defensive, analysts said.
With the fearsome gyrations of the Dow industrials and the damage inflicted on the Dow transports by the recent decline in United


Johnson ot Run in January
LEAD: Ben Johnson said today that he would return to competitive racing in January.


In Seeking Iraqi Motive, Some Turn to 1918 Atlas
LEAD: Iraq's invasion of Kuwait is the most iron-fisted of a series of actions that it has taken against the emirate since Kuwait became independent in 1961.


'Steel Magnolias' Returns to a Stage
LEAD: NOW that Hollywood's opened-up, overstuffed, star-strewn ''Steel Magnolias'' is out of the way, it's time to home in on the real thing.


Cynthia Franklin Marries
LEAD: Cynthia Leigh Franklin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John B. Franklin of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday at the Asylum Hill Congregational Church in Hartford to Daniel Kevin Carpenter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Carpenter of Northville, Mich.
The Rev.
Carl Becker officiated.
Mrs.
Carpenter, 25 years old, graduated from Cornell University.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
THE BLACK WOMEN'S HEALTH BOOK: Speaking for Ourselves.
Edited by Evelyn C. White. (Seal, Paper, $14.95.) Evelyn C. White has collected more than 40 poems, essays and personal memoirs in ''The Black Women's Health Book.'' Ms.
White, a journalist at The San Francisco Chronicle, writes that ''over the past few years, I have observed a growing number of vibrant black women being devastated by a multitude of physical and emotional ailments, ranging from drug addiction to cancer.


Life After Wall Street: Less Stress - Less Money, Too
LEAD: She was an arbitrageur and he was a trader, and before they reached their mid-30's, they had a combined annual income that sometimes exceeded a half million dollars.
In the days of 1980's glory - or high-speed greed, depending on the point of view - they were like many of their Wall Street colleagues: always running, and making more money than they ever thought possible.


Jets' Lines Coach Is Loud and Clear
LEAD: They have drafted three of college football's most acclaimed offensive threats.
They have a pair of million-dollar arms at quarterback.


Ferry Sloop Takes Shape, With Help of Ex-Addicts
LEAD: THE Hudson River ferry sloop family is getting ready to produce another offspring.
The 32-foot gaff-rigged sloop, tentatively named the Eleanor - after Eleanor Roosevelt - is being built on the grounds of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Veterans Administration Hospital in Montrose, a joint effort of the newly revitalized Riverlovers boat club of Crugers and of drug- and alcohol-abuse patients at the hospital.


Design;   The Home Team
LEAD: Architects have always had a yen for decorating, and decorators, an itch for architecture.
Both often fancy themselves landscape designers as well.
Indeed, it is quite common these days to find homes that have been designed, decorated and landscaped by one person.


Fresh Meals on the Spur of the Moment
LEAD: SUMMER lunches don't have to be complicated affairs.
At this time of year, even the most impromptu meals can be made memorable because there is so much good fresh produce around.


Grenay Patterson Weds in Brooklyn
LEAD: Grenay J. Patterson, a daughter of Mrs.
Grant George Patterson of Brooklyn, and Henry F. C. Robertson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Robertson of Brooklyn, were married there yesterday at Emmanuel Baptist Church.
The Rev.
Dr.
H.
Edward Whitaker officiated.


Rich Zone Shared Since '66
LEAD: Iraqi troops have advanced to within a mile of the Saudi border, entering the Neutral or Partitioned Zone, an oil-rich area divided between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, Kuwaiti officials said today, but Baghdad denied the report.


Managing;   Inviting the Headhunters Inside
LEAD: THE Baxter Health Care Corporation's Hyland division, a Deerfield, Ill., company that makes protein solutions from blood plasma, is looking for someone to fill a senior position.
Several Hyland insiders qualify - but just barely.
So Hyland has asked Conex Inc., a New York recruiting firm, to evaluate the insiders, compare them to outsiders and then present


Where Fat 'Is Not a Dirty Word'
LEAD: CHERYL AFFINITO, of New Haven, said she could not stand watching her friends isolate themselves because they were too ashamed of their weight to go out in public.
She and a friend, Annette Paffen, of Seymour, responded last fall by organizing the Connecticut chapter of the National Association to Advance Fat


Unclogging Ears
LEAD: A question in the Q&amp;A column on June 10 on coping with clogged ears on planes elicited home remedies and professional suggestions from readers.
Among them were these:


Deaf Girl Finds a Fresh Air Fund Pal
LEAD: From the insistence and intensity of their gestures, it is obvious that Sakina Williams and Brian Cosgrove are locked in a vigorous debate.
Absent, however, are the strident voices that usually accompany an exchange between 7-year-olds.


SOUND
LEAD: Like musicians having an off night, sound equipment also suffers spells of being indisposed.
But while humans often recover spontaneously, electronic music makers usually need judicious coaxing.
Luckily, many problems encountered with stereo equipment are minor ailments, avoidable with a bit of preventive maintenance and easily curable without professional help.


THE IRAQI INVASION: Man in the News;   Arab of Vast Ambition Saddam Hussein
LEAD: With a single, swift military action, Saddam Hussein has dispelled the image he has assiduously tried to cultivate in the West as a man who can be trusted.
Iraq's 53-year-old


No Headline


'Steel Magnolias' Returns to a Stage
LEAD: NOW that Hollywood's opened-up, overstuffed, star-strewn ''Steel Magnolias'' is out of the way, it is time to home in on the real thing.


Put In Next Spring's Bulb Order Now
LEAD: IT IS time to think spring.
Although the season is a long way off, the hardy bulb catalogues have arrived in the mail, and gardeners will have to start thinking about what bulbs they will want to plant in the fall.


Ms. Moran Wed To M. L. Galeno
LEAD: Carol Linda Moran, a deputy bureau chief in the Brooklyn District Attorney's Office, and Michael Louis Galeno, an Assistant Brooklyn District Attorney, were married yesterday at the Bedford Presbyterian Church in Bedford Village, N.Y., by the Rev.
Dr.
Thomas A. Hughart.


Regulators Are Seeking to Revise Some Sales of Savings and Loans
LEAD: Federal regulators will seek to make changes in some deals in which the Government sold nearly 100 insolvent savings institutions in 1988, and they may try to cancel some of the sales.


America's Poetry: Mississippi Blues And the Beat
LEAD: There's a point on ''BLues in the Mississippi Night'' (Rykodisc 90155; CD only) when the guitarist Big Bill Broonzy compares notes with his pianist, Memphis Slim, about life in the gulaglike penal camps of the Deep South. ''You know, the way we lived in those tents and things like that,'' Broonzy remembers, ''and the food we had to eat was .


Ms. Edelen Wed To Felix Bizaoui
LEAD: Jeanne Edelen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Edelen of Newtown, Conn., was married yesterday to Felix Bizaoui, the son of Ida Bizaoui of Southfield, Mich., and the late Eli Bizaoui.
Eve P. Schare, a justice of the peace in Fairfield, Conn., officiated in the gardens of the home of the bride's parents.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended July 21
MANHATTAN
Chelsea
$410,000
40 West 15th Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar loft-co-op; dining room, den, elevator; maintenance $620, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Cathy Fields Realty)
TriBeCa
$1.225 million
105 Hudson Street
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3,300-sq.-ft.


Because of Kessel, High Electric Costs
LEAD: The Long Island Power Authority is the wrong agency, at the wrong time, doing the wrong job in an ineffectual and inefficient manner.
The threat of taking over Lilco is no longer credible, and we certainly don't need the Long Island Power Authority to decommission Shoreham.


Beauty;   Lip Reading
LEAD: It's odd, this sensibility we're all plugged into, where colored lips seem normal and naked ones seem, well, naked - and most of us spend a lot of time making sure the latter never happens.
Still, the idea of using lipstick treads an uneasy line between the real and the artificial.
The fashion writer Kennedy Fraser once declared that ''the woman who replaces her lipstick at the end of a meal often does so with a desperation which suggests that her mouth itself has been obliterated by chewing and by conversation.


Susan S. Parrish, Student, Marries
LEAD: Susan Scott Parrish, a daughter of Mrs.
Lawrence A. Bianchi of Boston and T. Kirkpatrick Parrish 3d of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Bruce Cordiner Judge, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Judge of Ann Arbor, Mich.
The Rev.
John J. Perry performed the ceremony, assisted by Canon Arthur W.


THE NATION: Noonan Q &amp; A;   What She Said At the University
LEAD: PEGGY NOONAN, speechwriter for Presidents Reagan and Bush, answered questions at a forum last week at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.
Following are excerpts:


HOW SHOULD PGA TOUR RE-EVALUATE SITE RULES?
LEAD: Regardless of the legal issue over clubs declining invitations to blacks, this practice is morally repugnant, and the PGA Tour should respond by conducting its tournaments at nondiscriminating courses.
TODD BANK
East Meadow, L.I.


Correction
LEAD: The Residential Resales column on July 29 listed an incorrect closing price for a home at 3060 Independence Avenue in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
It was $412,500, not $129,400.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My house has a forced-air furnace that is about 14 years old.
A heating contractor the heat exchange unit is badly rusted and he recommends replacing it because the heat exchanger is so bad and because the old unit had insufficient air flow.
He says that the new furnace would have 90 percent efficiency and would save about 40 percent in gas costs.


Michael Porter Redux: Yes, but . . .
LEAD: In an article on the July 22 Forum page, Michael E. Porter, a professor of business administration at the Harvard Business School, discussed the issue of American competitiveness (''Japan Isn't Playing by Different Rules'').
Professor Porter believes that the United States has been moving away from one of its fundamental principles - faith in competition - having been seduced by a mistaken view of the reasons for Japan's success in the world marketplace.


ARIEL SHARON: TALKING TOUGH
LEAD: No wonder Ariel Sharon talks tough (''Ariel Sharon: Talking Tough,'' by Joel Brinkley, July 8).
Until the Palestinians come to their senses and decide to pursue peace, hawks like Sharon won't let up their vigilance, nor should we, their supporters, want them to.
And Ariel Sharon as Prime Minister?


The Fourth R
LEAD: TEACHERS are jugglers, balancing competing interests, and, sometimes, competing ideologies, to deliver to their students enough accurate information to help them make reasoned judgments.


CRIME
LEAD: Ed McBain's new Matthew Hope mystery, THREE BLIND MICE (Arcade/Little, Brown, $18.95), takes its ironic nursery rhyme title from the grisly ritual slaying of three Vietnamese kitchen helpers who lived in a Florida coastal town called Calusa.
Not long before their deaths, the men had been acquitted of gang-raping the wife of a rich local farmer; so, when hard evidence turns up to implicate the husband of the rape victim, the new assistant state attorney (whose courtroom style is described as ''flamboyant, seductive, aggressive, unrelenting, and unforgiving'') naturally thinks she's got a loc


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My house has a forced-air furnace that is about 14 years old.
A heating contractor the heat exchange unit is badly rusted and he recommends replacing it because the heat exchanger is so bad and because the old unit had insufficient air flow.
He says that the new furnace would have 90 percent efficiency and would save about 40 percent in gas costs.


Some Memories of Life With Father
LEAD: Bravo for ''A Man Who Doesn't Know His Son Is Married.'' You've done a service to all (especially the boys) who have pangs where their divorced or separated dads should reside in their hearts.


In Europe, Immigrants Are Needed, Not Wanted
LEAD: A BRIEF walk along any street in downtown London, Paris, Frankfurt or Milan immediately shows how immigration from the third world has turned many Western European cities into melting pots.
But 30 years after this process began, a surge of racist incidents, smoldering hostility toward immigrants and new moves to keep out poor foreign workers show how Western


HOW SHOULD PGA TOUR RE-EVALUATE SITE RULES?
LEAD: It shouldn't.
The key word in this Shoal Creek matter is ''private.'' The club should be allowed to accept and reject whomever it chooses, based on whatever criteria the club establishes.
It is private.


A Testament to Sexism at High-Tech Companies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ann Burke to Wed Timothy Dansdill
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
John F. Burke of Belmont, Mass., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Ann Campbell Burke, and Timothy Thomas Dansdill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Dansdill of Old Greenwich, Conn.


No Superwomen Need Apply
LEAD:
RUNNING MATES
The Making of a First Lady.
By Ann Grimes.
336 pp. New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $21.95.


Protecting Against Lightning
LEAD: LIGHTNING causes millions of dollars in home and property damage, not to mention hundreds of injuries, in the United States each year.
Fortunately, houses in heavily built-up areas where there are many tall buildings generally are at a small risk.


Miss Cotins and Christopher Low Wed
LEAD: Elizabeth Hyde Cotins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur H. Cotins of St.
James, L.I., was married yesterday to Christopher Alfred Maximilian Low, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Low of Ridgefield, Conn.
The Rev.
Paul B. McInerny officiated at St.
Mary of the Isles Roman Catholic Church in Islesboro,


Picture This
LEAD: Whether one can decipher a schedule quickly enough to catch a train or interpret a navigation chart in time to avoid treacherous rocks depends a great deal on how clearly hundreds of pieces of information - facts and statistics - are ordered and presented.
In ENVISIONING INFORMATION (Graphics Press, Box 430, Cheshire, Conn.


Hungry Boaters Order Burgers at Sea
LEAD: THREE days a week, an old Navy lifeboat heads out of the Noank Village Boatyard, bound not to rescue boaters but to feed them.


Els Neukermans Wed in Palo Alto
LEAD: Els Maria Neukermans, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Armand P. Neukermans of Palo Alto, Calif., was married there yesterday to Peter Standish Paine 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paine Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Russell J. Roide and the Rev.
Kamiel de Rooms officiated at St.
Thomas Aquinas Roman Catholic Church.


South Koreans Apply to Cross North Border
LEAD: Thousands of South Koreans lined up before dawn today for passes to travel to North Korea during a proposed five-day border opening.


FROM RIVERBANK TO THE BOOKSHELF
LEAD: There is some first-rate writing coming from those whose muse is stimulated by their going afield with rod or gun.
John Gierach's ''Sex, Death, and Fly-Fishing'' (Fireside/Simon &amp; Schuster, 238 pages, paperback $8.95, hardcover $17.95) is one such effort.


Fines for Tanks: Guilty Until Innocent
LEAD: I was impressed with the quote attributed to James Pim (June 24) regarding the Suffolk County Department of Health Services enforcement of the fuel tank regulations: ''Pay the fine - it's small.''


Creator vs. Re-creator: Who Wins?
LEAD: Beethoven was, undeniably, the great liberator of Western music.
If only symbolically, his insistence on the composer's right to be treated as an equal by the aristocracy and to control his own music made possible the whole Romantic tradition of artistic freedom and independence.
We know what riches that movement produced.


Boris Yeltsin, Man of the Hour?
LEAD: Vladimir Kvint, Professor of Political Economy of the U.S.S.R. and a former professor at the Communist Higher Party School in Moscow, is a member of the ''Siberian school'' of market-oriented economists.
Professor Kvint, who is currently a distinguished lecturer at Fordham University, spoke with Joel Kurtzman of The New York Times through an interpreter.


Criminal Type Captures Whitney
LEAD: Criminal Type continued to prove himself the country's top race horse by more than default when he scored a thoroughly professional 1 1/2-length victory over Dancing Spree today in the $234,400 Whitney Handicap at Saratoga Race Track.


American Graphics, Full of 'Firsts'
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the new and improved Princeton University Art Museum is closed for the summer, there is still art to be seen on the campus, notably in the Firestone Library.
On view there is a large exhibition entitled ''American Graphic Arts, A Chronology to 1900 in Books, Prints and Drawings.''


Teaneck Residents Keep Pressure on Grand Jury


Unclogging Ears
LEAD: A question in the Q&amp;A column on June 10 on coping with clogged ears on planes elicited home remedies and professional suggestions from readers.
Among them were these:


It's Tough For Movies To Get Real
LEAD: It will surprise no one who has survived the crash-and-burn excesses of this summer movie season to hear that realism right now is at a premium.
Indeed, it seems to have gone almost entirely out of fashion.


Special Today: Education Life
LEAD:
Section 4A
A special report on tackling once taboo subjects.
Teaching begins at home.
Beyond tuition.
Tutoring for profit.


Postings: In Murray Hill;   Future Perfect?
LEAD: What's in store for the Future, a 35-floor condominium, now about halfway completed, at 200 East 32d Street and Third Avenue?


Still Say No to Nuclear
LEAD: To the Editor:


Paradise Imposed
LEAD: Imagine a luxury resort in the middle of a lava field.
Imagine sod laid on top of the lava and mowed so low you could practically play pool on it.
Imagine white sand on the shore, trucked in at hundreds of dollars per load and manicured as carefully as a wealthy woman's hands.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Productivity for the second quarter.
James M. Fail is scheduled to testify before a Senate committee about his purchase of failed Texas savings and loans.
Deadline for reorganizing the Manville trust fund.
TUESDAY: Consumer credit for June.
Home sales and prices for the second quarter.


Tax Plan Sticks New Yorkers With Bailout Tab;   Ads Are Ephemeral
LEAD: To the Editor:


Data Base Of Ancient Greece
LEAD: HIGH ON the compact-disk charts at universities around the world is the first installment of the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae, a computer compilation of every ancient Greek text in existence.


No Headline
LEAD:
$
Consumer Spending
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
1.0
0.0
0.2
Employment
July
June
May
In thousands
117,953
118,389
118,350
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
6,814(5.5)
6,447(5.2)
6,653(5.3)
Index of Leading Indicators
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.7
-0.2
Factory Orders
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
-1.5
2.2
-2.1
Economic Activity
July
June
May
Purchasing Manager's Index
47.4
51.1
54.8
Gross National Product
II Q'90
I


Center Offers Support on Alzheimer's
LEAD: FEW diseases are as difficult to live with as Alzheimer's, a degenerative brain disorder that is both progressive and irreversible.
For the families involved, the personality changes that the afflicted suffer on a day-to-day basis can be devastating.


Church and State
LEAD: Representative Floyd H. Flake served church and state and abused both, Federal prosecutors said last week.
Mr.
Flake, pastor of one of the largest black churches in New York City, was indicted on charges of misappropriating $75,200 from a federally subsidized housing complex built by his church and with evading taxes on $66,700 of the church's money that he and his wife put to personal use.


Worlds Apart
LEAD: TEACHERS are jugglers, balancing competing interests, and, sometimes, competing ideologies, to deliver to their students enough accurate information to help them make reasoned judgments.


Lifestyle: Sunday Brunch;   Dim Sum: Pay-as-you-Chew Dining
LEAD: These Chinese restaurants offer dim sum and other dishes for Sunday brunch.
The listing was compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Mandarin


Principals Take To Pulpits
LEAD: ONE Sunday morning James Robinson, 14 years old, watched with surprise from a wooden pew as his Baptist preacher called to the pulpit an unexpected guest: the principal of his old elementary school in Arlington, Va., Marjorie Tuccillo.


Belong Now, Pay Later
LEAD: Notice to ambitious lawyers: Want to be a Federal judge someday, or high official in the Justice Department?
Now's the time to quit that country club or eating club that refuses to admit minorities or women.
Either quit now or at least start compiling a record of agitation for change.
That's the message of the Senate Judiciary Committee, which confirms (and sometimes rejects) nominees for judgeships and high


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: The price of rare coins is rising as investors seek unique coins in the highest conditions.
The latest to be sold is an ultra-high-relief example of a 1907 $20 gold piece.
The MTB Banking Corporation reports that it sold the coin for more than $1.5 million.


Generations of Poison and Lies
LEAD: Never have so many human beings been exposed to so much radiation over so long a time - while so few knew about it.
Now, more than 40 years after it began, we are just beginning to learn what the U.S. government's Hanford nuclear weapons plant in Washington state has done to thousands of citizens who unwittingly drank radioactively contaminated water, breathed radioactively contaminated air, and fed milk laced with radioactive iodine to their children.


When Imitation Isn't the Sincerest Form of Flattery
LEAD: IF America's armchair quarterbacks ever voted for their favorite piece of furniture, chances are they might elect the La-Z-Boy recliner.
With huge cushions that gently mold to the supine contours of the heftiest fan and a footrest that stretches obligingly forward to prop up weary feet, the La-Z-Boy has become an icon of middle-class creature comforts.


In Defense of Detectors In the Courthouse
LEAD: While some complain about sensitive metal detectors at the entrance to the Richard J. Daronco Westchester County Courthouse [''The Pros and Cons of Security Often Lie in a Beep,'' July 8] , all who use the courthouse should feel reassured to learn that the magnetometers are effective enough to detect any object containing metal.


The Australian Ballet: En Route to a Tradition
LEAD: Surely but not slowly, the Australian Ballet won the hearts of a supposedly jaded audience in New York during one brief and indisputably successful week at the Metropolitan Opera House last month.


Roll-Call on Spending Limits
LEAD: Following is the vote of 255 to 155 by which the House of Representatives on Friday approved legislation to place a limit of $715,000 on how much House candidates can spend on their election campaigns.
Voting ''yes'' were 240 Democrats and 15 Republicans.
Voting ''no'' were 3 Democrats and 152 Republicans.


Postings: Cattle on the Move;   Slaughterhouse Four
LEAD: They have kept 11th Avenue in their baleful gaze since the early 20th century, but the four giant steer heads on the top of the New York Butchers' Dressed Meat Company slaughterhouses will soon be removed.


Fashion;   New Textures Are Crisp, Lush and Light
LEAD: If your seersuckers feel sodden and your linens have gone limp, hang on.
Men's wear arriving in stores now offers crisp new textures in relatively lightweight fabrics.


Top Capitalist
LEAD: In these times, a Bulgarian can take a quick and unconventional route to the top of national politics.
Zhelyu Zhelev, a philosophy professor, took over a group called the Club for the Support of Glasnost and Perestroika, became leader of the main opposition coalition and as of last week is Bulgaria's President.


Poles Backing Walesa Urge Jaruzelski to Quit
LEAD: The political movement supporting Lech Walesa's bid for the Polish presidency called on Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski today to quit the post within weeks.


Race, Ethnicity and the Privileged
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lunch Companions: Mozart and Goodman
LEAD: ''OUR purpose is simply to provide an oasis in the middle of the workday,'' said Debbie Moran, the series coordinator for the ''Listen 'n' Lunch'' programs at St.
Paul's National Historic Site in Mount Vernon. ''We try to offer a wide range of free performances, and the relaxed atmosphere makes each concert an especially enjoyable musical experience.


Put In Next Spring's Bulb Order Now
LEAD: IT IS time to think spring.
Although the season is a long way off, the hardy bulb catalogues have arrived in the mail, and gardeners will have to start thinking about what bulbs they will want to plant in the fall.


Ms. Tucker Wed To Robert Ellin
LEAD: Nancy Jane Tucker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron B. Tucker of Hewlett, L.I., was married last evening to Robert Scott Ellin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin W. Ellin of New York.
Rabbi Jeremiah Wohlberg officiated at Jem Caterers at the Sands Atlantic Beach in Atlantic Beach, L.I.


Tamils Kill 110 Muslims at 2 Sri Lankan Mosques
LEAD: Tamil militants with machine guns and hand grenades raided two mosques in eastern Sri Lanka, killing more than 110 men as they knelt in prayer, witnesses and officials said today.


Costly Lapse by Gooden
LEAD: The St.
Louis Cardinals reached up from last place in the National League East today and did what no team had done in two months: They defeated Dwight Gooden.


Painful Decisions
LEAD: The most difficult case i ever had?'' Ruth Macklin pauses, momentarily - and most uncharacteristically - at a loss for words as she thinks back over the hundreds she has considered in a decade as ethicist in residence at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and its affiliated hospitals in New York City.


Brodsky's Role Sets Campaign Agenda
LEAD: AS Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky sees it, the recently concluded legislative session in Albany was a nearly unqualified success. ''We ended spring borrowing, funded the libraries, improved reimbursement rates for hospitals, increased school aid'' and, in general, ''cut spending by state agencies while improving fiscal aid to local governments.


Fresh Meals on the Spur of the Moment
LEAD: SUMMER lunches don't have to be complicated affairs.
At this time of year, even the most impromptu meals can be made memorable because there is so much good fresh produce around.


Denise J. Brown Weds Todd Noel
LEAD: Denise June Brown, the daughter of Mary Alice Brown of Buffalo, was married there yesterday to Todd Joseph Noel, the son of the late Livingston Noel of Grenada, West Indies.
The Rev.
Dr.
Bennett W. Smith performed the ceremony at St.
John Baptist Church in Buffalo.


Dallas Police Chief and Aide Put on Leave After an Inquiry
LEAD: The city has placed the Police Chief and his deputy on indefinite leave after an investigative panel found evidence that they may have tampered with witnesses and committed perjury in an internal inquiry that led to the dismissal of a police officer.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical LIVE OPERA - In the proliferation of ''pirate'' recordings into the CD mainstream, there are some especially noteworthy entries, including a must - Thomas Beecham's excitingly paced reading of Wagner's ''Tristan und Isolde'' with Kirsten Flagstad and Lauritz Melchior (Melodram 37019); Verdi's ''Falstaff'' with Mario Del Monaco and Tito Gobbi fierily conducted by Georg Solti (Nuovo Era 2357/58), and Maria Callas in an essential 1955 performance of


Secondhand Emotions in Varied Media
LEAD: THE main event now at Wadsworth Atheneum is ''Robert Longo.'' But first, the superlatives and demi-superlatives: the 12-year retrospective is billed as ''the primary contemporary art exhibition in New England this summer'' and as the vehicle for ''some of the largest works ever mounted'' at the Hartfordmuseum.


2 Men Are Shot in the Neck in Mott Haven
LEAD: Two men were shot near the same location in the Bronx within five minutes of each other yesterday, and the police are investigating whether the shootings are related.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on July 22 about the Jasna Gora Monastery in Poland misidentified the Roman Catholic holy day celebrated on Aug. 15.
It is the Feast of the Assumption, not Ascension Day.


Wall Street;   For Foreign Investors, the Dow's Direction Is Relative
LEAD: THE eruption of a shooting crisis at one of the world's pulse points typically sends nervous international investors scurrying for the safety of the dollar.
Sure enough, when Iraq invaded Kuwait on Thursday, the greenback soared - but only for a few hours.
Then, the dollar sagged again, as investors pondered the impact costlier oil could have on the fragile United


Yanks Explore Role For Seaver
LEAD: Tom Seaver, who had been a Yankee braodcaster on WPIX the last two years, confirmed last night that he and George Steinbrenner had spoken in a ''general conversation'' about the former pitcher's taking a front-office job with the team.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-22


A Dedicated Sentry Guards a Watershed
LEAD: IN rural Cornwall Bridge, at the crossing of two winding country roads with the Berkshire Hills as a backdrop, a white farmhouse serves as the home of the Housatonic Valley Association.
The organization is a self-appointed sentry, standing guard over the vistas that stretch southward through Connecticut, as it works to protect the environment.


Mary Howard Weds Stephen Mooney
LEAD: Mary Thomas Howard and Stephen Emerson Mooney, video producers in Boston, were married yesterday at the Union Church of South Bristol, Me., by the Rev.
Sidney Maxwell, a minister of the United Church of Christ.


The Buddy System
LEAD:
MAKING A FRIEND IN YOUTH
Developmental Theory and Pair Therapy.
By Robert L. Selman and Lynn Hickey Schultz.
357 pp. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press. $29.95.


Caring for Children at the Work Site
LEAD: ASK any group of working mothers what they lack the most and the majority will say child care.
Women make up more than 60 percent of the work force in the county and their voices will grow stronger if their number increases, as expected, 10 to 15 percent by the end of the decade.


Marie P. Keenan To Marry in May
LEAD: Judge and Mrs.
John F. Keenan of Riverdale, the Bronx, have made known the engagement of their daughter, Marie Patricia Keenan, to William Gregory Mutchler, a son of Thomas F. Mutchler Sr. of Riverdale, Md., and the late Lillian P. Mutchler., A wedding next May is planned.


Who's Afraid of Lytton Strachey?
LEAD:
EMINENT VICTORIANS
By A. N. Wilson.
Illustrated. 240 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $25.


Homeless Quake Victims Face New Burdens in Iran
LEAD: Half a million homeless victims of the Iranian earthquake are threatened by food shortages and the frigid weather about to descend on northern Iran.


'As Thousands Cheer'
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOW SHOULD PGA TOUR RE-EVALUATE SITE RULES?
LEAD: As an experiment, hold the Masters at a public golf course in Altanta.
The corporate jets, the TV hangers-on and the pampered players would find a lot of excuses not to attend that event.
PEGGY EDSALL
New York


Put In Next Spring's Bulb Order Now
LEAD: IT IS time to think spring.
Although the season is a long way off, the hardy bulb catalogues have arrived in the mail, and gardeners will have to start thinking about what bulbs they will want to plant in the fall.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Check rosebushes for water needs and protect them from black spot and mildew with fungicidal spray; these two diseases can defoliate plants unless controlled.
Dry herbs for culinary use this winter.
Make potpourri.
Keep up with vegetable harvests.
Mail orders for hardy bulbs for planting in cooler weather.


367 on British Jetliner Stranded in Kuwait
LEAD: Among the thousands of foreigners trapped in Kuwait by the Iraqi invasion are 367 passengers of a British Airways jet that was at the international airport when Iraqi troops moved in, the airline announced yesterday.


The United Nations Comes of Age, Causing Some Anxiety
LEAD: WITH the end of the cold war, the United States and the Soviet Union are forging a working alliance at the United Nations that offers the organization its first real chance in 45 years to function as it is supposed to.


Iraq Without Hussein Would Be the Same
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Looking Glass, Through
LEAD: When the Berlin wall collapsed last November, the most potent symbol of the cold war went crashing down with it.
An even more fearsome one has now fallen with the end of continuous flights of the Looking Glass plane, the airborne strategic command post designed to survive a nuclear attack on the United


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: There was no American among the top 11 players in the Interzonal Tournament that ended July 14 in Manila.
This means that no American qualified for the elimination matches to pick a challenger for the world championship in 1993.
The failure was not for lack of ambition, but things just did not go their way.


Maternal, Erotic and Playful
LEAD:
SUBVERSIVE INTENT
Gender, Politics, and the Avant-Garde.
By Susan Rubin Suleiman.
Illustrated. 276 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $27.50.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in the Travel Advisory column on July 15 about the Chateau de Chambord in France misidentified its builder, Francois I. He was the father-in-law of Catherine de Medici, not of Eleanor of Aquitaine.


Three Finnish Films


THE THUNDER OF HOOFS, THE RING OF COMMENTARY
LEAD: I was foaled at Saratoga Hospital.
Ruined my first sports coat, a red corduroy that ran like a thoroughbred in the rain, selling tip cards at Saratoga Raceway (trots).
Got scared of the dark peddling the Pink Sheet, with its nationwide race results, outside Saratoga Lake's gambling hells.
Met my first rich people covering Saratoga Race Track (flats) for the daily Saratogian.


House Wares
LEAD: AS THE new school year approaches, computer makers are racing to introduce machines designed specifically for home use.
Easier to use, less powerful and less expensive than office PC's, the new machines are expected to appeal especially to students and their parents, and to teachers looking for a home computer.


Unclogging Ears
LEAD: A question in the Q&amp;A column on June 10 on coping with clogged ears on planes elicited home remedies and professional suggestions from readers.
Among them were these:


'Red Desert' Showing
LEAD: Michelangelo Antonioni's first color film, ''Red Desert'' (1964), is to open a two-week run at the Public Theater on Aug. 31.
One of the Italian director's stories of alienation, the film stars Monica Vitti and Richard Harris.
The new print, struck from the negative, will be shown nightly except Mondays at 5:30, 7:40 and 9:50, with a Saturday and Sunday matinee at 3:15.


Style Makers;   Noel Frankel, Creative Director, Advertising Agency
LEAD: Artists rarely get the freedom to illustrate an advertising campaign without specific requirements.
But the new print campaign for MTV, which made its debut in the July 2 issue of Rolling Stone magazine, is different.


Tina Redwine Is Married
LEAD: Tina Maria Redwine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bob K. Redwine of Atlanta, was married yesterday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York to Philip Srini Vasan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Srini T. Vasan of West New York, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas F. Powers officiated.
Mrs.
Vasan, 27 years old and a graduate of Smith College, is a merchandising assistant at the Ellesse sportswear company in New York.


Capturing a Taste for 'Adorable Bad Music'
LEAD: ''Don't analyze music; love it,'' said Francis Poulenc.
It was a characteristic remark.
Celebrated for his wit and elegance (however loud his tweeds), Poulenc was not a graduate of the Paris Conservatory, but of the Sorbonne.
Hence his academic foundation was not musical but literary, and his professional outlook was libertarian: ''For Poulenc composing was a game,'' wrote his fellow Frenchman, the composer and conductor Manuel Rosenthal.


Champlain's Hideaway Islands
LEAD: Maybe it's myopia, or maybe just the glare off Lake Champlain on a sunny day, but a lot of people turn a blind eye to the tiny archipelago off the lake's northeastern shore.
Drivers tend to rush right through, seeing these three islands as little more than a highway from Vermont to Canada.
They hurry west across the sand bridge that became the islands' first land link to the mainland in 1850, twist up Grand Isle and North Hero, ignore the turnoff to Isle La Motte and leave the state and country at Rouses


Miss Kriegman To Wed in Fall
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Oscar Kriegman of Wayne, N.J., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Michelle Robin Kriegman, and David Andrew King, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul J. King of Randwick, Australia.


Another Power Shortage
LEAD: THE United States will probably be importing 60 percent of its oil by the time today's first-graders get their driver's licenses; debate over whether to build new nuclear reactors seems likely to intensify as those youngsters grow up, and acid rain and the greenhouse effect promise to focus attention on energy use of all kinds for years.


Clyde H. Shaffer, 90, Retired Chief of Breyer
LEAD: Clyde H. Shaffer, retired president of the Breyer Ice Cream Company, died Friday in the Whitehall Nursing Home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 90 years old and lived in Pompano Beach, Fla.


Campus Life: Hood;   Summer Camp For Scientists Of the Future
LEAD: A year ago Ubaldo (Ozzie) Duran spent his after-school hours roaming the streets of Los Angeles, a member of a tough street gang who carried a knife and picked fights with rival gangs.
Today he's thinking about medical school.


Growing Up Where Violence Wants to Come Play
LEAD: In his short life in the struggling Brownsville section of Brooklyn, 13-year-old Gregory Orr has seen a man shot to death in a crowded courtyard in broad daylight.


Dr. Amy C. Heck Married To Dr. Daniel S. Kosches
LEAD: Dr.
Amy Caren Heck, a resident in psychiatry at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, was married last evening to Dr.
Daniel Scott Kosches, a fellow in gastroenterology at the Albert Einstein-Montefiore Medical Centers in the Bronx.
Rabbi Harold D. Halpern performed the ceremony at the Temple Gates of Zion in Valley Stream, L


Trade Sanctions Against Baghdad Imposed by European Community
LEAD: The 12 nations of the European Community imposed an immediate embargo today on oil imports from Iraq and Kuwait and said they would stop selling arms and other military equipment to Baghdad as punishment for having invaded Kuwait.


'Two Jakes' Picks Up The 'Chinatown' Trail
LEAD: ''I don't want to live in the past,'' says the private detective who is the protagonist of Jack Nicholson's new film, ''The Two Jakes.'' ''I just don't want to lose it.''


PRINCE CHARMING COMES BACK


M. J. Roach Weds Miss Boddicker
LEAD: Christine Hauser Boddicker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur F. Boddicker of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael James Roach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel T. Roach of Buffalo.
Canon Peter T. Elvin, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Thompson Memorial Chapel in Williamstown, Mass., assisted by the Rev.


Family Feud
LEAD: TEACHERS are jugglers, balancing competing interests, and, sometimes, competing ideologies, to deliver to their students enough accurate information to help them make reasoned judgments.


Stressing the Role Of a Children's Group
LEAD: ''Providing a Home for Those on the Run'' [July 15]  profiled the Emergency Shelter for Runaway and Homeless Youths and its services to county youngsters.
In the article, the role of the Westchester Children's Association in establishing, funding, and operating the shelter for three years (toward the end of 1984 through 1987), was omitted.


Freeing 'After the Fall' From the Ghost of Marilyn
LEAD: When Josette Simon was offered the role of Maggie in Arthur Miller's ''After the Fall,'' she said she had to satisfy herself that playing a part widely identified with Marilyn Monroe would not appear to be a gimmick.


At Blacks' Funeral in South Africa, a Call to Arms and for More Resistance
LEAD: With calls to arms against black adversaries and appeals for increased resistance to the white authorities, anti-apartheid movements today buried 3 of 27 people killed in vicious factional fighting here last month.


Postings: Easier Down Payments;   Sonny Mae Adds a Program
LEAD: The State of New York Mortgage Agency announced last month the start of a program that should make it easier for income-eligible, first-time home buyers to enter the housing market.
It applies only to buyers who use conventional, rather than below-market-rate, financing.


Style Makers;   Clive Howdle, Furniture Maker
LEAD: Clive Howdle, who calls himself a bespoke furniture maker, built his first pieces six years ago in an old henhouse belonging to his girlfriend's mother in Yorkshire. ''It was fine, except I couldn't make anything terribly tall,'' he said with a little grin. ''I've developed a reputation for being able to shoehorn everything into small spaces.


Better Hands for Cars
LEAD: WHEN the Allstate Insurance Company wanted to lower the cost of automobile insurance in Chicago, it knew that a prime obstacle was rapidly escalating pay for body-shop technicians.
That, in turn, reflected the dearth of qualified repairmen.


Fashion: On the Street;   For the Back 40 (Or the East 60's)
LEAD: Manhattan has been mistaken for a lot of things over the years, but rarely for a county fair.
Not, that is, until this summer, when many of the simple folk of New York City gave their wardrobes an overall overhaul.
Bib overalls, of course, can be every bit as useful on Madison Avenue as in the milking barn, what with all those pockets and all that room.


S.A.T.'s Golden Mean
LEAD: ALL the things an adolescent can be,'' laments Thomas S. Anthony, ''is reduced to a three-digit number'' - the Scholastic Aptitude Test score.
Mr.
Anthony, dean of admissions at Colgate University in Hamilton, N.Y., believes that students give too much weight to this number when gauging their chances of being accepted at a particular school.


Golf Strikes Sensitive Nerve
LEAD: The last time Louis J. Willie used his golf clubs, he played on a public course in Birmingham, Ala.
Willie's most vivid memory of the day was having to tee the ball up on every shot to avoid breaking his clubs on rocks that dotted the course.
That was in 1970.
Twenty years later, as the result of a bizarre chain of events that has shaken the golf establishment, Willie is able to play the silklike greens and picture book fairways of the Shoal Creek Country Club in Shoal Creek,


More New Magazines, And These Beckon To Black Readers
LEAD: FROM Los Angeles to Boston, black entrepreneurs, swimming against the tide of falling advertising pages and high mortality rates in the magazine industry, are establishing magazines aimed principally at black readers.


Strike the Pose: When Music Is Skin Deep POP VIEW;   Video Age Music: Stark Images, Shrill Voices, Skin Deep
LEAD: Probably no record distills the video-game quality of so much contemporary pop more succinctly than M. C. Hammer's hit ''U Can't Touch This.'' Over a funk riff appropriated from Rick James's 1981 ''Super Freak,'' the 27-year-old rap star from Oakland, Calif., proclaims his pop triumph in doggerel that says, in effect, It's great to be top dog in this


Coming to a Neighbor's Defense
LEAD: THE tiny dairy-farming town of Munnsville in central New York has never been known as a hotbed of political activism.
But this summer many local residents have banded together in a common cause.
On store counters throughout Munnsville, population 499, coffee cans have been set to collect donations for the Adelbert Ward Defense


Tax Plan Sticks New Yorkers With Bailout Tab;   'Sin' Tax Paradox
LEAD: To the Editor:


All the Answers
LEAD: Questions appear on page 20.


The Executive Computer;   A Marriage With Video Technology
LEAD: IN the future it may be impossible to tell the difference between a personal computer and a television set.
The two technologies are colliding even today, and in a few years we are likely to see conventional business computers giving way to ''smart TV's'' or ''video computers.''


East Brunswick Journal;   Ban on Cigarette Vending Machines Encounters Opposition
LEAD: FROM now on, smokers in this Middlesex County community are going to have to rely on over-the-counter sales to feed their nicotine habit.


New York's Deadly Season
LEAD: SAN FRANCISCO has its earthquakes, the Midwest its tornadoes.
But last week, as a crime wave continued to crash over the city, it seemed that one of the most dangerous things a person could do was to live in New York.


Florio's Tax Changes: Courageous, but More Are Needed
LEAD: IN the face of a huge deficit, a school finance crisis and a tax structure unfair to working families, Gov.
Jim Florio's tax increase was an act of courage and leadership.


Judge Adopts Plan on Los Angeles Districting
LEAD: The Federal district judge who found two months ago that Los Angeles County had illegally excluded Hispanic people from representation on its governing board has now imposed a plan aimed at remedying that discrimination.


Unclogging Ears
LEAD: A question in the Q&amp;A column on June 10 on coping with clogged ears on planes elicited home remedies and professional suggestions from readers.
Among them were these:


A Ton of Passion and 100 Grams of Patience
LEAD: For a short while, Nicolas de Stael was a name on many lips.
Having lived in poverty during the 1940's on the fringes of a Parisian art scene that was itself beginning to seem marginal, de Stael found himself suddenly, in the early 50's, unable to satisfy the demands of his New York dealer for new paintings.


Iraq Makes Its Bid to Run the Show in the Middle East
LEAD: FOR years now President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has been the bad boy of Arab politics, a classic bully who lived by the credo that crime pays and absolute crime pays absolutely.
The Iraqi strongman was at it again last week, invading his neighbor Kuwait, holding up the whole country for its oil and gold, and then daring the world to do something about it.


Elegant Lobbies to Lure Office Tenants
LEAD: Not so long ago, the lobbies of even the most architecturally distinctive office buildings were little more than sterile spaces connecting the front door to the elevators.
But if the designs of new buildings or of those built or renovated within the last few years are any indication, bland-looking vestibules are a thing of the past.


Why It Isn't Ungrammatical to Speak the President's English;   The Faults of Others
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stop Hussein, With Force if Necessary
LEAD: IN the last three weeks President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has ushered in a frightening era in international commerce and relations.
He has used blackmail and force to achieve his commercial and political ambitions.
President Hussein, a desperate man facing failed domestic policies, must be stopped now, if necessary by force.


What Business Stands to Gain - or Lose - With Souter
LEAD: WHAT kind of businesses are likely to be happy if David H. Souter is confirmed by the Senate to succeed William J. Brennan Jr. on the Supreme Court?
Probably the ones that are just like the reclusive workaholic jurist: straitlaced, attentive to detail and respectful of both tradition and the restrictions placed on it by


Perspectives: House Auctions;   Stirring Up the Buyers in a Slow Market
LEAD: The housing auctioneers put in a good day's work June 23 at the grand ballroom of the New York Hilton Hotel.
With 800 people in the audience, 68 apartments at a condominium called Executive Plaza, at Seventh Avenue and 51st Street, went on sale.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Chatham
$325,000
5 Somerset Avenue
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 49-year-old colonial; bay windows, fireplace, deck; taxes $3,836.
Freehold
$119,900
10 Phyllis Road
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; 1-car garage, fenced yard, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,241.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Southwestern Hamburgers:Little Effort for Summerfare
LEAD: When you are looking for a meal that involves little effort, has a summery feel and can be cooked indoors or out, give your hamburgers a southwestern accent.


Put In Next Spring's Bulb Order Now
LEAD: IT IS time to think spring.
Although the season is a long way off, the hardy bulb catalogues have arrived in the mail, and gardeners will have to start thinking about what bulbs they will want to plant in the fall.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Kuwait has faith in its Arab brothers.
Kuwait has faith in President Hosni Mubarak, King Fahd, custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, and the other leaders.
The crisis is an Arab one and Arabs will solve their own problems, God willing.''
- Abdel Rahman al-Awadi,
the Kuwaiti Minister of State
for Cabinet Affairs, in Cairo.


He Bleeds Cardinal Red, So Torre Returned
LEAD: Joe Torre sat in the red baseball uniform of the St.
Louis Cardinals and faced the inevitable question: Why would anybody forgo the rewards of the television booth and return to the field at the age of 50 as the manager of a last-place team?


Miss Goldman Is Wed on L.I.
LEAD: Michelle Joanne Goldman and Jeffrey Ford Eisenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Eisenberg of Miami, were married last evening at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth M. Goldman of Sands Point, L.I., by Rabbi Norman Kahan.


World Markets;   The Unsettling Iraq Factor
LEAD: SADDAM HUSSEIN, the President of Iraq, bet that Kuwait was vulnerable and it was.
So were most of the world's markets, which tumbled dramatically after Iraq's invasion of the emirate last week as the outlook clouded for oil prices, inflation, economic growth and the balance of power in the Middle East.


Players Sued
LEAD: Two police officers who were on plainclothes duty in Madison, Wis., the night of June 28 say things got pretty rough when they tried to subdue a man who they say was acting obscenely outside a tavern and his two companions intervened.
Indeed, according to a series of civil damage suits the officers filed Friday, the three, Chris Chelios of the Chicago Blackhawks, Gary Suter of the Calgary Flames and David Lundeen, a former teammate of the two pros at the University of Wisconsin, ''showed a complete disdain and disregard'' of the officers' ''inherent dignity as human beings.


Flashcard
LEAD: THERE were 40,407,540 students enrolled in 83,165 public elementary and secondary schools in the United States during the school year 1988-89.
California is home to the most public schools, 7,312 of them, while Delaware, with 168, has the fewest.


Jill S. Solodar to Marry Alle J. J. Schilstra in '91
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Solodar of Port Washington, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jill Suzanne Solodar, to Alle Jetze Jacob Schilstra, a son of Harry Schilstra of Sneek, the Netherlands, and Mrs.
Nynke Louwsma-Kramer of Bolsward, the Netherlands.
A fall 1991 wedding is planned.


Why Rabbit Had to Go
LEAD: ''Rabbit AT Rest'' will be the fourth and last of my so-called Rabbit books.
Each of them occurs in the ninth year of a decade and was written, more or less, in the ninth year of the decade.


Hostetler: If Mobility Counts
LEAD: When you want to divide five apples equally among seven people, you can do it easily by making applesauce.
But how does a professional football team divide playing time when its starting quarterback is experienced but not especially mobile and the backup is inexperienced but mobile?


Miss Hoopes Weds Charles J. Halpin
LEAD: The wedding of Stephanie Marshall Hoopes, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Riter Hoopes of Wilmington, Del., and Charles Joseph Halpin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis N. Halpin of Glastonbury, Conn., took place yesterday at the Westminster Presbyterian Church in Wilmington.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.


What's so Funny About Washington?
LEAD: As publishers of slick, adfat magazines go, Bill Regardie is regarded as a very gutsy fellow indeed.
Co-founder and editor in chief of the irreverent Washington magazine that bears his name, Regardie has in the past 10 years managed to offend a lot of powerful people.
Certainly he seems to have tried to offend them, town house to White House and everything in between.


Dr. Gayle Milton Marries in Boston
LEAD: Dr.
Gayle Pearl Milton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Milton of Newton Center, Mass., was married last evening at the Copley Plaza in Boston to Michael Clifford Zeller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Zeller of Great Neck.
L.I.
Rabbi Steven Folberg and Cantor Alex Zimmer performed the ceremony.


Ms. Del Guercio Planning to Wed
LEAD: September wedding plans for Maria Victoria Del Guercio and Gregory Vander Roest Stanton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Stanton Jr. of Rye, N.Y., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Louis R. M. Del Guercio of Larchmont, N.Y.


Review/Music;   Soviet Group Amid U.S. High-Tech
LEAD: No one could have dreamed up an odder juxtaposition of artist to physical context than the Shostakovich String Quartet playing at the Winter Garden last Sunday afternoon.
Serious, heavy-sounding Soviet musicians attacking serious, heavy-sounding Russian music seemed like space men from another planet set among the palm trees of this glass-domed monument to profit at the World Financial


As the Crow Talks
LEAD: For people who notice such things, there has recently been an unaccustomed hush in nature.
The wind sighed and other birds called, but nature's great conversationalist, the crow, was hardly uttering a caw.
With young crows not long out of their nests, the parents were keeping quiet, lest predators discover their fledglings.


Robin Lynn Silverman Is Engaged To Wed Harry A. Keates Next July
LEAD: The engagement of Robin Lynn Silverman to Harry Andrew Keates, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edwin Keates of Villanova, Pa., has been announced by her parents, Susan Silverman and Henry Silverman, both of New York.
The wedding is planned for next July.


SENATE APPROVES SHIFT IN STRATEGY FOR MISSILE SHIELD
LEAD: In a direct challenge to President Bush over the plan for an anti-missile system, the Senate today approved a major revision that would require the Pentagon to shift the focus from space interceptors to defenses on the ground.


Best Sellers: August 5, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


Ms. Wagner Wed To Tracy Walker
LEAD: MaryMoss Wagner and John Tracy Walker 4th were married yesterday at the Meeting House-on-the Green in New Marlboro, Mass., by the Rev.
Duncan R. McQueen, an Episcopal priest.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick W. Wagner 3d of New York.
Her husband, known as Tracy, is the son of Mr.


No Headline
LEAD: By midsummer, when Israelis seek relief from the Middle East's sweltering heat, Jerusalem is the only truly comfortable spot in the country.
While the days in the city are often very warm, the air is dry, and when the sun goes down visitors and residents don cotton sweaters to ward off the cool winds blowing from the Judean Mountains.


Veiled Prejudice
LEAD:
RACE AND SLAVERY IN THE MIDDLE EAST
An Historical Enquiry.
By Bernard Lewis.
Illustrated. 184 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $24.95.


'As Thousands Cheer'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Protecting Against Lightning
LEAD: LIGHTNING causes millions of dollars in home and property damage, not to mention hundreds of injuries, in the United States each year.
Fortunately, houses in heavily built-up areas where there are many tall buildings generally are at a small risk.


Ms. McGrath Wed To P. J. O'Rourke
LEAD: Brinn Patricia McGrath, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. McGrath of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Peter J. O'Rourke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter O'Rourke of Hillsdale, N.J.
The Revs.
Gerard Reedy and Dennis P. Keane officiated at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Roman Catholic Church.


Budget Cuts Leave Libraries Gloomy
LEAD: Carrying a stack of children's books and records, Pamela Englund climbed the steps of the Jefferson Market library in Greenwich Village on a recent Friday afternoon and tugged at the door.
It was locked.


Disputed Arts Grants to Be Reconsidered
LEAD: The deep division in the nation over public support of controversial art was reflected today at a clamorous meeting of the council that advises the chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts.


Restoring the Pride of the Yankees
LEAD: WHEN George Steinbrenner was ordered by Commissioner Fay Vincent to give up operational control of the New York Yankees last week, Americans who treasure baseball as the national pastime and those with a stake in the game as a business both had reason to feel relieved.
One of the most demoralizing eras in a fabled franchise's history had ended.


HOW SHOULD PGA TOUR RE-EVALUATE SITE RULES?
LEAD: A country club with an all-white membership is an indictment of racism.
A PGA Tour event in an all-white country club is an endorsement of prejudice.
Simply stated, the PGA Tour needs to evaluate its position on prejudice and racism.
NEAL SCHNEIDER
New Paltz, N.Y.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
STAR SINGERS


Commercial Property: The Grand Central District;   A Quest for Standards in East Midtown Esthetics
LEAD: Having already taken up the task of patrolling the streets, sweeping up trash, helping the homeless and dispatching cabs, the Grand Central Partnership has embarked on a subtler and more daunting task: shaping taste - at least enough to tame some of the more unbridled shopfronts in mid-Manhattan.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Dance View article in the Arts and Leisure section today, about the Australian Ballet, misidentifies a principal dancer.
He is Steven Heathcote.


Don't Change the Law for High-Tech Crybabies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Martin Victor, Mayor, 76
LEAD: Martin Victor, a former Mayor of Lattingtown, L.I., and a former vice president of Babcock &amp; Wilcox, an engineering concern, died on Friday in his home in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 76 years old.


Mortimer Blumenthal, Psychiatrist, Dies at 68
LEAD: Dr.
Mortimer Jacob Blumenthal, a New York City psychiatrist and child psychoanalyst, died yesterday at his home.
He was 68 years old and lived and practiced on the Upper East Side.


Property Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


MARKET WATCH
LEAD: Is Iraq's Saddam Hussein another Hitler, who will gobble up neighbor after neighbor, until finally stopped?


Q and A
LEAD:
Demolition Next Door
Question: I have received notice that the house attached to mine will be demolished.
My home is brick and I am worried that after this building is torn down I could have water seepage and other problems.
What steps must be taken to insure that the party wall will be restored?


Playing Himself
LEAD: As a starstruck 17-year-old, David Hampton feared he would never win stage fame on his own, so he latched onto someone else's.
It began one night in 1983 when he simply had to get into Studio 54 and hit upon the ruse of posing as Sidney Poitier's son.
It worked so well he used it again - for a free meal in a trendy restaurant - and again and again to gain access to the homes of some wealthy and well-known New Yorkers.


Barry Trial Jury Deliberates But Fails to Reach a Verdict
LEAD: The jury in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug and perjury trial deliberated for four hours today but did not reach a verdict.


About Cars;   From Italy, Luxury Of a Quirky Order
LEAD: It is maybe six years since Alfa Romeo pumped up the red and white balloons and rolled out the tiny hot dogs and other hors d'oeuvres to announce to the motoring press that it intended to become a real presence in this country.


College Grad, 25, Radio News Exec; Career Goal: Miss America
LEAD: LAST year, Bianca Salahshourian, the news director at radio station WWCO in Waterbury, was scanning the newspaper when she spotted an article on the coming Miss America pageant.
Another article noted that contestants for the title of Miss Greater Waterbury were rehearsing at a local civic center for their pageant.


Fresh Start
LEAD: SUMMER is the relative calm before students storm their local educational institutions, be those institutions public or private, geared to youngsters or adults.


Currency
LEAD: To the Editor: The rate of exchange of American dollars for Israeli shekels published in the Travel Watch chart (''$1 Equals'') on uly 15 is discouraging.


Some Memories Of Life With Father
LEAD: The recent article ''A Man Who Doesn't Know His Son Is Married'' (Opinion page) brought back not too far-off memories of my own life with my father.
My father had a close relationship with both of his children when they were young.
Plagued by his own insecurities, as his children grew and matured, he felt threatened and left behind.


Vermont's Classic Villages
LEAD: There is a Vermont we carry around in our imagination, and a Vermont that really exists, and it's in the hill towns of the state's back roads where vision and actuality coexist best.
A white church steeple framed by sugarloaf hills of maple and birch; weathered red houses progressing backward into connected red barns; a stream bending around the village in a line of alders; freshly cut meadows rising up from the town's back; a general store selling insulated boots in August, sunflower seeds in March.


Art Is More Than Just Art
LEAD:
ENCOUNTERS &amp; REFLECTIONS
Art in the Historical Present.
By Arthur C. Danto.
356 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


Degrees in Whole Earth
LEAD: MUCH as the creation of a women's studies major reflected a kind of consciousness-raising for students in the 1970's, so environmental studies may be a generational barometer for the 1990's, as colleges and universities increasingly create curriculums on the environment and grant their graduates degrees.


Show by Fellowship Winners
LEAD: THE thin line separating art from crafts is nearly erased when they are exhibited side by side.
In the current exhibition at the New Jersey Center for Visual Arts, it is hard to tell the difference, even with a program.


An Urge to Cry Out
LEAD: To the Editor:


Our Animal Rites
LEAD: The bear had the adenoidal breathing of an elderly man with a passion for cigars and a tendency toward emphysema.
My first thought, when I saw him contemplating me through tiny eyes from a rise just beyond the back porch, was that he looked remarkably bearlike, like a close-up shot from a public television nature program.


In Yonkers, No End Of Strife In Civic Life
LEAD: THE selection of a new police commissioner recently diverted Yonkers from its decade-old struggle over a court-ordered housing desegregation plan.
As with almost every public matter in Yonkers, the choice set off controversy.


Flashcard
LEAD: HIGH school football and basketball games are the mainstay of sports attendance in the United States, according to a Gallup Mirror of America poll conducted in February.
More Americans attended high school football games during the previous year than either college or professional football games.
The same held true for high school basketball.


Susannah Richards and James Work 3d Are Wed
LEAD: Susannah Richards, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Richards of Damariscotta, Me., was married yesterday at her parents' home to James Clark Work 3d, the son of the late Bernice Blackwood of Chicago and the late J. Clark Work of Clermont, Fla.
Deborah Potter, a lawyer, performed the ceremony.


The Actors Who Follow the Impossible Acts
LEAD: ''It's a tricky task,'' Arthur Laurents said one recent afternoon, discussing the job of bringing a new actor into a working production.
Mr.
Laurents, who wrote the book for ''Gypsy'' and directed its current Broadway revival, was in the midst of helping Linda Lavin prepare to replace Tyne Daly as Rose.


ARIEL SHARON: TALKING TOUGH
LEAD: Sharon's reputation as a soldier rests primarily on his performance in the Six-Day War, which was outstanding.
However, a man who spends 25 years in the army must be judged on his cumulative performance.
A review of Sharon's military career reveals an uneven record and a persistent tendency to disobey orders, employ excessive force and remain indifferent to civilian casualties.


Campus Life: Michigan State;   Tuition Increase Inspires Threat From Governor
LEAD: James Blanchard says he is planning to order tuition refunds to students at Michigan State University unless the university lowers a proposed tuition increase.


Q and A
LEAD:
Tours of Mayan Ruins


Review/Musical;   Love's Labours Gained
LEAD: Everything about the New York City Opera's new production of Stephen Sondheim's musical ''A Little Night Music,'' Friday night at the New York State Theater, conspires to blur the line between opera and Broadway.


Paying the Price For That Lawn
LEAD: Although I was encouraged to learn from ''Perfect Lawns Exact a Price Some Refuse to Pay'' on July 15 that a ''small but growing'' number of Westchester gardeners are trying to cure their chemical dependency on lawn pesticides and fertilizers, I think we still have a long way to go to catch up with western states like California and


Final Pits Youth Against Experience
LEAD: After today's semifinals, the final of the Metropolitan Amateur Championship at the Piping Rock Club on Sunday will offer a contrast of experience and youth.


M. D. Siegel Weds Sharon Margolies
LEAD: Sharon Melissa Margolies and Michael David Siegel were married last evening at the Union Reform Temple in Freeport, L.I., by Rabbi Lawrence Colton.
Mrs.
Margolies Siegel is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley E. Margolies of Baldwin, L.I.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Warren Siegel of San Juan Capistrano,


At Play on a Working Farm
LEAD: There is something almost mythic about a farm: the sun setting on rolling green pastures, the swoop of barn swallows on their way to the nest, the new life (newborn calves, lambs, kittens, puppies) that seems to crowd the small corners of the cavernous barn.
It is the place to view The Farmer - that embodiment of the work ethic - on the job, and to have a glimpse of the livelihood that, as Americans, seems somehow our birthright.


Talking: Roofs;   Making Decisions On Repairs
LEAD: Literally at the top of most maintenance programs for a single-family house should be its roof.
A leaky or damaged roof can be the source of a multitude of water problems.
A roof that is worn or buckled or has missing tiles can also be an eyesore - and a visual barrier to quick or easy sale.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My house has a forced-air furnace that is about 14 years old.
A heating contractor the heat exchange unit is badly rusted and he recommends replacing it because the heat exchanger is so bad and because the old unit had insufficient air flow.
He says that the new furnace would have 90 percent efficiency and would save about 40 percent in gas costs.


Noted With Pleasure
LEAD:
Talking to Pictures


Manila Troops Said to Kill 19 In a Family to Avenge 2 Dead
LEAD: Soldiers have been accused of killing 19 members of a Muslim family, including six children, to avenge the death of two comrades who were gunned down by a member of the clan, a Government official and witnesses said today.


Fine Art Museum Is Not Needed in Roslyn
LEAD: The present unhappy state of affairs of the Nassau County Museum of Fine Art in Roslyn Harbor will remain unresolved as long as the present management is oblivious to the fact that we simply do not need another fine-art museum located at its present location.


Flash Points
LEAD: TEACHERS are jugglers, balancing competing interests, and, sometimes, competing ideologies, to deliver to their students enough accurate information to help them make reasoned judgments.


Taxis, by the Book
LEAD: There are many ways to travel from point A to point B in New York City: subways, buses and bicycles.
People walk, run or drive.
And, of course, there is the yellow cab, about which the Taxi and Limousine Commission now offers convenient and sensible instructions.


Flashcard
LEAD: MORE than half of all public libraries in the United States do not have any librarians on staff whose primary responsibility is attending to children, who are major users of public library resources and services.
Four out of ten public libraries have fewer than two full-time employees, which means librarians must be generalists.


Races to Watch
LEAD:
WASHINGTON
Jolene Unsoeld, a freshman Democrat elected by just 618 votes in 1988, is running in a tough environment: the designation of the Northern spotted owl as a threatened species could eventually cut thousands of logging jobs in her district, the Third.
Her opponent, former State Representative Bob Williams, advocates weakening the Endangered Species Act to permit continued logging.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: The quality of United States stamp production is excellent.
Mistakes are seldom made, and when they are, stamps that come off the presses lacking perforations or some colors, or with part of the design upside down, are almost always found by postal inspectors and destroyed.
That's almost always.
There has been a mini-epidemic of errors in the production of the Lighthouse booklet, the strip of five 25-cent stamps.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
A BOOK OF KELLS


Man and His Child Are Shot During Robbery in the Bronx
LEAD: A Bronx man and his 16-month-old son were shot yesterday during a robbery in the stairwell of their apartment building in the Morrisania section, the police said.


Quiet Trial Could Lead to Major Abortion Ruling
LEAD: A four-day trial that passed quietly in this small central Pennsylvania town this week may take on enormous importance for millions of American women.
It is a likely candidate to become the case the Supreme Court uses to reconsider its decision recognizing the right to abortion.


Protecting Against Lightning
LEAD: LIGHTNING causes millions of dollars in home and property damage, not to mention hundreds of injuries, in the United States each year.
Fortunately, houses in heavily built-up areas where there are many tall buildings generally are at a small risk.


Anti-Communist Radio Endangered by Success
LEAD: In a number of ways, this is a banner year at the American institution known as Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty.


Dr. Alix Goldman Wed in California
LEAD: Dr.
Alix Goldman, a pediatrician, and Christopher Casler, a movie producer and screen writer, were married yesterday in Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Warner R. Traynham, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the nondenominational ceremony at Salisbury House, an inn.
The bride is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving Goldman of Niantic, Conn.


BNO INDEX TERMS


Miss Artioli Weds Michael N. Findlay
LEAD: Pauline Ann Artioli, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Artioli Jr. of Somers, Conn., and Michael Nielsen Findlay, a son of Mrs.
E.
Andrew Deeds of Charlotte, Vt., and David B. Findlay Jr. of New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
John Nutting, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Warren (Vt.) United


Steinbrenners Outline Chain of Command for Down the Road
LEAD: With the ouster of George Steinbrenner as the Yankees' general partner, Hank Steinbrenner has become the focus of attention as the man most likely to succeed his banished father.
Hank, however, is not his father's son who will ultimately rule the Yankees.
Barring a coup d'etat from within or forced from without, son Harold will someday assume command of the fabled but fallen franchise.


Lorraine Linton Wed in New Jersey
LEAD: Lorraine Janis Linton, a daughter of Terese K. Linton Nunziato of Lincoln Park, N.J., and Robert Linton of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Daniel Ross Levinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Levinson of Singer Island, Fla.
The Rev.
Roger H. Smith, a Unitarian universalist minister, officiated at Stronghold Mansion in Bernardsville, N


On Language;   Acronym Power
LEAD: One way to stand out in a world swimming in mere abbreviations is to assemble the letters into pronounceable words.
As several recent examples show, acronyms fall into distinct categories.


Surpirses From the Unpredictable Past
LEAD:
THE END OF THE LINE
The Failure of Communism in the Soviet Union and China.
By Christopher S. Wren.
352 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


A New Taste (Afghani) in Huntington
LEAD: HISTORIC Huntington Village now has an Afghani restaurant.
Incongruous as that might seem, it is not a bad fit.
Huntingtonians have long demonstrated their love for Greek food by supporting three storefront Greek restaurants within two blocks of each other.
There are some similarities between the two cuisines: souvlaki becomes shish kebab and baklava translates to bughluva.


Show Good Will To U.S. Athletes
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Armonk, N.Y.
$707,500
53 Oregon Road
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; stone fireplace, family room, study, Jacuzzi, deck, 1.3 acres; taxes not yet assessed.
Katonah, N.Y.
$540,000
Van Rensselear
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 2-year-old contemporary; great room, 2 fireplaces, Jacuzzi, spiral staircase, loft, library loft, 1.9 acres; taxes not yet assessed.


The Endangered Civil Service
LEAD: However well-intentioned and enlightened its policies, any government, from the White House to the local motor-vehicle registration office, is only as good as its workers.
For the Federal Government, this undeniable truth has recently spelled trouble.
It seems to be getting ever harder to staff top-flight political positions, where the turnover rate on average has been about 18 months.


Rules Are Disputed On America's Cup
LEAD: Organizers for the 1992 America's Cup regatta in San Diego have set residency limits on sailors and yacht designers to prevent individuals from working for more than one country.
But the effort has met with resistance from a key player.


Resisting Hitler
LEAD: To the Editor:


Flashcard
LEAD: DURING the last 14 years the number of college degrees awarded to women has increased on all levels.
In this same period, the number of degrees earned by men has declined; the exception is associate degrees.
In 1989 women earned the majority of associate's, bachelor's and master's degrees as well as more than a third of doctorates and first-professional degrees, such as medical, law, dentistry or theological degrees.


Kathie A. Shutkin To Wed Next Year
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Shutkin of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathie Alane Shutkin to David Benjamin Mandel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice M. Mandel of Port Washington, L.I.
A January wedding is planned.


Dimples and Other Subtleties
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A letter about the second baseman Louy Whitaker (Mailbox, July 29) incorrectly identified the writer.
His name is Jim Grondin.


The Long Arm of the Constitutionz
LEAD:
CONSTITUTIONALISM, DEMOCRACY, AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS
By Louis Henkin.
125 pp. New York: Columbia University Press. $25.


Susannah Richards and James Work 3d Are Wed
LEAD: Susannah Richards, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Richards of Damariscotta, Me., was married yesterday at her parents' home to James Clark Work 3d, the son of the late Bernice Blackwood of Chicago and the late J. Clark Work of Clermont, Fla.
Deborah Potter, a lawyer, officiated at the ceremony.


Sarah J. Beilke and Thomas Michael Begel Wed
LEAD: Sarah Jane Beilke and Thomas Michael Begel were married yesterday in a nondenominational ceremony at the Ventana Inn in Big Sur, Calif., by the Rev.
Hugh Rideout, a minister of the Universal Life Church.
Mrs.
Begel is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Beilke of Green Bay, Wis.
She is a graduate of the University of Wisconsin and a saleswoman at the Scully &amp; Scully giftware shop in New York.


Votes in Congress;   Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
Senate


Ms. Osborne Wed To C.C. Grinnell
LEAD: Beth Arlene Osborne and Christopher Chandler Grinnell were married yesterday at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Larchmont, N.Y., by the Rev.
Horace H. Grinnell, a cousin of the bridegroom.
Mrs.
Grinnell is the daughter of Mr. and Robert H. Osborne of Shelter Island, L.I.
Her husband is a son of the late Katherine Carr Grinnell of Larchmont and the late Mr.


Works in Progress;   The Lady and the Tiger
LEAD: Siberian Tigers are the largest of all cats, weighing up to 700 pounds, and white Siberian tigers might be the rarest.
First bred successfully four years ago by Robert Baudy at the Rare Feline Breeding Center in Florida, there are now six in the world.
Five are with Baudy; the sixth, Kita, (above and right), lives in Westfield, Ind.


Lillian Goldstein, A Student, Weds
LEAD: Lillian Rachel Goldstein, a daughter of Dr.
Elliott J. Goldstein of Pittsburgh and Dr.
Marion Zucker Goldstein of Amherst, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Andrew Schapiro, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Schapiro of New York.
Rabbi Ari Cartun officiated at the Westin William Penn in Pittsburgh.


About Men;   The Quick, the Dead
LEAD: The year my family invested in Florida real estate I decided the world was meaningless.
I had nothing in particular against Florida, or investments for that matter - I simply happened to be 15.
It was a hormonal kind of thing.


As Immigration to Israel Soars, Housing Plans Are Grounded by Politics
LEAD: More new immigrants moved to Israel last month than at any time since the first years after the nation's birth 42 years ago.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   A Town With Understated Treasures
LEAD: This hamlet in Orange County, N.Y., squeezes about 60 galleries and shops into one main street less than half a mile long.
But there is no big billboard heralding that fact, and the galleries themselves, in 200-year-old houses, look like the long-time residences they are, except for their own tiny hand-painted signs, often camouflaged by overgrown trees.


Virtues of A Visual Medium
LEAD: To the Editor:


Iraqis Dig In Around Kuwait, Suggesting No Plan for Early Pullout
LEAD: Iraqi troops fortified some of their positions in Kuwait today, a move that Pentagon officials said indicated that they might be preparing for a long stay.


Evening Hours;   Celebrating A Theater's 60th Year
LEAD: More than 700 guests from East Hampton and Sag Harbor on Long Island trooped out to Dune Alpin Farm in East Hampton to dance under a large white tent and celebrate the 60th anniversary of Guild Hall in East Hampton and its venerable John Drew Theater.


Update 2
LEAD: MICHAEL Wright, who drew the cover for Education Life's spring issue, left off the number 2.
Beth Nelson, 8 years old, of Rochester, Vt., discovered its absence and made her own drawing in a letter to the editor to tell us about it.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Madison Avenue Street Fair, Madison Avenue will be closed today from 37th to 50th Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


East Meets West In a Dying Steel Town
LEAD: On a humid Saturday in July, police stop traffic from passing along a largely abandoned two-block portion of the main street through Braddock, Pa. (population 4,775 and falling), to allow the Japanese film maker Hiroaki Yoshida to continue shooting his first American movie, ''Iron Maze,'' in some of the town's abandoned buildings.


Horned Owl Is Rare on L.I.
LEAD: The report on the Activities of Volunteers for Wildlife (June 10) was of such good will and so helpful to our cause we hesitate to reply lest we seem ungrateful.
We would, however, like to correct a technical inaccuracy, that the great horned owl is a year-round resident on Long Island.
This species is common on Long Island.


Argentina's Glittering Trove
LEAD: Excited by stories of a mountain of silver, the colonizing Spanish in the early 16th century gave the name Rio de la Plata - River of Silver - to the great South American river system that ends at Buenos Aires.
In the Andes, along the continent's western rim, their dreams would be fulfilled.
So abundant was the supply of the glittering metal that in the 17th century, in Potosi alone - now part of Bolivia - more than 3,000 mine shafts were opened.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
KEEPING WATCH: A History of American Time.
By Michael O'Malley. (Viking, $19.95.) In tracing the ways timekeeping has evolved in the United States, Michael O'Malley quotes Lewis Mumford's claim that ''the clock, not the steam engine, is the key machine of the modern industrial age.'' There were clocks in the American colonies as early as 1638; by 1700, roughly one white adult in 50 owned a clock and one in 32 a watch.


Fresh Meals on the Spur of the Moment
LEAD: SUMMER lunches don't have to be complicated affairs.
At this time of year, even the most impromptu meals can be made memorable because there is so much good fresh produce around.


Annie R. Davis Weds Lamont R. Bailey
LEAD: Annie R. Davis, a daughter of Rena M. Davis of Brooklyn and the late John M. Davis, was married yesterday to Lamont R. Bailey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence R. Bailey of Jamaica, Queens.
The Rev.
Dr.
James C. Kelly performed the ceremony at the Bethesda Missionary Baptist Church in Jamaica.


Catching Guadeloupe's Beat
LEAD: On a trip to Guadeloupe last June, I stopped at a roadside chicken stand somewhere on the well-paved southern coastal road between Ste.-Anne and St.-Francois.
The small outdoor restaurant was empty but as the sun was setting six men came along.
One started playing a large drum.
Another responded with livelier rhythms on a smaller drum.


PRINCE CHARMING COMES BACK
LEAD: In ''Prince Charming Comes Back'' (Hers, July 15), Daphne Merkin notes that men are bewildered or angry about the movie ''Pretty Woman.'' But she doesn't bother to examine why.
We women, she writes, ''still need our myths, our amatory fictions; they help us endure.'' However, I doubt Merkin would be sympathetic to men who ''need'' to fantasize about physically beautiful, intellectually inferior, sexually submissive women to help them endure.


Campus Life: Florida A &amp; M;   Rapid Growth Outpaces Space In Dormitories
LEAD: Florida A &amp; M University is discovering that growth can bring pain along with benefits.


Optical Allusions
LEAD: THE STATE of Texas, long considered a national bellwether in the selection of elementary and secondary school textbooks, is for the first time considering computer software, videodisks and CD-ROM disks as alternatives to conventional printed textbooks in some courses.


Postings: Directory for $5;   Finding the Watchdogs
LEAD: At a time when not-for-profit housing and development groups have multiplied in New York City, it is hard to keep them straight.
Who are the Green Guerrillas and the 52 People for Progress?
How does one contact Good Old Lower East Side Inc., or the Neighborhood Action Coalition?


Deborah Segal Weds Jeffrey A. Gross
LEAD: Deborah Ann Segal, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Segal of Villanova, Pa., was married last evening at Congregation Rodeph Shalom in Philadelphia to Jeffrey Andrew Gross, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Gross of Rydal, Pa.
Rabbi Elliot J. Holin performed the ceremony.


Streetscapes: The Central Park Loch;   Taming a Wilderness to Hew to Olmsted's Concept
LEAD: Not too many people take the trouble to visit the Loch, a section of upper Central Park just north of the 102d Street Cross Drive.
It has no rowboats, no hot-dog vendors, no swings, no baseball field.


Fear Is Quality's Biggest Foe
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Now Supports Inquiry Into Causes Of Savings Scandal
LEAD: The Bush Administration has dropped its opposition to a Senate proposal that would create a bipartisan commission to study the causes of the savings and loan crisis.


Tech Notes;   NASA's New Hydrogen Ramjet
LEAD: RAMJETS don't have turbines, so they can't ''breathe'' and can't carry a plane aloft.
But once in flight, these simple jets ''ram'' air into their engine compartments, where it is mixed with fuel and burned.
At high speeds, ramjets are lighter and more efficient than conventional jet-turbine engines.


Ousted K.G.B. General Running for Parliament
LEAD: In the seven weeks since he went public with allegations of K.G.B. abuses, Oleg D. Kalugin has been officially denounced, stripped of his major general's rank and pension and charged with the crime of disclosing state secrets.


You Can't Eat a Painting
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: As far as any bridge historian can remember, there has never been a tie in the final of a National Knockout Team Championship.
Never, that is, until two weeks ago in the Grand National in Boston.
The event began at grass-roots level nine months earlier and was down to two teams.
At stake was a major title and the right to compete in playoffs to determine the United States representatives in the World


THE GUIDE
LEAD:
BOOK OF KELLS


Mutual Funds;   Adding the Bells and Whistles


Murphy Starts Over
LEAD: After spending his entire 13-year career with the Atlanta Braves, Dale Murphy is going to have to learn a new city and familiarize himself with a new team.
The 34-year-old slugger was traded to the Philadelphia Philies on Friday night for a relief pitcher, Jeff Parrett, and two players to be named.


No, the Louvre Wasn't Broke, But Fixing It Is a Fine Idea
LEAD: It would be difficult to pass through the center of Paris today and not realize that the Louvre is being taken apart, rethought and put together again.
Imminent ever since I. M. Pei's designs for the new pyramidal entrance to the museum were revealed some years ago to a chorus of execration, the radical rereading of the Louvre and its collections is going forward in readiness for completion in 1995.


Miss Walsh Wed To J.P. Siebecker
LEAD: Patricia Ann Walsh, a daughter of Drs.
Robert J. and Wanda S. Walsh of White Plains, was married yesterday to Joseph Paul Siebecker, a son of Marie Siebecker of Brooklyn and the late Joseph B. Siebecker.
The Rev.
Robert A. Ferro officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of Sorrows in White Plains.


All About/Phone Cards;   The Latest Front In a Long-Distance Telephone War
LEAD: TELEPHONE calling cards were long the industry's doormats - useful, but taken for granted.
Now the largest long-distance companies are giving them mantelpiece display.
These thin plastic rectangles for charging calls, with 10-digit numbers and magnetic strips, have become favored weapons in the battle for the nation's $52 billion long-distance market.


Making A Killer
LEAD: Iraq's capture of Kuwait is, of course, a declaration of war against Western power and economic independence.


Off and Playing at Saratoga
LEAD: This is the Philadelphia Orchestra's 25th anniversary season at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center, but the original plan was for something different.
In the early 1960's, when a group of upstate New Yorkers started talking about a performance facility on the grounds of the new Saratoga Spa State Park, the idea was to create a summer home for the New York


HOW SHOULD PGA TOUR RE-EVALUATE SITE RULES?
LEAD: The uproar over the P.G.A.
Championship tournament is justified only to the point that most prestige golf clubs are restricted.
Perhaps the Shoal Creek affair will lead to quiet work toward more progressive policies at clubs nationwide, which would also ensure that site selection for all tournaments would be completely nonpolitical.


Far Fig Newton
LEAD: The German words that made their way into English once conveyed philosophy and romance, like Zeitgeist for spirit of the era, and Weltschmerz for melancholy over the state of the world.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
China Installs Travel Phones For Complaints
BEIJING


What's Being Sold Here?
LEAD:
LOVE FOR SALE
The Words and Pictures of Barbara Kruger.
By Kate Linker.
Illustrated. 96 pp. New York:
Harry N. Abrams. $29.95.


Anne McGeown Weds C.J. Rethmeyer
LEAD: Anne Marie McGeown, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John R. McGeown of Montclair, N.J., was married there yesterday to Craig Joseph Rethmeyer, the son of Madeleine Rethmeyer of Novato, Calif., and Dr.
Curtis Rethmeyer of Manhattan Beach, Calif.
The Rev.
William J. Dowd officiated at the Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic


Junk Mail's Top Dogs
LEAD: Bill Jayme stands on his hilltop patio before his sun-drenched house, his swimming pool, his verdant five acres overlooking the vineyards of Sonoma, Calif.
Smiling proudly, if ironically, he says: ''Everything you see was paid for by Dear Reader.''


Campaign Surgery;   Bills in Congress to Tighten Spending May Be an Attempt to Impress Voters
LEAD: After rancorous debate and mostly party-line votes, the House and the Senate have each pased campaign finance bills, the first major effort since Watergate to limit spending and regulate contributions.


The Operative Word in America: Deficit
LEAD: CONGRESS is packing itself off for an August vacation, leaving untouched the nasty business of cutting enough spending and raising enough taxes to squeeze $50 billion out of the ever-swelling budget deficit.


Keeping Score
LEAD: To follow developments in the management of the Metropolitan Opera, it might help to have a libretto.
Directors of the Met, which has been without a chief administrator since Hugh Southern was forced out as general manager in June, last week named John Volpe to the job.
Sort of.
Mr.
Volpe, who arrived 26 years ago as an assistant carpenter, will be the Met's chief administrator, but he will be called general director instead of general manager and will have less power than his predecessors.


Andrea Whitton Marries on L.I.
LEAD: Andrea Stewart Whitton and Peter Schoellkopf were married yesterday at the Vanderbilt Mansion in Oakdale, L.I., by the Rev.
John Fordan, a Unitarian minister.
Mrs.
Schoellkopf is a daughter of Jayne Simonson Whitton of Macungie, Pa., and Henry G. Whitton of Little Orchid Isle in Vero Beach, Fla.
Her husband is a son of Mr.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
MONKEY BAY, by Elaine Ford. (Penguin, $7.95.) In a dreary little town on the coast of Maine, Hannah Pratt decides to take revenge for her desolate childhood by seducing her mother's boyfriend.
Last year our reviewer, Howard Frank Mosher, said this is ''a realistic, often unexpectedly funny and invariably well-written novel.


Lillian C. Gustilo Marries
LEAD: Lillian C. Gustilo and Roderick M. Hamar were married yesterday at the Good Shepherd Roman Catholic Church in Golden Valley, Minn., by the Rev.
Theodore C. Campbell.
The couple, both 26 years old, graduated from Brown University.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a law student at the University of Minnesota.


Fitting the Word To the Deed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wholesale and Retail Prices For Gasoline Climb Swiftly
LEAD: The first message transmitted by major oil companies to Vera Haskins's fax machine came Thursday, less than 24 hours after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait: Gasoline prices would immediately increase by 3.5 cents to 8.5 cents a gallon.


Trouble on Hemlock Street
LEAD:
SEVENTH HEAVEN
By Alice Hoffman.
256 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


FLUTIE AND GASTINEAU: HANGING ON IN CANADA
LEAD: The helmet has ''BC'' inscribed on it, and Doug Flutie does not flinch at the coincidence: He was once the darling of an entire nation playing for another B.C.


Iran Reported Ready to Restore British Ties
LEAD: President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran said today that his Government was willing to restore diplomatic relations with Britain, which Iran severed in March 1989 as a result of its anger over the novel ''The Satanic Verses,'' Iranian news organizations reported.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday with an article about accounting standards for nonprofit corporations misidentified an official of the National Charities Information Bureau Inc.
He is Ken Albrecht, president of the bureau, not Daniel Borochoff, an analyst.


Bonn Moves to Buy the East, Before the Bill Arrives
LEAD: AS Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany and Prime Minister Lothar de Maiziere of East Germany have been playing it, unification is like one of those ''Lost Our Lease - Everything Must Go'' sales, in which the store never closes but just keeps doing business under another name.


Sham Tradition For Old-Timers
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: A Portentious Pet


Tax Plan Sticks New Yorkers With Bailout Tab;   Blow to Homeowners
LEAD: To the Editor:


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD: East Islip
$232,000
150 Dock Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; 2 fireplaces, porch, basement, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Elmont
$143,000
104 Kingston Street
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 43- year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, patio; taxes $2,800.


A Cup of Coffee, An Idea on Recycling
LEAD: So William R. Healey burned his hand on a paper coffee cup while trying to transport his beverage, his briefcase and his laptop computer in a crowded elevator to his office in Trenton (''Yes, Plastic Can Be Recycled,'' Opinion page, July 8).


Flashcards
LEAD: OVER half the public radio stations in the United States - 200 in all - are operated by universities, as are 92 public television stations.
The first public radio station began broadcasting from the University of Wisconsin more than 70 years ago.
Radio stations were developed by universities, usually by their engineering departments, as a teaching tool.


Profit Centers
LEAD: SUMMER is the relative calm before students storm their local educational institutions, be those institutions public or private, geared to youngsters or adults.


Campus Life: U.C., Irvine;   Leading Students From High Schools Confront Issues
LEAD: On the theory that leaders are born but also must be encouraged, the University of California at Irvine has been asking 50 top high school students from around southern California to wrestle with the social issues of their day - the environment, human rights, drugs and poverty.


Style Makers;   Denise Wallace. Jewelry Designer


Sandinistas Accused as Burial Sites Are Unearthed
LEAD: For years, Justina Cardenas Gomez has known what happened to her brothers when they disappeared here in 1983.
But she guarded the secret for fear of meeting the same fate.


Fresh Meals on the Spur of the Moment
LEAD: SUMMER lunches don't have to be complicated affairs.
At this time of year, even the most impromptu meals can be made memorable because there is so much good fresh produce around.


Man, 19, Admits Role In Drug-Related Death
LEAD: A 19-year-old Morristown man has pleaded guilty to causing the death of a female friend by supplying her with drugs.


Hambletonian to Harmonious
LEAD: Last year, the dead heat in the Hambletonian between Park Avenue Joe, who is owned by Lou Guida, and Probe, who is owned by Frank Antonacci, resulted in a lawsuit to determine just whose horse should have come home with the winner's purse.


Data Update
LEAD:
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
June 90
May 90
June 89
Nation
$97,500
$95,600
$93,500
Northeast
148,500
141,300
149,700
Midwest
76,200
73,500
72,000
South
87,500
85,100
85,100
West
135,400
141,800
135,000
*4*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


For 30 Years, a Manager Travels the Back Roads of Baseball
LEAD: AS he has been doing for more than three decades, Dick Caswell is unloading a bat bag, baseballs, batting helmets and other equipment from the trunk of his car, this time near Cubeta Stadium in Stamford, where the New Rochelle Robins are scheduled to play the Stamford Athletics in a Stamford Twilight


What's Being Sold Here?
LEAD: In 1987, several years after AIDS was acknowledged as having reached epidemic proportions, countless little stickers, no bigger than a 50-cent piece, featuring a pink triangle on a black field emblazoned with the words ''SILENCE - DEATH'' appeared everywhere in New York City, posted wherever the eye might fall - on telephones, lampposts, mailboxes and highway toll machines.


Litchfield Gets a Stylish, Modern Grill
LEAD: ONE of the smartest-looking modern restaurants to open recently is in Litchfield, a town that prides itself on its 18th-century appearance.


Steinbrenner Would Qyit U.S.O.C.
LEAD: George Steinbrenner, addressing his Olympic position publicly for the first time, said he would resign as a vice president of the United States Olympic Committee if committee leaders thought it was appropriate because of his banishment from the daily operations of the Yankees.


A Stand-Up Genius
LEAD:
BOONE
By Brooks Hansen and Nick Davis.
394 pp. New York:
Summit Books. $19.95.


Ettore Maserati, 96, Race Car Producer
LEAD: Ettore Maserati, a founder and guiding force of the Maserati racing-car company, died today, the ANSA news agency reported.
He was 96 years old.


HOW SHOULD PGA TOUR RE-EVALUATE SITE RULES?
LEAD: The PGA Tour should hold more events on public courses.
Such courses have no ''membership policies'' other than the fact that some provide greens-fee discounts for local residents.


To Make Your Dreams Come True, Try a Little Hockey
LEAD: WISH upon a star.
Wish upon a hockey puck.
Dreams come true on Long Island no matter what the stimulus.
Take the recent feat of Mike Galligan of Floral Park.


With Wear and Tear, Habitat Has Become a Home
LEAD: Montreal has several outstanding buildings - new and old - but unlike any other Canadian city, it also contains at least one work that has become known internationally and whose place in the history of architecture is assured.
I am referring to Habitat, which was designed by Moshe Safdie and built as part of Expo, the world's fair that the city was host to in 1967.


Amazon City With a Taste Of Wood Fire
LEAD: Breaking the barbed-wire and cow-pasture monotony of the Belem-Brasilia highway, a large orange sign here proclaims, ''Welcome to Paragominas.'' The sponsor is Stihl, a maker of chain saws.


Technology;   Lining Up for Potential Gene Therapy Profits
LEAD: LAST week, after years of debate about the scientific and ethical dimensions of inserting new genes directly into humans, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health approved gene therapy techniques to treat certain types of immune disorders and a lethal form of skin cancer.


Northeast Notebook: Augusta, Me.;   A Deal to Save A Wilderness
LEAD: In the largest single conservation deal in its history, the State of Maine has agreed to pay $13.2 million for 40,000 acres of wilderness.


Christine G. Bona Wed To Robert E. Cabana
LEAD: Christine G. Bona, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick E. Bona of Boonton Township, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert E. Cabana, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Cabana of Boonton Township.
Msgr.
John R. Ryan performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Magnificat Roman Catholic Church in Kinnelon, N


Jessica G. Bullard Is Wed in Jersey
LEAD: Jessica Gould Bullard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Bullard of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Kevin Paul Lee, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth K. Lee of Seoul, South Korea, and Manassas, Va.
The Rev.
Gregory W. Schmidt, a minister of the United Church of Christ, officiated at the Community Congregational Church in Short


Ms. Tolson Wed To Charles Rivkin
LEAD: Susan Melissa Tolson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Edward Tolson of Rockville, Md., was married yesterday to Charles Hammerman Rivkin, a son of Mrs.
John S. Long of Chicago and the late Ambassador William R. Rivkin.
The Rev.
Frederick R. Bloom, a Roman Catholic priest, and Cantor Arie Eisner officiated at St.


Fashion;   LEGS!
LEAD: It's not that leggy fashions are exactly new - after all, the short skirt has been around so long that it's almost ancient.
But when some of this season's new bodysuits start showing up, watch out!
With a skintight fit and wild patterns in bold colors, they are bound to start leg legends anew.
The eye-boggling bodysuit, or cat suit as it is sometimes called, is a style trend that has been taken up by designers and comes in every price range.


Race, Ethnicity and the Privileged
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Brown Wed To Mark Siceloff
LEAD: Suzanne Brown, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip J. Brown Jr. of London, was married yesterday in Basking Ridge, N.J., to Mark Jeffrey Siceloff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren J. Siceloff of Basking Ridge.
Msgr.
William J. Capik officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
James.


He Lives to Eat
LEAD:
RESERVATIONS RECOMMENDED
By Eric Kraft.
277 pp. New York: Crown Publishers. $18.95.


Show Time
LEAD: This may be the baseball season, but California fans who haven't forgot basketball will get a chance tonight to see some top National Basketball Association stars in action.
The event is the fifth annual Magic Johnson all-star game at the Forum in Inglewood, Calif.


Making Someone Else's House Your Home
LEAD: LAST year, William F. and Ann Powers of Setauket, L.I., and their teen-age daughter spent July in a home in Brittany, while the owners of the French house stayed in the Powers home in Setauket.
The families also exchanged autos.
Despite some anxiety about the friendliness of their French neighbors, the Powerses were delighted with the experience: a month's lodging in


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: When Chinon introduced the original Genesis two years ago, it touted its hybrid camera as the ultimate picture-taking machine.
It had zoom lens, automatic focusing and exposure settings, built-in flash and high-tech, space-age design.


Sitcom Writing: Riches Plus Respectability
LEAD: When the writer-producer Gary David Goldberg dropped out of Brandeis University in 1964, the thought of working within the mainstream was out of the question.
Besides, he and many within his generation considered television the enemy.
If recruiters from the networks had come to the campus, Mr.
Goldberg now says, ''there would have been derision and boycotting, maybe shots fired.


Karen Kaufman Weds D. L. Becker
LEAD: Karen Lee Kaufman, a nurse practitioner at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, and Donald Lee Becker, a lawyer in Belmont, Mass., were married yesterday at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Belmont by the Rev.
Martha H. Giltinan.
Mrs.
Becker is a daughter of Mrs.
Leonard Kaufman of Rochester and the late Mr.


Because of Kessel, High Electric Cost
LEAD: What Mr.
Kessel didn't say in the article on Lilco (June 24) is that because of the shutdown of Shoreham, Long Island consumers will have the highest cost electricity in the United States.
The installation of new gas turbine plants possibly may produce electricity at lower cost than Shoreham but only because the price of oil has fallen from $30 a barrel in the 70's.


Hosteling Through Europe
LEAD: Hosteling is a frame of mind, an alternative psychology of travel.
As a hosteler you carry your house on your back: your bedroom is a soft white envelope of top sheet, bottom sheet and pillowcase sewn together and called a sheet sleeping sack; your kitchen is a water bottle, a blue enamel cup, a cheap stainless steel spoon and a Swiss army knife; your bathroom is a toiletries bag and a towel; your desk a notebook and several foreign stamps.


Schenectady Fire Kills 5 Tenants
LEAD: Five people were killed last night as fire roared through a rooming house in Schenectady, N.Y..
It was the worst fire in the city in at least 25 years.


P.G.A. MUST GO BEYOND TOKEN CHANGE
LEAD: Once again racism has met its match: money.


Lifestyle;   Portable Shade Is Big on the Beach
LEAD: The days when the ''Doonesbury'' comic strip lampooned tanning contests with day-to-day coverage of the ''George Hamilton Pro-Am Celebrity Cocoa Butter Open'' seem to be over.
So are the days of ''Let the Sunshine In,'' which may or may not be why some beaches now look like variegated mushroom fields of umbrellas.


Fashion;   Jackets That Stretch From Summer's End Into Fall
LEAD: As soon as August arrives, people start thinking about fall.
The temperature may be in the 80's or even the 90's, but the specter of September invades the mind and thoughts turn to subdued colors and more serious clothes.


The Quiz
LEAD: AMERICANS have been getting a healthy dose of lessons in civics and government lately, what with proposed constitutional amendments, suggested reforms of the Electoral College (remember the Electoral College?), attempts at taking a census and efforts to establish democracies from scratch.


Landry 6 Others, Enter Hall
LEAD: It was a cloudy, gray morning here at the Pro Football Hall of Fame, and throughout the ceremony on the steps outside the building, a downpour appeared likely.
But the rain never fell on the seven inductees and a spirited, elbow-to-elbow crowd of nearly 16,000 spectators.
And the celebration turned out to be a sparkling tribute to the diverse array of stars that increased to 155 the number honored inside with bronze busts.


Currency;   The Dollar Spirals Down
LEAD: THE dollar fell just short of its post-World War II low against the German mark last week.
Without Saddam Hussein it might have made it.
The Iraqi President's invasion of Kuwait sparked buying of the dollar, a safe haven, on Thursday and there was enough support left on Friday to offset a worrisome economic report.


Protecting Against Lightning
LEAD: LIGHTNING causes millions of dollars in home and property damage, not to mention hundreds of injuries, in the United States each year.
Fortunately, houses in heavily built-up areas where there are many tall buildings generally are at a small risk.


Business Diary: July 29-August 3
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
Iraq Marches, Kuwait Crumbles and the Markets Convulse
It's as if President Saddam Hussein of Iraq sat at a trading desk, with enough capital to suddenly, violently dump yen, unload Treasury bonds, buy oil, bid up the dollar, hoard gold, invest in Norwegian and Australian commodity stocks and sell shares almost everywhere else.


Martine Balandraux to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Georges Balandraux of Paris have made known the September wedding plans of their daughter, Dr.
Martine Balandraux, and Dr.
David M. Bernstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira Bernstein of Fairfield, Conn.
Dr.
Balandraux, the chief of the hematology clinic at Beaujon Hospital in Paris, received an M.D.


Health Facility Must Oppose Smoking
LEAD: The article on hospitals struggling with a ban on smoking (July 15) cited the state requirements for clearcut smoking policies as a moving force in implementing such an action.


Karen Petty Wed To David F. Hold
LEAD: Karen Elizabeth Petty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Petty Jr. of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to David F. Hold, a son of Florence G. Hold of New York and Frederick W. Hold of Vancouver, Wash.
Dr.
Robert M. Norris, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in St.


Food;   Oh Sweet Poison!
LEAD: The first culinary reference to the tomato, as far as I know, is to its use by the Aztecs as an accompaniment, along with squash blossoms and peppers, to their cannibal feasts - a detail observed by one of Cortes's companions and reported by the anthropologist Marvin Harris in his book ''Cannibals and Kings.


Men and Women On the Golf Course
LEAD: When Skip Ungar wrote in his recent letter to the New Jersey editor that women golfers could join him on the golf course on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays on an equal basis - assuming they have no objection to eliminating the ladies' tees - he revealed as much about his lack of knowledge of modern-day golf as he did about his patronizing attitude.


Flashcard
LEAD: AT LEAST a third of the undergraduates surveyed last year said they had been victims of a crime since their college enrollment.
The survey, conducted by the Center for the Study and Prevention of Campus Violence, at Towson State University in Baltimore, involved 1,850 students at colleges nationwide.


Future Schlock
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tax Plan Sticks New Yorkers With Bailout Tab;   Our Spending Problem
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stephen King Stories Adapted for the Stage
LEAD: A GOOD Stephen King yarn, aficionados of the wildly successful and prolific writer say, can be scary, funny and moving, psychically probing, even meaningful beyond mere menace.


A Hard Look at Waterborne Traffic Control
LEAD: UNLIKE planes in crowded skies, ships in crowded harbors and channels are not required to have guardian controllers sitting at all-seeing radar screens and, via radio, keeping everybody out of each other's way.
The Coast Guard does have a control system of sorts, but its weaknesses were underscored last week both by Congressional hearings on the port traffic control needs of Alaska and New York and by a collision in the busy shipping channel between Houston and the Galveston


Surgery for Reardon
LEAD: The operation took only a little more than two hours, and the patient will be staying in the hospital only a few days, but by the time Jeff Reardon is able to pitch again the 1990 season will be history.


The Maestro on Himself
LEAD:
CONVERSATIONS WITH VON KARAJAN
By Richard Osborne.
Illustrated. 157 pp. New York:
A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/
HarperCollins. $22.50.


A Disclaimer To Howls of Success
LEAD: What a coincidence when I found that informative article about New York City chefs on Long Island (July 15).


Bronze Treasures From Indonesia
LEAD: Indonesia's robust bronze tribal artifacts made before the 8th century help to explain the earthiness seen in later objects of the Hindu-Buddhist period, which dominates the exhibition ''The Sculpture of Indonesia,'' at the National Gallery of Art here.
At the entrance to the show, organized by the museum to cover artifacts from the fifth to 15th centuries, is a selection of these ancient bronzes: a haunting figure of a man, an elephant-shaped vessel, a flask and a ceremonial ax, works virtually unknown until now in the


Judging Shearson's Chairman by His Book Covers
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Chopin: 24 Mazurkas
Charles Rosen, piano. Globe CD GLO 5028. CD only.
Chopin composed more than 50 mazurkas.
On this disk Charles Rosen presents a cross-section from the very earliest to the last.
The mazurkas are amazing works in which Chopin far transcends superficial nationalism.


Political Memo;   The Art Of Politics Goes Abstract
LEAD: CONNECTICUT gubernatorial races have generally been pretty straightforward affairs: two parties, two candidates; no muss, no fuss.
Each side lined up, snarled a bit and retired to the voting booths, where Democrats usually voted Democratic, and Republicans lost.


17th Family Folk Festival May Be Finale
LEAD: FOR 16 summers, the Connecticut Family Folk Festival has brought a wide variety of traditional and contemporary music to Elizabeth Park in Hartford, but the announcement of the annual conclave next weekend comes with a disturbing footnote. ''Given the present funding climate,'' says the festival's artistic director, Susan Garber, ''it seems likely that this 17th annual festival will also be the last one.


Stories My Parents Told Me, From the Horror of Hiroshima
LEAD: HIROSHIMA today is a very beautiful city, but 45 years ago it was in ashes.
I was born there in 1947, and this is the story my parents often told me when I was a child.


Liberian Rebel Says He'll Arrest Foreigners to Stir World Attention
LEAD: A rebel leader, Prince Johnson, said today that he was ordering the arrest of all foreigners in Monrovia to provoke international intervention in the nation's war.


Review/Music;   Blending The Exotic And Familiar
LEAD: One of the discomforts of monitoring new American composition is having to watch young composers steeped in the lore of Third Avenue or the Bronx as they escape into Buddist chant, Tibetan prayers or the everyday musical obeisances of Islam.
There is romance in these flights of fancy, but the flight too often is from what one really knows and understands.


Campus Life: Georgetown;   Neighbors Fight Student Housing Off Campus
LEAD: With their cobblestone streets and 18th-century brick town houses, the neighborhoods surrounding Georgetown University are a source of pride for residents.
But many residents contend that the drunken behavior of students living off campus are creating slumlike conditions.


Campus Life: Wisconsin;   The 'Seniors' at Summer Session Are of the Gray Variety
LEAD: Many students at the University of Wisconsin have been surprised by the age of hundreds of their classmates at this year's summer session.
These classmates are retirees, mostly from Florida, whose ages range from the early 60's to the early 80's.


Fiat's Thrust Into Eastern Europe
LEAD: FRANCESCO GALLO, director of international operations for the Fiat Group, had the proud and worried look of an expectant father as he paced through the half-finished $1.3 billion assembly plant that Fiat is helping build here amid southern Poland's fields of hay and corn.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Metuchen
LEAD: What is now the tiny Borough of Metuchen grew up as a way station serving coaches carrying passengers from New York City to Perth Amboy, New Brunswick, Newark and Trenton.
Today, it is a commuter paradise, straddling Route 27 and within three miles of Route 1, Interstate 287, the Garden State Parkway and the New Jersey Turnpike.


House Grows Edgy as Elections Near
LEAD: The House of Representatives is heading into an election season with anxiety growing, as polls show the voters in an angry mood, the savings and loan issue gathers steam and the stalemate over the budget injects a powerful uncertainty into the fall campaign.


Trinidad Puzzles Over Cause of the Uprising
LEAD: The chief preoccupations in this English-speaking nation of 1.3 million people are calypso, cricket and soccer.
So the attempted coup against the Government, and the violence it spawned before its peaceful denouement on Wednesday, struck many Trinidadians as something alien.


Comic Relief for Engineers
LEAD: IN AN effort to attract minority children to science and engineering, the National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering Inc. has recruited an unlikely hero: the Amazing Spider-Man.


The Invasion: Prices and Assessments
LEAD: Gasoline prices have jumped between 4 cents and 14 cents across the country since the invasion.
Page 13.


My Teacher, My Self
LEAD: I WAS raised in a Philadelphia ghetto.
My parents were divorced; my father, an electrician, was black, my mother Japanese - a stranger in a strange culture who never did learn how to work the system.


Caring for Children, Men Find New Assumptions and Rules
LEAD: At a time when there is pressure on men to be more caring and demonstrative to children, more and more men and organizations are worrying that casual physical contact with children may create the impression of sexual misconduct.


Cultural Imperatives
LEAD: SUMMER is the relative calm before students storm their local educational institutions, be those institutions public or private, geared to youngsters or adults.


U.S. Is Seeking to Forestall Any Arab Deal for Kuwait
LEAD: Having joined with Moscow and the Western allies in a solid front of opposition to Iraq, Administration officials said today that the United States was now trying to make certain that the Arab states would not undercut efforts to force a total Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait.


San Francisco Limps In Repair of Damage Months After Quake
LEAD: Bent but not broken, the flagpole atop the Ferry Building was a powerful symbol of San Francisco's durability, its tensile strength, in the days after last October's earthquake.


I Hear You, I Hear You
LEAD:
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND
Women and Men in Conversation.
By Deborah Tannen.
330 pp. New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


Oil Spilled From 2 Barges Reaches Marshes in Texas
LEAD: Oil oozed into marshes on the north shore of Galveston Bay today, but fishing resumed in parts of the bay, where more than 500,000 gallons of oil spilled from a damaged barge a week ago.


Study Backs DNA Testing for Investigations
LEAD: Genetic tests used to identify suspects in criminal cases are valid and reliable when properly performed, but strict standards must be set to assure confidence in the method, according to a Congressional study released today.


The Sounds of Brazil: More Than Lambada
LEAD: It's now clear that outside Brazil, lambada is a new French word for hype.
But before the would-be international dance craze fizzled on its way from Paris, American record companies prepared a wave of new releases from Brazil.


Lolly Jewett Wed to Abner Oakes 4th
LEAD: Laura Jewett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Jewett of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Abner Oakes 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Oakes 3d of Hamden, Conn.
The Rev.
John Livingston, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony.
The bride, who is 28 years old and is known as Lolly, is keeping her name.


Kuwaiti Washington Embassy Embattled Too
LEAD: The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait has thrown Kuwait's embassy here into turmoil and left Ambassador Saud Nasir al-Sabah in the diplomatically precarious role of representing the exile government of an occupied country.


Kelly Stars as Yanks Beat Indians, 5-3
LEAD: If there are those among the Yankees who miss Deion Sanders, Roberto Kelly isn't one of them.
Not that Kelly disliked Sanders, the flamboyant football player and erstwhile baseball player; it's just that with Sanders gone, Kelly is the Yankees' center fielder again and Kelly likes being the Yankees' center fielder.


The Editorial Notebook;   Thailand, the Next Tiger
LEAD: Economic development in Thailand is as visible as Bangkok's polluted air or the buildings that seem to spring up overnight.
Less obvious but just as important is its political development, a steady consolidation of democratic institutions to match the economic gains.
And there is an increasing sophistication and self-confidence in


Dismal Tidings As Mets Fall, 8-3
LEAD: Not necessarily in this order, the Mets lost several things of value today in Busch Stadium: They lost their second straight game to Joe Torre's St.
Louis Cardinals, 8-3; they lost a chance to go one-up in first place on the Pittsburgh Pirates, and they lost some confidence in Sid Fernandez, who lost his second straight.


Lawmaker's Role at 3 S.&amp; L.'s Divides the House
LEAD: Three years ago, American Federal Savings and Loan Association was in deep financial trouble, and Federal regulators were threatening to seize it.
To minimize the cost to taxpayers, the regulators proposed merging the institution with a more solvent Oregon savings and loan.


Review/Television;   Aftermath of the Hiroshima Bomb
LEAD: The power of ''Hiroshima: Out of the Ashes,'' tonight's drama at 9 on NBC about the dropping of the first atomic bomb, is generated as much by what the viewer brings to it as by the events on screen.
Not only do we anticipate the cataclysm of Aug. 6, 1945, for the people whom we see going about their daily lives on Aug.


F.B.I. Report Confirms Sharp Rise in Violent Crime
LEAD: Affirming reports of record levels of violent crimes in many cities, the Federal Bureau of Investigation says the rates for murder, robbery and aggravated assault have risen sharply since 1985.


Triathletes Discover Variety of Rewards
LEAD: THE path to running a triathlon is paved with tales of renewal and reward as recreational athletes discover the value of cross training and pursue peak performance in a wider spectrum of sports.


Man Accused of Stealing 25 Cabs
LEAD: A Queens man has been charged with stealing 25 medallion taxis during the last month and using them to pick up fares to support his crack habit, the police said.


Differing Views Emerge on Success
LEAD: The degree to which the Goodwill Games, which ended yesterday, succeeded as an international sports event is a judgment that depends largely upon who is measuring.


Review/Festival Latino;   Miserable in the Promised Land
LEAD: In ''?De Donde?,'' Mary Gallagher has written an intelligent and instructive play about the illegal immigration of refugees to the United States from Central America.


Vietnam's Allies Faltering in Cambodia
LEAD: The new American policy on Cambodia has been warmly welcomed here, but it does not alter a domestic situation that, 11 months after the withdrawal of most Vietnamese troops, is slowly deteriorating.


Moscow Inches Closer to Applying for I.M.F. Membership
LEAD: After years of hostility, the Soviet Union has given the first clear signal that it wants to join the $120 billion International Monetary Fund, and officials both here and in Moscow say it may not be long before the Soviet Union formally asks to join.


Ellen Raskin Wed To D. E. Holzberg
LEAD: Ellen Raskin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel M. Raskin of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to David Elliot Holzberg, a son of Ernest Holzberg of Larchmont, N.Y. and the late Rose Holzberg.
Rabbi Alex J. Goldman and Cantor Sidney G. Rabinowitz officiated at Temple Beth El in Stamford.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Hayes's 2-Run Shot Stops Pirates, 8-6
LEAD: A two-run home run by Von Hayes broke a sixth-inning tie today and sent the Philadelphia Phillies past the Pittsburgh Pirates, 8-6.


Ms. Reich Marries Michael H. Pilson
LEAD: Rebecca Elizabeth Reich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Reich of Scotch Plains, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Harris Pilson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neal H. Pilson of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Bernard H. Rosenberg performed the ceremony at Grand Marquis Catering in Old Bridge, N.J.


People
LEAD: *
Chris Amato has been named vice president and senior art director at Cadwell Davis Partners.
The agency also named Julie Treacy as vice president and management supervisor.


Not Much New Supply In North Sea
LEAD: Oil-consuming nations in need of supplies to replace oil from Iraq and Kuwait will not find much help in the North Sea, which last year accounted for 5.4 percent of world production, oil companies say.


Iraqi Official Urges Turkey Not to Shut Oil Pipeline
LEAD: Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister reportedly urged Turkey today not to take retaliatory action against Baghdad for the invasion of Kuwait.
Officials here said he was told that there were no such plans at this time.


Vermont Justices Say Indians May Fish Without Licenses
LEAD: The Vermont Supreme Court has let stand a lower court ruling that the Abenaki Indians of northwestern Vermont have a right to fish in their ancestral homeland without licenses.


A Region Feels the Pinch and Slap In Washington's Talk of Farm Cuts
LEAD: This part of Mississippi's Delta region, in many respects a throwback to the Old South and its vast plantations, will be among the first to be pinched if Washington enacts provisions of farm law just approved by the House of Representatives.


Streets of Sanctuary Now Harbor Criminals
LEAD: Oliver August Jones does not live in the West Village.
But he works there - looking for victims.


Nelva M. Weber, 81, Landscape Architect
LEAD: Nelva M. Weber Sammataro, a landscape architect and columnist in New York and Connecticut, died on Tuesday at the Rose Haven nursing home in Litchfield, Conn.
She was 81 years old and lived in Litchfield and Manhattan.


R. J. Geller Weds Emiko Kakiuchi
LEAD: Emiko Kakiuchi, a senior researcher for the Japanese Ministry of Education, and Robert James Geller, a professor of geophysics at Tokyo University, were married yesterday in a civil ceremony in Tokyo.


Mortimer Blumenthal, Psychiatrist, Dies at 68
LEAD: Dr.
Mortimer Jacob Blumenthal, a New York City psychiatrist and child psychoanalyst, died Saturday at his home.
He was 68 years old and lived and practiced on the Upper East Side.


Khmer Rouge Poised to Gain From U.S. Policy;   Impossible Compromise
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gulf Premium Added by Lloyd's
LEAD: In reaction to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, marine underwriters in the Lloyd's of London insurance market have added a premium for ships traveling in the Persian Gulf.


Boris H. Klosson, 69, Expert on Soviet Union
LEAD: Boris Hansen Klosson, a retired foreign service officer specializing in Soviet and Eastern European affairs, died Friday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 71 years old and lived in Chevy Chase.


Buffalo's Economic Revival Owes Much to Albany Investment;   Cultural Resources
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mercer Defeats Cooper In 12
LEAD: Ray Mercer, the International Boxing Federation's intercontinental heavyweight champion, pounded out a 12-round unanimous decision over Bert Cooper at Caesars here today.


White Sox Sweep Brewers
LEAD: Jack McDowell pitched a five-hitter and Lance Johnson drove in three runs today to lead the Chicago White Sox past the Milwaukee Brewers, 6-1, for a sweep of the teams' five-game series.


Identity Crisis for 'Seven Sisters'
LEAD: In magazines as in life, being known as someone's sister can be a badge of pride - or a real drag.


Possible Bid For Greyhound
LEAD: The Blackstone Group, a New York investment firm, is considering trying to buy Greyhound Lines Inc. in a deal to end the six-month drivers' strike, a partner in the firm, Richard Ravitch, said Friday.
Greyhound, which runs


Marla Altman Weds Peter N. Marron
LEAD: Marla Susan Altman, the daughter of Jodee K. Greenberg of Great Neck, L.I. and Dr.
Joseph Altman of Springfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Nathan Marron, a son of Sarah Marron of Brooklyn and the late Samuel Marron.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman, assisted by Cantor Benjamin Siegel, performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New


American Dream of the 90's: My Child the Tennis Champ
LEAD: Five years ago, Russ and Maggie Miller left their home in southern New Jersey to follow their second-grader, Karin, to the prestigious Nick Bollettieri Tennis Academy in Bradenton, Fla., a tennis think tank that has produced such teen-age luminaries as Andre Agassi, Monica Seles, Aaron Krickstein, Jimmy Arias and Carling


Tobacco Free And Up to Snuff
LEAD: A BULGE in the jaw.
A gob of brown chaw.
Where would baseball be without smokeless tobacco?
A lot healthier, says the American Medical Association and the Surgeon General.


Advisory Council Rejects Restriction on Arts Endowment's Grants
LEAD: The advisory council to the National Endowment for the Arts today refused to bar support for any project that ''advocates or promotes a particular political, ideological, religious or partisan point of view.''


Managers Value Money
LEAD: A new survey indicates that managers, who once listed job security as their top priority, now value money more highly.
Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas Inc., a Chicago-based job-placement company, said a survey of 600 managers discharged from Fortune 1,000 companies found job security now ranks second in their hearts to the size of their paycheck.


Tokyo Stocks Plunge Again As Mideast Tensions Grow


Praise for Seaver From Some Yanks
LEAD: Yankee players and coaches reacted positively yesterday to the prospect of Tom Seaver being appointed the team's general manager.
There was no word, however, from management of any move to hire Seaver, currently a WPIX television announcer for the Yankees.


Study Says U.S. Needs to Attack Infant Mortality
LEAD: A high-level Bush Administration study calls for spending about $500 million a year more to reduce the infant mortality rate in the United States, now higher than in 19 other countries, including Singapore and East Germany.


Chronicle
LEAD: JEFF JARVIS, former managing editor of Entertainment Weekly, will become Sunday editor of The Daily News, the newspaper announced yesterday.


Audit Says Air Force Misspent Nearly $10 Million
LEAD: An internal audit has found that nearly $10 million was spent improperly to refurbish officers' clubs, golf courses and other recreation sites at several Air Force bases.


With Care, U.S. Presses Kenyans To Open Their Political Process
LEAD: A senior American official, in Kenya to patch up ruffled relations, has urged the Government to open up the political process but has been careful not to insist on multiparty democracy as the only prescription.


2d Power Failure in a Week Strikes West Side of Chicago
LEAD: An explosion and fire today at an electrical substation caused the second power outage in a week on the city's West Side, cutting off electricity to about 25,000 customers, officials said.


Shari Birnbaum Weds David Dreier
LEAD: Shari Ellen Birnbaum, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira M. Birnbaum of Wesley Hills, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Howard Dreier, the son of Judge and Mrs.
William A. Dreier of Warren, N.J.
Rabbi Gerald A. Goldman officiated at the Pearl River Hilton in Pearl River, N.Y.


Puerto Rican Ballet Makes Its Bow With a 15-Year-Old Gold Medalist
LEAD: ''Bueno, senores,'' the ballet mistress calls out.
A group of lithe, well-trained young dancers moves to the center of the studio, one of them a solemn, skinny teen-ager with an almost casual look of authority.
The Ballet Concierto de Puerto Rico has arrived, with 15-year-old Diana Perez, a gold medalist in the International Ballet Competition in Jackson, Miss., in June, for a performance tomorrow night at the Damrosch Park Band Shell, as part of the Lincoln Center Out of


Lisa Shapiro Wed To G. T. Grobstein
LEAD: Lisa Shapiro, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Shapiro of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Gregory T. Grobstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Grobstein of New York.
Rabbi Abraham Eckstein performed the ceremony at the Little Neck Jewish Center in Queens.


Several Issues in This Week's U.S. Sales
LEAD: Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, tomorrow's auction of three-year notes, Wednesday's auction of 10-year notes, and Thursday's auction of 30-year bonds and a 36-day cash management bill.


Outdoors: Salmon With Finicky Ways
LEAD: PART of the fascination, and frustration, of Atlantic salmon fishing is that everything has to be just right if angler and fish are to be connected.


Syrian Likens Invasion to Law of the Jungle
LEAD: President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, denouncing Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, was quoted today as saying Baghdad was following the law of the jungle.


President of US West Named to Chief's Post
LEAD: US West Inc., the Colorado-based telecommunications holding company, has named Richard D. McCormick as its chief executive to succeed Jack A. MacAllister.


Review/Art;   For Louise Bourgeois at 79, Honor in Her Homeland at Last
LEAD: At the age of 79, the sculptor Louise Bourgeois is finally being honored by her native France.
The site of her triumphal traveling retrospective is not Paris - the Pompidou Center turned it down - but Lyons's Musee d'Art Contemporain, which has given her all three floors of its attractively severe 17th-century building.


Metro Matters;   New York City Is No Dodge City. It's Deadlier.
LEAD: Oakley Ralph couldn't come to the telephone right away to discuss the crime rate in Dodge City, Kan., the other day because he was supervising the installation of an air conditioner in the basement of City Hall.
Mr.
Ralph is Dodge's Police Chief.


Costly Second Thoughts for Some Books
LEAD: Publishers love to talk about their successful books and the problems of rival houses.
They are more reluctant to expound on their own failures and difficulties.
And they become positively tight-lipped about their aborted books -manuscripts for which they paid a lot of money but decide not to publish.


Question Box
LEAD:
An Old Refrain
Q.
Back in 1957, when Walter O'Malley was threatening to move the Dodgers to Los Angeles, a song was recorded imploring them not to leave Brooklyn.
What was the song and who sang it?
A.
The song, ''Let's Keep the Dodgers in Brooklyn,'' published by Famous Music Corporation, was made popular by Phil Foster, a comedian from Brooklyn who viewed O'Malley's intention as no laughing matter.


RJR Bonds Drop Sharply
LEAD: Prices of some ''junk bonds'' of RJR Nabisco Inc. fell sharply on Friday as rumors swept the market that the company had completed a huge buyback of some of its bonds.


South China Floods Kill 108
LEAD: Floods caused by a typhoon have killed 108 people in China's southern coastal provinces of Guangdong and Fujian over the last week, an official report said today.
The state flood control headquarters, quoted by the official New China News Agency, said the typhoon flooded 695,000 acres of farmland in the two provinces and destroyed 25,200 houses in Guangdong.


PROXY IN KUWAIT ISSUES THREAT;   Hostage Warning
LEAD: Iraq's new proxy government in Kuwait threatened to take hostages or nationalize foreign property today in the face of international calls for sanctions in response to President Saddam Hussein's takeover of his oil-rich neighbor.


BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, AUGUST 6, 1990
LEAD:
Iraq and the Oil Market


Sports of The Times;   Morgan and Palmer in the Rain
LEAD: It was a leaky afternoon yesterday in this hamlet by the lake, just the kind of wet and gray day on which no one here would ever have considered inventing baseball.
Umbrellas, yes.
But not the national pastime.


Maurice Braddell, 89, An Actor and Writer
LEAD: Maurice Braddell, an actor, author and art restorer, died July 28 in England.
He was 89 years old.


Oil Users Pay Price; Japanese Stocks Fall
LEAD: Japan has cut off an eighth of its oil supply as it joins its allies in halting purchases from Iraq and Kuwait.
The move raises fears for Japan's economy, and stock prices fell sharply in Tokyo this morning.


Chief Honcho Wins A Slow Jim Dandy
LEAD: The Jim Dandy Stakes at Saratoga Race Track is supposed to be a prep for the richer Travers Stakes 13 days later, but none of the four colts who ran today will be back for the main event this year.
After this Jim Dandy, no one had any illusions about the quality of the quartet who contested it.


In Verification, Trust
LEAD: There are few tasks more urgent than keeping open skies open.
Allowing routine inspection of military activities is the surest way to verify compliance with arms treaties.
It also has the potential to relax hostility and transform political relations.


Chronicle
LEAD: When he was 9 years old, DR.
HENRY KAUFMAN fled Wenings, Germany, with his parents in advance of World War II.
Today he is to become an honorary citizen of the town.


Coslet Gives Jets a Break
LEAD: Bruce Coslet believes there is life even during football.
He took today off along with the Jets' coaching staff and closed the training camp.


Chronicle
LEAD: Together, they may be Britain's brainiest couple.
And together they received honorary degrees from Sussex University recently.
LADY ANTONIA FRASER was honored for her contributions to the writing of history.
Her husband, HAROLD PINTER, was honored for his contributions to the university.


On Civil Rights: No Steps Back
LEAD: House Republicans went down to defeat on the civil rights bill last week with President Bush's slogans flying. ''Quota bill!'' they declaimed. ''Lawyers' bonanza!'' But 64 percent of the House ignored their watered-down alternative and voted instead for the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1990.
It was a triumph for reasonableness as well as rights.


Trade Surplus Rises in Japan
LEAD: Japan's trade surplus in the broadest measure rose 12.2 percent in June from the period a year earlier, ending two consecutive months of decline, the Finance Ministry said Friday.


The Price of Confronting Iraq in the Oil Market;   Japanese Joining In Embargo Despite Impact on Economy
LEAD: Japan said last night that it would join its allies in halting all purchases of oil from Iraq and Kuwait, cutting off an eighth of the country's entire supply of oil.


Independence Was in the Air at Puerto Rican Parade


Loan Errors Under Study
LEAD: The Resolution Trust Corporation is checking for possible errors in adjustable-rate loans, L. William Seidman, chairman of the agency, has said in a letter to the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee.


Sharon Stern Weds David Levy on L.I.
LEAD: Sharon H. Stern, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome L. Stern of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to David B. Levy, the son of Suzanne Levy of Oceanside, L.I., and the late Daniel Levy.
Rabbi Philmore Berger performed the ceremony at Temple Gates of Zion in Valley Stream, L.I.


BUSH, HINTING FORCE, DECLARES IRAQI ASSAULT 'WILL NOT STAND'; PROXY IN KUWAIT ISSUES THREAT
LEAD: Committing the United States to roll back Iraq's conquest of Kuwait, President Bush said today that he would not settle for anything less than a total Iraqi withdrawal and would not tolerate the establishment of a puppet regime in Kuwait.


Washington Talk;   Senate's Carte Blanche Vs. Souter's Blank Slate
LEAD: Early in the century, Supreme Court Justices were confirmed as a matter of course.
Felix Frankfurter notes in his reminiscences that even he, once considered an ''execrated character'' by many lawyers because of his radicalism, was approved by the Senate without dissent.


America Is Still the Lodestar for Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baldwin Breaks Through, Winning Met
LEAD: John Baldwin today ended his streak of second-place finishes in major amateur events by capturing the Metropolitan Amateur Championship, a title he also won 23 years ago.


Pakistan to Offer Investors Incentives to Expand Tourism
LEAD: Hoping to cash in on growing numbers of tourists visiting Asia, Pakistan is about to announce a comprehensive plan to expand the tourism sector through generous incentives to private investors.


Buffalo's Economic Revival Owes Much to Albany Investment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Change on Missile Shield Is Resisted
LEAD: The Pentagon served noticed today that it would fight attempts in Congress to restructure the anti-missile program.


Ruth M. Shattuck, Town Selectman, 69
LEAD: Ruth M. Shattuck, a former member of the Board of Selectmen for Darien, Conn., died Friday at her home in Darien.
She was 69 years old.


Two Top Officers Quit At Conquest Exploration
LEAD: The Conquest Exploration Company, which recently tried to sell itself but received no acceptable bids, has announced that its two top officers have resigned and that Randal B. McDonald, former president and chief executive of Pennzoil Inc., had been named president and chief executive on an interim baisis.


2 Companies, Big and Little, Clash Over Plan on Missiles
LEAD: A proposal to convert aging nuclear missiles into cheap rockets for launching satellites has presented the Government with a difficult choice between conflicting goals: cashing in on the peace dividend and promoting American competitiveness in high-technology industries.


John F. Fanning, Newspaper Executive
LEAD: John F. Fanning, the advertising makeup manager for The New York Times, died yesterday at Centrastate Medical Center in Freehold, N.J.
He was 61 years old and lived in Howell, N.J.


Senate Approves Measures on Transit and AIDS
LEAD: In the final hours before leaving for its summer recess, the Senate gave final approval late Saturday to legislation to provide more than $4 billion over the next five years to help cities deal with AIDS and to provide money to upgrade airports, mass transit systems and Amtrak.


Hartford Paper First Up to Bat
LEAD: THE Sporting News is generally acknowledged to have been the first newspaper primarily devoted to baseball since it made its debut March 17, 1886.
But now it appears that a paper known as The Bat and Ball, published in Hartford, beat The Sporting News to the newstands by 20 years.


In Romania, Ceausescu Is Gone but His Crippling Economic Legacy Endures
LEAD: The mammoth August 23 Conglomerate, which produces locomotive and industrial engines, was Nicolae Ceausescu's pet factory, and the factory clings to part of the executed dictator's grim legacy: a near-total obliviousness to market realities.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''There are an awful lot of countries that are in total accord with what I've just said.


Neglect Found in Residences for Disabled
LEAD: Thousands of mentally ill patients and other people unable to care for themselves are being assigned by New York State authorities to live in unsanitary, dilapidated and poorly supervised adult group homes or halfway houses, inspections by a state monitoring agency have found.


Fire Destroys Homes In Oregon Mountains
LEAD: A fire driven by high winds and temperatures close to 100 degrees engulfed about 3,300 acres of parched forest, jumped a 75-foot-wide river canyon and destroyed 28 houses by this afternoon.


Seifert Makes 49ers His Own
LEAD: GEORGE SEIFERT stuck his hands into everything.
He coached his players and he coached his coaches.
He was not a good listener.
His teams won 3 games and lost 15.
He was fired. ''It was a learning experience, for sure,'' said Seifert, recalling his stint as Cornell's head coach in 1975 and 1976, a time when he possibly grew the most as a coach but was still nearly run out of town by alumni who were never in favor of his selection.


Khmer Rouge Poised to Gain From U.S. Policy;   Mementos of War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coming to a Doorknob Near You: a Bag of Ads.
LEAD: The prospect of sharp increases in most postal rates next year has breathed new life into the effort to create a nationwide private delivery network that would compete with the United States Postal Service in distributing magazines, catalogues and advertising circulars.


Don't Speak to Me of 'Vulnerable'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: Can you sell a book the length of two magazine articles?
Yes, if you are WILLIAM STYRON.
First, there was the speech, at Johns Hopkins University.
Next, there was the Vanity Fair article, in December.
Now, there is the book, ''Darkness Visible,'' to be published on Sept. 4 by Random House.


The Uses of Force
LEAD: President Bush did the right thing on Liberia over the weekend, ordering in the Marines to evacuate threatened Americans and protect the U.S.
Embassy.
He also sends a useful signal about America's willingness to use appropriate military force in defense of clear national interests.


Saints Winners at Wembley
LEAD: Britain got another taste of the National Football League today, and for the fifth year in a row, it feasted on the best and worst of the game as the New Orleans Saints opened their preseason with a 17-10 victory over the Los Angeles Raiders.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Tangled in the S.&amp; L. Web
The problems faced by an Oregon Congressman enmeshed in savings and loans illustrate the web of conflicting interests at the heart of the industry's collapse.
Page A10.
Group Homes Faulted
Thousands of mentally ill patients and other people are living in dilapidated conditions at group homes in New York, inspectors found.


Recession and Inflation Fears Rise
LEAD: The credit markets are expected to be whipsawed again this week by the powerful prospects of recession and inflation.


Mark Siegel WedTo Ms. Schiffman
LEAD: Shana Schiffman, a research assistant at the American Enterprise Institute, a policy research organization in Washington, was married yesterday to Mark Eric Siegel, a medical student at Georgetown University.
Rabbi Robert Miller officiated at the Glen Island Casino in New Rochelle, N.Y.


Developers in China Hit Hard Times
LEAD: After a five-year development binge that has dotted Beijing's perpetually hazy skyline with dozens of new office and hotel towers, the Chinese are suddenly learning that the flip side of a boom is a bust.


Dinkins to Hire 1,058 More Officers by Spring
LEAD: In the face of stiff pressure to take action against rising crime in New York City, Mayor David N. Dinkins is to announce today that he will hire 1,058 new police officers by next spring to increase foot patrols in neighborhoods, a senior mayoral aide said last night.


Why Israel May Show Its Nuclear Hand
LEAD: Soon, as a result of the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, we may know the truth about Israel's chemical, biological and - the ultimate taboo - nuclear weapons capability.


Market Place;   Small Investors Resisting Any Impulse to Sell, So Far
LEAD: The stock market was buffeted by waves of selling and sharply lower prices last week in the wake of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
But there are signs that most individual investors have not yet begun to sell.


Transcript of News Conference Remarks by Bush on Iraq Crisis
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Bush's news conference yesterday in Washington, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription service:
OPENING STATEMENT


Jill D. Suttenberg Is a Bride on L.I.
LEAD: Jill Dara Suttenberg, a management consultant in Boston, and David Matthew Altshuler, a medical student at Harvard University, were married yesterday at the Dix Hills (L.I.) Jewish Center by Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein.


Reacting To Iraq
LEAD: The Bush Administration, which was surprised by the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, now faces two daunting tasks - to force an Iraqi withdrawal and a restoration of Kuwaiti sovereignty, and to move the United States substantially toward independence from Middle Eastern oil.


Jody Lynn Meier, Student, Is Wed
LEAD: Jody Lynn Meier, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Meier of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to James David Reitzes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Reitzes of Kansas City, Mo.
Rabbi Ely E. Pilchik performed the ceremony at Mountain Ridge Country Club in West Caldwell, N.J.


German Unity Drive Mired in Politics
LEAD: In their drive to advance the date of German unity elections by seven weeks to mid-October, Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his East German partner, Prime Minister Lothar de Maiziere, have plunged this signal event in their nation's history into the cauldron of German politics.


Business and the Law;   Judicial Struggle In Asbestos Cases
LEAD: Asbestos litigation has turned into a kind of three-dimensional judicial chess game, with plaintiffs, defendants and judges all struggling among themselves.


Lynn Lorenzo Weds Michael Pollack
LEAD: Lynn R. Lorenzo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roberto Lorenzo of Penfield, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael D. Pollack, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald J. Pollack of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Melvin N. Sirner officiated at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Travel Related Services Company, New York, named Dennis J. Beckingham senior vice president and controller.


Richard S. Rheins Weds Susan Miller
LEAD: Rabbi Susan Lynn Miller, a daughter of Morris J. Miller of Clifton, N.J., and the late Beatrice R. Miller, was married yesterday to Rabbi Richard Steven Rheins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irvin C. Rheins of Indianapolis.
Rabbi Chaim Stern and Cantor Dana S. Troupp officiated at Temple Beth El of Northern Westchester in Chappaqua, N


Review/Jazz;   A Festival OPens With the Sounds of New Orleans
LEAD: Traditional New Orleans jazz sounds easy until current musicians try to re-create it.
After 60 years of evolution in which most jazz has been conceived as solos with accompaniment, the freewheeling, communal give-and-take of traditional jazz takes a lot of readjustment.
Crescent City Summit, which opened the annual Classical Jazz festival on Friday night at Alice Tully


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Meredith Corp., Des Moines, a publisher of magazines and books and an owner of radio and television stations, announced the completion of the sale of MMT Sales Inc., New York, a subsidiary that sells advertising time for 29 television stations, to MMT Acquisition Corp., a company owned by the unit's current management.


Limits on Commercials Voted in Italy
LEAD: After an unexpectedly copious amount of political bloodletting, the Italian Parliament today enacted the country's first law regulating television and press ownership and setting guidelines for broadcast commercials.


Doubleday Books Receive Editor's Personal Touch
LEAD: With the publication next month of two books bearing her name on the spine, Nan A. Talese will become the latest editor to have a personal imprint within a major publishing house.


Recycling Lifts Hope and Tests Patience
LEAD: As its landfills grow ever fuller, New York City has begun to turn to recycling.
Sharyn Cameron and her neighbors are on the frontier.


Review/City Opera;   Tito Capobianco Production Of 'Lucia di Lammermoor'
LEAD: With each new season, the New York City Opera presents audiences its familiar if enigmatic face.
This is a company difficult to define, perhaps because it has so much difficulty defining itself.


Correction
LEAD: A headline on Saturday about an unsuccessful attempt in the Senate to overturn a virtual ban on abortions at overseas military hospitals gave an incorrect vote tally in some copies.


Overflowing Church Hears a Sermon of Defense
LEAD: Thousands of people packed a church in Jamaica, Queens, yesterday morning and through thunderous applause and repeated ovations showed their support for the Rev.
Floyd H. Flake, the Democratic Congressman indicted last week on charges of misusing church funds.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-8
An Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait is the only outcome that is acceptable to the United States, President Bush said, all but committing himself to use military force against Iraq if diplomatic efforts and economic sanctions fail.
Page A1


9 Held in 2 A.M. Concert Melee in Village
LEAD: Nine police officers were injured and nine people were arrested early yesterday when officers trying to quiet an impromptu street concert in Greenwich Village were pelted with bottles, the police said.


Golfers Hedge Taking Shoal Creek Stance


Minor Blessing for Mexico, But Not Really a Windfall
LEAD: The sharp jump in oil prices after Iraq's seizure of Kuwait comes as a minor blessing for Mexico, a nation that enriched itself in the early 1980's by exporting high-priced oil but can no longer raise its production to benefit from a new windfall in prices.


U.N. Expected to Approve Iraq and Kuwait Trade Ban
LEAD: The United Nations Security Council is expected to approve a worldwide ban on oil purchases from Iraq and occupied Kuwait on Monday in retaliation for the Iraqi invasion and to prohibit all other trade and financial dealings with these countries, Council members said tonight.


Mark Guffey and Miss Silverman Wed
LEAD: Marjorie Sue Silverman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bennet H. Silverman of Hastings, N.Y., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Mark Alan Guffey, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
E.
Loren Guffey of Conway, Ark.
Rabbi Martin J. Zion performed the ceremony at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White Plains.


Experts Say Embargo May Work If Nations Maintain Commitment
LEAD: With Japan joining the United States and Europe yesterday by agreeing to halt oil imports from Iraq and Kuwait, the industrialized world has begun an economic campaign against Baghdad that for the moment relies on an embargo but holds out the possible use of a naval blockade.


The Cost of Confronting Iraq in the Oil Market;   Psychology, More Than Availability, Sways Gas Prices
LEAD: Oil tankers take six weeks to travel from the export terminals of the Persian Gulf to the refineries of the Gulf of Mexico, but oil prices, as events last week have shown, make the trip at something near the speed of light.


Brazil's Costly Trip to a Free Market
LEAD: With elections two months away, Brazil's Government is wrestling with violent strikes, a sharp recession and threats by foreign creditors.


Khmer Rouge Poised to Gain From U.S. Policy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fight Ends in Fire and Knifing
LEAD: An argument ended in a stabbing at 1:45 A.M. today after one youth tried to burn another's house, the Suffolk County police said, and a 15-year-old was charged with arson and assault.
After a fight between two youths, the police said, the 15-year-old bought gasoline and ignited a house at 24 Centerwood Street.


Sari Press Wed To Ira J. Miller
LEAD: Sari Rachael Press, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Press of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to Ira Jordan Miller, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joshua Miller of Miami Beach.
Rabbi Israel Miller, the bridegroom's great uncle, performed the ceremony at Town and Campus Caterers in West Orange, N.J.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
Productivity .......... 2d Qrtr.
Tuesday
Consumer Credit .......... June
Wednesday
None
Thursday
None
Friday
Producer Price Index .......... July


60 Years Ago Tonight, Judge Crater Stepped Into a Taxi
LEAD: On a sticky summer evening 60 years ago tonight, a serious-looking man wearing an old-fashioned choker collar and a brown suit hailed a taxicab on West 45th Street.
He said goodbye to two friends on the sidewalk and climbed into the cab, apparently heading for a theater a few blocks away.


Trees Imbued With History Get Their Own Honor Roll
LEAD: When James W. Johnson of Waterloo went off to fight in the Civil War, he hung his scythe in the crotch of a Balm of Gilead tree on his farm, asking that it be left there until he returned.
He never returned.


Miss Fink Weds Joshua Korman
LEAD: Siobhan Oona Fink, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Aaron J. Fink of Los Altos Hills, Calif., was married yesterday to Dr.
Joshua M. Korman, a son of Gerd Korman of Ithaca, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Ruth Z. Korman.
Rabbis Scott L. Glass and Morris Goldfarb officiated at the Thomas Fogarty Winery in Woodside,


Keeping Putts on Track
LEAD: A golf club professional who created a teaching device that controls the direction of a putter as you swing has created a similar apparatus for use at home or on the putting green.


Congressman Flake's Indictment: Good Works or Greed?
LEAD: In southeast Queens, where the war against drugs and deterioration is a daily struggle, the white-steepled Allen African Methodist Episcopal Church is surrounded by a complex of tan brick buildings that some call Flakeville, in honor of the minister-turned-politician who built them.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Kite Rolls In $6 Million: Tom Kite rolled in a 15-foot birdie putt on the first playoff hole yesterday to defeat John Cook in the St.
Jude Classic in Memphis and become the PGA Tour's first $6 million man.
Kite hit a fairway iron to the green on the 13th hole, the first of sudden death, while Cook's approach landed in a leftside bunker.


New Leader for U.S. Soccer
LEAD: Alan Rothenberg, a Los Angeles trial lawyer who has had no formal ties to soccer for more than six years, was elected today as president of the United States Soccer Federation.
Rothenberg only became a candidate 10 days ago after a strong suggestion by the world governing body for soccer that he run.


The Author, On 'Grapes Of Wrath'
LEAD: In 1953, as a student at Columbia, I wrote a paper on the ''Grapes of Wrath'' for a literature course.
Although I knew John Steinbeck only through his novels and stories, I mailed the critique to him.
To my surprise and delight, I received a letter from him by return post.
It was handwritten (so was the 200,000-word ''Grapes of Wrath'' manuscript) on a yellow tablet.


Times Mirror to Buy Paper
LEAD: The Times Mirror Company said on Thursday that it had agreed to purchase 50 percent of La Opinion, one of the nation's largest Spanish-language daily newspapers.


U.S. Forces Evacuate 74 After Threats in Liberia
LEAD: A reinforced company of 225 United States Marines flew into Liberia today to evacuate Americans and foreign dependents, after a rebel leader threatened to start taking foreign prisoners.


Big Hits All Around


Jerusalem Journal;   Getting By in Israel, or, How to Stretch a Shekel
LEAD: If Israelis are hard on the outside and sweet on the inside, as local folk wisdom says, then a good part of their toughness probably comes from the constant struggle against a battered economy, where taxes are all-encompassing, prices are higher than in Manhattan, and meager salaries seldom stretch to the end of the month.


Environmental Tee Off of Sorts
LEAD: FOR a field in which ''greens'' are generally understood to be putting surfaces rather than bands of aggressive environmentalists, it is surprising how sensitive the golf industry is becoming to the threat the game poses to the surrounding world.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
The Bloom Agency in Dallas has produced a television campaign for the Mothers Against Drunk Driving organization.
The campaign promotes both the organization's designated-driver program and its 10th anniversary.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   U S Sprint In Rebuttal To A.T.&amp; T.
LEAD: A hard-hitting new television campaign by U S Sprint reaches out and thumps American Telephone and Telegraph.


S.E.C. Censures Thomson
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission said last week that it had censured Thomson McKinnon Asset Management for not disclosing the existence of an advisory fee to some clients of its Foxhall Investment Management division.


Books of The Times;   Synergy Gone Awry: Mazda in Michigan
LEAD:
Working for the Japanese
Inside Mazda's American Auto Plant
By Joseph J. Fucini and Suzy Fucini
258 pages. The Free Press/Macmillan. $19.95.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article and a chart about food magazines on the Media Business page of Business Day on July 23 unfairly portrayed a 1986 circulation loss at Gourmet.
Gourmet's editors point out that the magazine acquired the subscription list of a defunct publication, Cuisine, in 1984 and filled the unexpired Cuisine subscriptions.


A President Puts Himself on the Spot
LEAD: Foreign policy, which lifted George Bush so high in the esteem of his fellow Americans, making him seem for months on end like the man with the infallible touch, now threatens to bring him low.


Highway Bridge Plan Roiling TriBeCa
LEAD: The intersection of Chambers and West Streets is heavy with traffic much of the day and well into the night.
To the east is the Borough of Manhattan Community College, a parking lot and a public tennis court.
On the west is the rapidly emerging shape of the new Stuyvesant High School building, and between these points lies the latest conflict involving the TriBeCa neighborhood in lower Manhattan and the more recent settlement at Battery Park


Accounts
LEAD: *
Endless Pools Inc., New York, a maker of pools used for swimming laps, to Da Vinci Einstein Advertising, New York, with an estimated budget of $500,000.
The account is the first for the agency, which was formed this summer by two former employees of Chiat/Day/Mojo's New York office.


Signs in Canada Of a Recession
LEAD: The Canadian Government said last week that its composite leading indicator, a gauge of the economy's upcoming performance, fell four-tenths of a percent in May.
It was the fourth consecutive monthly decline.


Martha's Vineyard Journal;   Vacation Island Is Made Laboratory for a Study
LEAD: The first iridescent posters greet visitors at the ticket office for the ferry to Martha's Vineyard from Cape Cod: ''The designated driver is the life of the party.''


In Child Deaths, a Test for Christian Science
LEAD: David and Ginger Twitchell, a Christian Science couple from Massachusetts who relied on prayer rather than on doctors as their young son lay dying from an obstructed bowel, were convicted of involuntary manslaughter last month.
It was a stunning verdict, coming as it did in the very shadow of the Mother Church in Boston.


Margot Fuchs Weds Marc Schwartz
LEAD: Margot Lynn Fuchs, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel Fuchs of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Marc Alan Schwartz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Schwartz of Holmdel, N.J.
Rabbi Neil Cooper officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.


Reports Conflict on the Fate Of Terrorists Held in Kuwait
LEAD: Diplomats said today that Iraq might have executed 15 pro-Iranian Shiite Muslim terrorists whose freedom was demanded by factions holding Western hostages in Lebanon.


Lenore Elsberg Weds Stephen Asbel
LEAD: Lenore Michele Elsberg, the daughter of Victoria B. Elsberg of Nanuet, N.Y., and the late Julian A. Elsberg, was married yesterday to Stephen Michael Asbel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David S. Asbel of Merion Golf Manor, Pa.
Rabbi Alan Katz officiated at Town and Country Caterers in Congers, N.Y., assisted by Cantor Alan


War-Crime Charges Haunt Scientist
LEAD: Whether Arthur L. Rudolph is a war criminal for persecuting laborers in Adolf Hitler's underground rocket factory or an old man unjustly wronged, there is an inescapable pathos about the situation that confronts him now, as he summons up his failing energies for his daily ordeal in a Toronto immigration court.


Bridge
LEAD: If there were a prize for the best opening lead of the year, the 1990 winner would probably be Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif.
In the Spingold Knockout Team Championship at the Summer Nationals in Boston last month he and his teammates were involved in a close quarterfinal battle against a group led by Zia Mahmood of


NAVY INVESTIGATES REACTORS' SAFETY
LEAD: Investigating allegations of cheating on nuclear reactor safety inspections aboard the aircraft carrier Nimitz, the Navy has restricted four crew members aboard ship.


Welcome to the Shuttle Please Stow Your Fears
LEAD: Boarding the 9:30 Pan Am shuttle to Boston on Saturday morning was the moment of truth for Buffy Smith.
Her hands were clammy, her heart was pounding and she had endured nightmares about being trapped on a plane the size of her bathroom.
After months of preparation, Flight 526 was it - her first time off the ground.


Jill Frankel Weds Steven L. Elbaum
LEAD: Jill Mimi Frankel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven R. Frankel of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Steven Lawrence Elbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome D. Elbaum of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Jack Stern performed the ceremony at the Westchester Reform Temple in Scarsdale, assisted by Cantor Stephen


Hiring Police: What Dinkins Has Said
LEAD:
July 19, 1989 - Calling New York ''a city under siege,'' a campaigning David N. Dinkins says that over the next four years he wants to hire 1,300 more police officers for neighborhood foot patrols and for the subways.
Jan. 1, 1990 - In his inaugural address, he reaffirms his vow to be ''the toughest Mayor on crime this city has ever seen.


George Stavrinos, 42, Artist and Illustrator
LEAD: George Stavrinos, a graphic artist and illustrator who helped revive interest in finely drawn representational art, died Friday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 42 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of pneumonia, his sister Lydia said.
Mr.
Stavrinos graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design in 1970, and his drawings and illustrations soon began to appear in The New York Times, Gentleman's Quarterly and Cosmopolitan.


Record 44th Homicide Listed in Bridgeport
LEAD: Bridgeport has listed its 44th homicide this year, matching the record set in all of 1988.


Naturalists Split by Panther Sightings in East
LEAD: PEOPLE say they are seeing panthers in New England and neighboring areas of Canada.
But do the sightings, even if authentic, mean the stealthy big cat is breeding again in the Northeast decades after its presumed extinction there?
The question has split naturalists into fervent believers and skeptics demanding foolproof evidence.


In Debut, Rookie Pirate Beats the Phillies by 10-1
LEAD: Pittsburgh's Randy Tomlin pitched a five-hitter in his major-league debut tonight, but he didn't have time to enjoy it.
While his arm was being wrapped in ice after the game, Tomlin started worrying whether he would go back to Harrisburg of the Class AA Eastern League or remain with the Pirates.


Board Offers to Shift Officers From Schools
LEAD: The Board of Education offered yesterday to put back on the street more than 100 police officers now giving instruction in police work and crime-prevention to pupils in New York.


Review/Opera;   Bilingual New Production of 'Ariadne auf Naxos'
LEAD: ''Ariadne auf Naxos'' is an opera about compromise, composed by a man of the theater who believed in the tactics of accommodation and who practiced them in his art and his life.
During World War II Richard Strauss let himself be used by the Nazis in the belief that he was using them, with unhappy effects on his reputation.


Prices of 'Junk Bonds' Fall
LEAD: Prices of ''junk bonds'' dropped sharply yesterday as investors worried that many of the low-rated companies that have issued such high-yield securities would have trouble meeting their obligations if higher oil prices caused a recession.


Dollar Continues Its Slide On Interest Rate Concerns
LEAD: The dollar lost more ground yesterday against all primary foreign currencies except the Japanese yen amid speculation that recent signs of economic weakness will lead to lower United States interest rates.


Our Towns;   At Day Care, Ringtoss, Songs And Compassion
LEAD: Each workday morning, Ron Walker, 30 years old, a senior credit analyst for the Bank of Boston, drops off Elvi at day care by 8, then rushes for the 8:36 train to the city.
Elvi seems to enjoy day care.
Yesterday morning Mr.
Walker pulled up to the curb and Elvi dashed from the car, leaving the door open.


Review/Jazz;   Some Respect for Jackie McLean
LEAD: A tribute to the alto saxophonist Jackie McLean on Saturday night at Alice Tully Hall really began two songs in, with the arrival of the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis.
Mr.
Marsalis and Mr.
McLean seared the melody of Mr.
McLean's ''Bird Lives,'' tearing through the tune with two impressively assured improvisations so bursting with ideas and momentum that the piece barely held them.


John Gronvall, V.A. Official, Is Dead at 59
LEAD: John A. Gronvall, former chief medical director of the Department of Veterans Affairs in Washington, died Aug. 2.
He was 59 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Markets


Union in Bid For Greyhound
LEAD: The Amalgamated Transit Union, which is on strike against Greyhound Lines Inc., said today that it was working with the the Blackstone Group, an investment house, to buy the nation's largest bus company.


Ship Fire Burns for 6 Hours
LEAD: Firefighters battled a ship blaze at Port Elizabeth from midnight to 6 A.M. today before a carbon-dioxide system smothered the fire, an executive of Maersk Inc., Ken Karahuta, said.


Appeals Panel in Rorer Case
LEAD: An appeals court withdrew certain restraints yesterday against two foreign investment firms named in the insider trading investigation of the Rorer Group Inc. takeover.


Souter's Record, Though Slight, Is Troubling;   Church and State
LEAD: To the Editor:


David J. Melamed, Lawyer, 60
LEAD: David J. Melamed, a lawyer and former secretary of the Communications Satellite Corporation, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.


The Iraqi Invasion;   U.S. ACTS TO RAISE MIDEAST STRENGTH
LEAD: The United States moved today to increase its naval forces in the Middle East for a possible blockade to enforce the United Nations trade sanctions against Iraq, and other Western officials indicated that they were prepared to join in such an action if it was necessary.


Infant Struck in the Head by a Stray Shot
LEAD: A 5 1/2-month-old boy was shot in the head yesterday in Manhattan when a bullet tore through an apartment wall as he lay sleeping in bed with his grandmother, the police said.


Souter's Record, Though Slight, Is Troubling;   What's in a Surname?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Careers;   When Going To Executive Search Firms
LEAD: The role of management recruiters, also known as ''headhunters'' and ''search consultants,'' seems to confuse many executives, especially those who have suddenly lost their jobs.
In desperation, they deluge recruiting firms with resumes and telephone calls demanding interviews immediately.


People
LEAD: *
Allen P. Adamson has been appointed senior vice president and group director at Ammirati &amp; Puris.


Genentech Agrees To Delay Merger
LEAD: Roche Holding Ltd. and Genentech Inc. agreed to a United States Government request to extend until Aug. 31 the waiting period required under Federal antitrust law for review of their proposed $2.1 billion merger.
The Federal Trade Commission had requested more information on the merger on March 23, and the two companies said in a joint statement that they were now in ''substantial compliance'' with that request.


More Speed From Muscle Power
LEAD: IN a race of muscle-powered watercraft on Saturday, a light hydrofoil built mostly of aluminum achieved a speed of 17.45 miles an hour, believed by race organizers to be a world record for its class.


Lotus Is Cutting Its Marketing Staff
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation has imposed a cost-cutting program that will result in the layoff of about 40 workers, mostly from the company's marketing department.
The company, which employs 3,100, said that it was still hiring in some areas and that the net reduction in workers would be about 20 people.


Climate Roller Coaster In Swedish Tree Rings
LEAD: NEW evidence from Sweden reveals that the average summer temperature in far northern Europe has fluctuated almost seven degrees over the last 1,400 years, illustrating how widely the earth's climate varies naturally and suggesting that in the northernmost parts of the world, the effects of any global warming will be hard to feel for a long time.


Bar Group Votes Neutrality on Abortion
LEAD: Lawyers at the American Bar Association's annual meeting called upon the group's policymaking body today to abandon its stance favoring abortion rights and return to neutrality on the issue.


Rig Count Off in Week
LEAD: The number of rigs exploring for oil and natural gas in the United States dropped by 30 last week, to a total of 966, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
A year ago the count stood at 874.
The decline was attributed to weak gasoline prices in the last few months.


Trader Settles Anti-Fraud Charges With the S.E.C.
LEAD: Salim B. (Sandy) Lewis, a former leading Wall Street trader, settled Federal civil anti-fraud charges today that he had manipulated the price of a stock in 1986.
Mr.
Lewis was also barred from the securities business.


Dow Plunges by 93.31; Stocks Slide in Tokyo
LEAD: Stock prices plunged again yesterday as continuing tensions in the Middle East pushed up oil prices, leading to investor fears that inflation will heat up.


Investor Increases Stake in Henley
LEAD: The Lebanese investor Toufic Aboukhater has raised his stake in the Henley Group Inc. to 9.11 percent from 7.67 percent.
He disclosed late last month that he had asked Government regulators for permission to increase his holdings in the Hampton, N.H., manufacturing concern to more than 15 percent.


Bodyguard Is Convicted in Case With Links to Drug Agent's Death
LEAD: A Federal jury in Los Angeles has convicted the last of a group of four defendants charged with a number of crimes that included the kidnapping and killing of a United States drug agent in Mexico.


Knudsen Appointment
LEAD: The Morrison Knudsen Corporation, a construction and engineering company, said on Friday that its chairman and chief executive, William M. Agee, had been named to the additional post of president.
Mr.
Agee succeeds Frank M. Adams, who died on May 27 in an airplane crash.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We have approached the surge in crime methodically, professionally and creatively.


British Police Defuse Bomb Linked to I.R.A.
LEAD: The police today defused a bomb they believe was planted by the Irish Republican Army in an attempt to kill a retired British official.


Long-Term Treasury Yields Soar
LEAD: Prices of long-term Treasury bonds took their worst battering yesterday since the days just before the 1987 stock market crash, although bargain hunters prevented the interest rate on the benchmark 30-year bond from moving higher than its level of May.


New British Sports TV
LEAD: British Aerospace Communications Ltd. said today that it would start a satellite television sports service for British pubs and bars.
The sportscast service, which is a unit of British Aerospace P.L.C., will initially concentrate on showing live British rugby league matches on Sundays, with highlight programs on Monday and Tuesday evenings.


Of Magnetism and Monitors
LEAD: CONCERN has been increasing over the possibility of adverse health effects from computer monitors.


Savings Deal Questioned By Senators
LEAD: After hearing James M. Fail acknowledge that he made incorrect disclosures to Federal regulators in 1988 when he purchased 15 insolvent savings and loans, members of a Senate panel said today that they were seriously troubled by the deal's inadequate disclosures and questionable finances.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a short article with a listing headed ''Movies This Week'' in the Television section on Sunday misidentified an actress in ''The Baker's Wife,'' which will be shown at 1 o'clock tonight on Bravo.
The runaway young wife is played by Ginette Leclerc; Marlene Dietrich does not appear in the movie.


U.S. and Vietnam Hold Talks on Cambodia
LEAD: The first formal talks on Cambodia between the United States and Vietnam were held yesterday in New York, and both sides called them useful, although they were evidently inconclusive.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Odor Flashbacks
Q.
Occasionally one smells an odor and then smells it again hours later.
Are odor molecules still in the nose, or is it psychological?
A. ''It could happen either way, but in most cases it is probably psychological,'' especially if it is a very bad odor, said Solomon H.


A.T.&amp;T. Is Adding To Its Stake in Sun
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. agreed to sell about 4.6 million shares of common stock to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company for $191.8 million.
The sale, when completed, will increase the amount of Sun stock that A.T.&amp; T. has acquired directly from the Mountain View-based computer company to 14.7 percent.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE - Suspended Rick Leach, San Francisco Giants outfielder, for 60 days after he tested positive for drug use.
ST.
LOUIS (NL) - Placed Bryn Smith, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Moved John Morris, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list to the 21-day list.


Impeached Judge Is Charged With Violation of His Parole
LEAD: A former Federal judge who was impeached by Congress after his perjury conviction was arrested today and charged with breaking parole by carrying a gun, the authorities said.


FACING BOYCOTT, IRAQ SLOWS OIL: THE IRAQI INVASION;   BLOCKADE IS HINTED
LEAD: American and British officials said today they would be prepared to organize an international naval blockade of Iraq to insure enforcement of economic sanctions imposed on the country by the United Nations.


Psychologist's Tapes Can Be Used in Trial In Couple's Murder
LEAD: Conversations between a psychologist and two brothers after their parents were slain can be used as evidence in their murder case, a judge ruled today.


Repairing the Blink
LEAD: Surgeons have devised a procedure in which a tiny gold weight implanted in the eyelid restores the blinking ability to patients with facial paralysis, researchers say.
The pull of gravity on the weight mimics nerve function and allows people who have a weakened or damaged facial nerve to close their eyes in an almost natural fashion.


Grubb &amp; Ellis
LEAD: The Grubb &amp; Ellis Company, a real estate broker, said it would close some offices, cut back some operations, eliminate a number of jobs and reduce travel and advertising spending to save about $7 million during the rest of 1990 and $11.5 million in 1991.
The company said it was closing commercial real estate brokerage offices in southeast Denver; Detroit; the Atlanta area; Princeton, N.J., and New York.


Souter's Record, Though Slight, Is Troubling;   State Court Service
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mitsubishi Assists Venezuela Venture
LEAD: The Mitsubishi Motors Corporation will provide technical assistance for a joint venture to produce its passenger cars in Venezuela beginning in September.
A Mitsubishi spokesman, Kyoichi Shimada, said the joint venture, MMC Auto Motriz de Venezuela S.A., would produce 800 passenger cars this year primarily with parts shipped from Japan.


Jury Trials Not Needed in Drunken Driving, Court Rules
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled today that motorists accused of drunken driving are not entitled to jury trials, even though those convicted for the third time can be jailed for six months, fined $1,000, pay thousands of dollars in insurance surcharges and lose their right to drive for 10 years.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corporation, Denver, a hardware distributor, said it would sell its Amdura National Distribution Co. unit to Our Own Hardware Co., Minneapolis, a wholesale supplier of hardware, for undisclosed terms.


Boise Retreats in Northwest
LEAD: Stung by sharply lower earnings this year because of a weak paper market, the Boise Cascade Corporation announced plans today to scale back pulp and paper mill operations in the Northwest while continuing to upgrade its other paper and timber mills.


The Iraqi Invasion;   After Years of Discreet Trade-Offs, U.S. Is Testing the Saudis
LEAD: After three Administrations fought bitter battles in Congress to secure billions of dollars of military aid for Saudi Arabia, insisting that the Saudi Government was crucial to United States interests in the Middle East, the complex relationship between Washington and Riyadh has abruptly reached a crossroads.


Dollar Loses Draw as Safe Haven in Time of Crisis
LEAD: The dollar, a longtime haven for investors in times of military and political crisis, has been all but shunned since Iraq invaded Kuwait.


Midland Journal;   No Champagne Gushers In Texas Over Oil Prices
LEAD: Tripp Wommack, who has been buying and operating oil fields here for 10 years, scanned the buffet room at the Petroleum Club.


Review/Music;   When It's Time to Dance
LEAD: Sam Fan Thomas of Cameroon had an international hit in 1984 with ''African Typic Collection,'' a medley of electrified traditional rhythms bound together by the exhortation ''Dansez, dansez, yeah'' that found fans in French-speaking Africa, Europe and the Caribbean.
When he brought his band to Kilimanjaro on Friday night, there was no resisting that imperative; Mr.


Iran Deal Disclosed For Fokker Planes
LEAD: NICOSIA, Cyprus, Aug. 6 (AP) -


INSIDE
LEAD:
Mandela's Group Suspends Revolt
The African National Congress has suspended the guerrilla campaign it began 30 years ago in its struggle to end apartheid in South Africa.


Giants' Leach Suspended
LEAD: The San Francisco Giant outfielder Rick Leach was suspended for 60 days by the baseball commissioner, Fay Vincent, today after a positive drug test.


Suspensions For 2 Traders
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has barred two executives of Jefferies &amp; Company from the securities business for six months for their roles in events that led to the criminal conviction of two prominent Wall Street figures last year.


The Iraqi Invasion;   Hundreds of Westerners Rounded Up in Kuwait
LEAD: Iraqi soldiers rounded up hundreds of Westerners, including at least 28 American citizens, from hotels in Kuwait.
It was not known what Iraq planned to do with them.


Reviews/Dance;   Ballet Chicago's Addition: Its Own Choreographer
LEAD: It wasn't so long ago that Ballet Chicago was being hailed as an extremely promising new company.
And a performance on Saturday night at the Ted Shawn Theater of the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival here suggested that the company is steadily fulfilling that promise.
But the performance also suggested that Ballet


Dinkins Plans Service Cuts to Pay For Adding 1,058 Police Officers
LEAD: Pressured to respond to a recent string of alarming crimes in New York City, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he would hire 1,058 new police officers by next spring to increase neighborhood foot patrols and would pay for this by cutting a range of other services.


Off to Impressive Start at Saratoga
LEAD: Until rains of biblical proportion turned Saratoga Race Track into a mudpit yesterday, the opening week of racing here was as invigorating as the cool Adirondack night air.
After extended summer doldrums at Belmont Park, New York State once again is the capital of American racing this month, a place of champions.


A U.S. Strategy for the Gulf Crisis;   Coping with the Economic Consequences
LEAD: President Bush has rallied the U.N.
Security Council to vote a trade embargo against Iraq and Kuwait.
This is the right response to Baghdad's heinous invasion, but it raises two troubling questions for the U.S.: Will the embargo block Iraqi oil exports?
And will it throw the U.S. into a devastating recession?


CHRONICLE
LEAD: LEE ATWATER is back in the hospital.
The Republican Party chairman became ill in March and the diagnosis was a benign brain tumor.
He was visited at George Washington University Hospital yesterday by PRESIDENT BUSH.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
HORSE RACING
Majesty's Time Prevails Majesty's Time outfought favored Candid Cameron through the stretch to carry Jorge Chavez to a 2 1/4-length victory in the $85,200 Albany Handicap for horses 3 years old and up at Saratoga.
Candid Cameron, with Dave Penna up, was easily second best in the five-horse field, finishing 15 1/2 lengths ahead of Applebred and Jean-Luc Samyn.


Only a Bruise for Swift
LEAD: The Seattle Mariner pitcher Bill Swift, struck on the forehead by a line drive at the Kingdome while pitching against Minnesota on Sunday night, was released yesterday from a hospital after undergoing tests.
Swift, who was sprawled on the mound for four minutes after being hit by a drive off the bat of Gary Gaetti, suffered only a bruise and was expected to make his next start on Saturday.


Pleas Are Filed In Eastern Case
LEAD: Eastern Airlines and eight of its top managers pleaded not guilty yesterday in Federal court to charges that they had falsified safety and maintenance records to avoid expensive flight delays and cancellations.
United States District Judge


When Rage Explodes, Brain Damage May Be the Cause
LEAD: ''HE was a scientist, but he was acting strangely,'' said Dr.
Stuart Yudofsky, a psychiatrist who consulted on the man's case. ''At work, when something didn't go right, he would scream and threaten his co-workers.
At home, if his 4-year-old spilled some food at the table, he'd get so mad at her, he'd punch holes in the walls with his fist.


Jury in Barry Trial Deliberates All Day; Reaches No Verdict
LEAD: The Federal jury in the drug and perjury trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. worked throughout today weighing the evidence compiled in the case, but once again the panel recessed without reaching a verdict.


Cool Papa's Stolen Moments
LEAD: ''Funny, but I don't have any regrets about not playing in the majors.
They say that I was born too soon.
I say the doors were opened too late.'' - James (Cool Papa) Bell Perhaps the saddest part about James Bell's baseball career was that he was a major leaguer in every sense but name, but never fully realized it.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on the front page of SportsMonday this week, referring to an article inside about the new head of the national governing body of soccer, misidentified the organization.
It is the United States Soccer Federation.


FACING BOYCOTT, IRAQ SLOWS OIL: THE IRAQI INVASION;   PULLOUT DEMANDED
LEAD: The United Nations Security Council today registered its outrage over Iraq's invasion of Kuwait by ordering a far-reaching trade and financial boycott on Iraq and occupied Kuwait.


O. B. Hardison Jr. Is Dead at 61; Author and Folger Library Head
LEAD: O. B. Hardison Jr., a professor of English at Georgetown University and former director of the Folger Shakespeare Library, died Sunday at the Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 61 years old and lived in Washington.


Mortgage Rates Up a Quarter-Point in Just a Few Days
LEAD: Home mortgage interest rates, which last week were hovering just above 10 percent, have increased quickly in recent days, following the yields on Treasury bonds onto higher ground.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Following his success in Pirandello's ''Henry IV'' in London, RICHARD HARRIS said yesterday that he planned to abandon films and now spend the rest of his career playing major Shakespearean roles.
The Irish actor, who is 58 years old, said he would play King Lear, Richard III and Shylock in London's West


Productivity Rise First in Six Quarters
LEAD: The productivity of American workers improved for the first time in six quarters, climbing in the second quarter at an annual rate of 1.6 percent, the Labor Department said today.


Bethlehem Sells Vessels
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation said today that it would sell two Great Lakes ore vessels and would recognize a gain from the transaction.
The company said it had signed a letter of intent to sell the Lewis Wilson Foy and the Sparrows Point to the Oglebay Norton Company.
After the deal is completed, Bethlehem Steel will be left with a fleet of two 1,000-foot vessels used to ship iron ore pellets from Minnesota to the company's Burns Harbour, Ind., plant on Lake Michigan.


Midwest Banks Plan Merger
LEAD: The Firstar Corporation and Banks of Iowa Inc. said today that they had agreed to merge in a stock swap valued at about $200 million.


Market Place;   Arbitrage Curb's Effect on Volatility
LEAD: The stock market is undergoing a series of stresses with no direct parallels in the recent past.
And all this comes as traders are trying to cope with a new rule that many do not fully understand.


Talking Business; with Pfeiffer of Compaq;   The PC Surge In West Europe
LEAD: The European Community's program to turn its 12 nations into a single market is creating a bonanza for makers of personal computers in general and for the Compaq Computer Corporation in particular.
Analysts expect the Western European personal computer market to grow by as much as 25 percent this year - twice the pace of the more mature


Souter's Record, Though Slight, Is Troubling
LEAD: To the Editor:


Amnesty Starts And One Owner Turns In 3 Guns
LEAD: On the first day of a citywide amnesty program for people with illegal guns, only three weapons were turned in - all by the same person.


U.S. Is Urged to Make Major Computer Effort
LEAD: The United States should undertake a major effort to develop superconducting computers that can operate a million times faster than today's fastest machines, a national panel recommends.


Now or Later?
LEAD: Panicky officials at the U.S.
Department of Agriculture are racing around to bank regulators to find Iraqi funds; unless they can seize and use offsetting assets, $2 billion in commodity credit guarantees will come out of taxpayers' pockets to pay for Mr.
Bush's past appeasement of Saddam Hussein.


Magellan Nears Venus in Trip to Map Surface
LEAD: AFTER a 15-month voyage from Earth, looping the Sun one and a half times, the Magellan spacecraft is approaching Venus.
Scheduled to arrive Friday, it is primed to conduct the first detailed mapping survey of the planet's mysterious surface, which lies beneath a perpetual covering of dense, acrid clouds.


Bhutto Is Dismissed in Pakistan After 20 Months
LEAD: The Government of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto was dismissed today by the President of Pakistan, who accused her administration of corruption, nepotism and other acts ''in contravention of the Constitution and the law.''


Defendant's Mother Ejected For Outburst at Jogger Trial
LEAD: The mother of a defendant in the Central Park jogger trial was ordered removed from the courtroom yesterday after she shouted ''Liar!'' at a prosecution witness.


Bridge
LEAD: A party of 24 Soviet bridge experts is to arrive in New York City today and tomorrow for a visit that runs through Saturday.
The danger that through a ticketing mix-up they would be stranded in Seattle, where they competed last week in the Goodwill Games, was averted by the combined efforts of the bridge community and T.W.A.


For More Drugs, First Test Is Abroad
LEAD: PATIENT trials of new treatments, long a crown jewel of American medical science, are increasingly being conducted overseas, a number of prominent researchers say.


Mets Let Cardinals Take Another
LEAD: The Mets bombed in St.
Louis again tonight when they lost to Joe Torre's revived Cardinals for the third time in a row and to Joe Magrane for the second time in a week.
And they flew home wondering why the hottest team in the big leagues in June had become a .500 team in August.


To Young Milwaukee Drivers, Cruising Ban Is Un-American
LEAD: An effort to stop cruising in Milwaukee and three of its suburbs has led the American Civil Liberties Union to sue on the behalf of teen-agers who say they have a right to free travel.


Review/Festival Latino;   A Lampoon, With Music, Of Culture And Politics
LEAD: In one of the fastest and funniest sketches in ''Los Rayos Gamma in New York,'' the satirical musical revue that had weekend performances at the Public Theater, a young Puerto Rican minister soberly informs his father that he intends to go into politics.


Man Fatally Shot in Dispute Over Phone in a Subway Station
LEAD: A 27-year-old man was killed in a Brooklyn subway station, apparently after an argument over the use of a pay telephone, the police said yesterday.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


U.S. Curtis Cup Coach Dusts Off Clubs
LEAD: The players who captured the Curtis Cup for the United States late last month played the best golf in the first day of the 90th United States Women's Amateur Championship today at Canoe Brook Country Club.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Saturday about religion as a political issue in Pakistan misidentified a human rights lawyer.


CHURCH TO ORDER AUDIT OF FUNDS
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Atlanta says it will investigate whether church money went improperly to a woman whose intimate relationships with a priest and an archbishop led to their resignations.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., New York, has formed a new unit, Hill &amp; Knowlton International, for its operations outside the U.S.
Thomas E. Eidson, president and chief operating officer of U.S. operations for the firm, was appointed president and chief executive of the new division.
John D. Bergen, executive vice president of the parent company's Eastern region and general manager of its New York office, replaces Mr.


Fears of Escalating Inflation Spark a Rise in Gold Prices
LEAD: Gold futures prices rose yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange, reflecting continuing fears that the soaring price of crude oil -now at the highest level in more than four and a half years - will lead to higher inflation.


By Design;   Baseball Caps Branch Out
LEAD: Baseball caps used to be strictly for men.
But this summer women have taken to wearing them with a passion.


African National Congress Suspends Its Guerrilla War
LEAD: After a marathon 15-hour negotiating session with the white authorities, the African National Congress announced early today that it had ordered the immediate suspension of a guerrilla campaign begun 30 years ago in its struggle to end apartheid.


Liberian Rebel Seizes Foreigners, Including American
LEAD: A Liberian rebel leader seized about a dozen foreigners, including an American, as hostages from a hotel outside Monrovia today, the State Department said.


Are the Children Primed to Test or Read?
LEAD: To the Editor:


John T. Kolody, Hospital President, 70
LEAD: John T. Kolody, retired president of St.
Barnabas Hospital, died on Saturday at St.
Agnes Hospital in White Plains.
He was 70 years old and lived in Whitestone, Queens.


Congress Hails Its Bills on Housing As a Reversal of a Decade of Neglect
LEAD: After a decade in which Federal housing programs stagnated or starved, Congress has passed bills that pledge significant amounts of new housing money, both to strengthen current programs and to create new ones.


Homeless People Are Ejected From E Trains


The Iraqi Invasion;   Cutting Budget Gap Now Discounted
LEAD: With the American economy seemingly headed for recession and the exploding cost of imported oil about to push it over the edge, analysts widely agree that cutting the budget deficit this year no longer makes sense.
But by the same token, they argue, the case for making a credible deal now on future deficit reduction is more compelling than ever.


Damaged Barge Still Limits Traffic in Houston Channel
LEAD: Salvage crews cleaned the tanks of a damaged oil barge today so it could be cut up and removed and the Houston ship channel fully reopened.


Tax Collecting At I.R.S. Lags
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service is losing its battle to collect overdue taxes, which are growing faster than tax collections, Government auditors said last week.


Dickerson Reports
LEAD: Eric Dickerson reported to the Indianapolis Colts' training camp in Anderson, Ind., yesterday but the star running back did so after failing a physical he took in Indianapolis.


Gun Fired at Show Injures 2
LEAD: A man trying to sell an automatic pistol at a gun show accidentally fired it into the crowd, injuring two people, the police said.
A 27-year-old man was arrested for investigation of aggravated assault after the shooting on Sunday.


Judge Criticizes Manville's Managers on Bailout of Trust
LEAD: In an attempt to put pressure on the Manville Corporation, a Federal judge said yesterday that the company's senior executives had not been cooperative in helping to bail out the trust they created to assist victims of asbestos.


Election of Rothenberg Is Applauded by FIFA
LEAD: The election of Alan Rothenberg as president of the United States Soccer Federation on Sunday has pleased the world governing body for soccer, which had supported his candidacy over those he defeated: Werner Fricker, the federation president for six years, and Paul Stiehl, the federation treasurer.


Serb Minority Seek Role in a Separate Croatia
LEAD: Within weeks of a declaration of sovereignty by the Yugoslav Republic of Croatia, leaders of the republic's Serbian minority are pressing for cultural and, in all likelihood, territorial autonomy that would further complicate an already intricate political map and could exacerbate already bitter ethnic rivalries.


More on Windows 3.0
LEAD: FOR the second stage of testing Windows 3.0, the new Microsoft graphical interface, with a modestly endowed AT-class computer, I loaded a selection of software that had not been written with Windows in mind.
That is, each of the programs got its own little icon, or symbol, and could be run by putting the on-screen pointer on the icon and clicking the mouse button twice, even though they had not been designed for a graphical environment.


Souter's Record, Though Slight, Is Troubling;   Flirting and Rape
LEAD: To the Editor:


German Move to Speed Up Unity Impelled by East's Economic Slide
LEAD: Among the underlying causes of the East German Prime Minister's surprising call to move up all-German elections is a realization that reunification will cost far more than expected and that monetary union has not slowed East Germany's economic decline.


Are the Children Primed to Test or Read?;   A Better Measure
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Eastern Airlines Inc., Miami, named Jack E. Robinson 3d vice president of corporate development and president and chief executive of Eastern Express, its commuter airline.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-11


Riverside Picks Union Aide as No. 2 Minister
LEAD: Riverside Church in Manhattan, which has had difficulty in recent years in putting the inspirational message from its pulpit into social action, has hired a former union organizer as its No. 2 minister.


Are the Children Primed to Test or Read?;   Doing Their Best
LEAD: To the Editor:


F. C. Symonds Jr., 63, A Professor of Surgery
LEAD: Francis C. Symonds Jr., clinical professor of surgery at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University, died on Saturday in Englewood Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 63 years old and lived in Tenafly, N.J., and Southold, L.I.


A U.S. Strategy for the Gulf Crisis;   Enlisting the Saudis in Their Own Defense
LEAD: No policy to contain Saddam Hussein, let alone force Iraq to resume the status quo ante in Kuwait, can work without active support from Saudi Arabia.
The question for U.S. policy makers and other world leaders is how to persuade King Fahd to take the necessary risks.


The Iraqi Invasion: Reporter's Notebook;   The Guns of August Make a Dervish Bush Whirl Even Faster
LEAD: Maybe George Bush really believed that the world was becoming kinder and gentler.


Harold E. Beste, 81, Researcher Who Worked on TV Components
LEAD: Harold E. Beste, an electronics researcher and engineer who helped develop television components and weapons systems, died on Friday at his home in Verona, N.J.
He was 81 years old.


Rabbi Jacob J. Hecht, Radio Broadcaster, 66
LEAD: Rabbi Jacob J. Hecht, an educator, writer and radio commentator, died on Sunday while visiting Camp Emunah, a summer camp he founded in Greenfield Park, N.Y.
He was 66 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


NBC Plans Debuts in August for 5 Shows
LEAD: Concerned about television's smaller audience this summer and a looming threat from the Fox Broadcasting Company, NBC announced a prime-time scheduling plan yesterday that will move up the premiere episodes of five new fall series to August.
The new television season officially begins Sept. 17.


The Iraqi Invasion;   Text of the Resolution for Sanctions on Iraq
LEAD: Following is the text of the resolution adopted today by the Security Council, calling for sanctions against Iraq:
THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
REAFFIRMING its Resolution 660 (1990),


Reporter's Notebook;   Oh, No! They've Created a Monster!
LEAD: There's an early scene in the first of the ''Robocop'' film series that provides a familiar nightmarish shock of technological recognition when a machine, a kind of latter-day Frankenstein's monster, runs amok with tragicomic results.


Tandy Introduces A New Computer
LEAD: The Tandy Corporation introduced a six-pound notebook computer equipped with hard-disk and floppy-disk drives priced at $1,999.
The new machine will compete directly with similar models made by the Compaq Computer Corporation, the Zenith Electronics Corporation and the Toshiba Corporation.


Indian Soldiers Seize 12 Leaders Of Kashmir's Militant Separatists
LEAD: Indian troops captured the chief military commander of Kashmir's independence movement and 11 other militant leaders in Srinagar today as the Kashmiris met to discuss strategy, the authorities said.


Big Losses at Businessland; Stock Price Plunges
LEAD: Businessland Inc. stunned Wall Street today by posting losses for the fourth quarter and the year far in excess of analysts' estimates.
The stock of the personal computer retailer lost more than half its value, plunging $4, to $2.875.


The Iraqi Invasion;   Iraqis Shut Pipeline to Turkey After Ships Sail Away Empty
LEAD: Apparently already feeling the effects of an American-orchestrated boycott, Iraq sharply reduced the flow of oil today through twin pipelines that cross southern Turkey and normally transport more than half its oil exports.


Review/Television;   Series in the Summer: What to Watch, or Not
LEAD: Neither the weather nor television fare has sizzled much this summer.
But all the networks have offered a few new series for those inclined to spend the pleasant evenings in front of the tube.
John O'Connor and Walter Goodman offer comments on some of the main shows.
Northern Exposure CBS, 10 P.M.


Slaying of 2 Jews Stirs Violence in Jerusalem
LEAD: Two Jewish teen-agers who disappeared on Saturday while hitchhiking through Arab East Jerusalem were found dead today in a valley between the city and a Palestinian village.
They had been bound, gagged and repeatedly stabbed.


Maas Powers Yankees


Uncertain Future at the Smithsonian
LEAD: The Smithsonian Institution has been uneasy in recent days about reports of an impending budget squeeze and a major shake-up in its managerial ranks.


AIDS Advocates Find Private Funds Declining
LEAD: Advocates for people with AIDS are expressing concern that the public is growing weary of hearing about the disease and that a sense of alarm has given way to a resigned acceptance, making it harder to raise badly needed private funds.


Physics and Computers Create a Science of Aquatic Thrills
LEAD: AQUATIC designers are creating giant water slides that are starting to mimic roller coasters and eight-foot-high artificial waves that can propel surfers and swimmers on long, pleasurable rides down the length of a pool.


Bishop Paul Galloway Dead of Cancer at 86
LEAD: Paul V. Galloway, a retired bishop of the United Methodist Church, died Saturday at St.
John Medical Center in Tulsa, Okla.
He was 86 years old and lived in Tulsa.


Mauthausen Journal;   At a Death Camp, Gypsies Confront Indifference
LEAD: The delegation of gypsies had come to the site of the Nazi concentration camp at Mauthausen to look for a part of their history, one that has been less examined and less lamented than the fate of other peoples in World War II.


Moore and Zawatson Listed as Starters by Jets
LEAD: Bruce Coslet finally put it in writing today.


Indictment Dropped Against Teacher in Westchester Slaying
LEAD: A Westchester County Court judge today dismissed a murder indictment against Carolyn Warmus, a 26-year-old teacher accused of killing her lover's wife, saying the District Attorney's office had manipulated the grand jury.


Huge Fire in Oregon May Be Held in Check
LEAD: Residents chased from their homes by a forest fire that continued to burn today after consuming 20 houses returned to find the blaze had roasted meat inside freezers and melted bottles.


Chess
LEAD: Sparring partners, whether in boxing or chess, do not have an easy time of it.
In fact, the boxing partner has the advantage because he gets to wear protective head gear.
There is no analogue for the chess training partner who has to put up with one drubbing after another from his principal's slashing combinations.


Gloom Lifts as Maas Hits His 11th Homer
LEAD: The prospect of rain, what with the persistent clouds overhead indistinguishable from the black incinerator smoke that belched across the Bronx sky, was no doubt for more than a couple of Yankee fans as promising as it was threatening.


Morality Played No Part in Hitler Plot
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rising Costs Forced Taxes Upward in Many States
LEAD: States have increased taxes by $7.6 billion thus far in 1990 to meet rising costs of schools, prisons and health care, a study reported today.


Plan to Burn Dioxin Stirs Fear in Arkansas
LEAD: Unless a small, determined band of residents have their way, this city of 29,000 people is about to become the site of the nation's largest incineration of dioxin.


U.S. Rural Assistance Is Criticized in Study
LEAD: After a yearlong study, a nonprofit advocacy group has concluded that many rural Americans suffer needlessly from poverty and pollution because Federal programs to help them are poorly financed and poorly run.


Queens Gunman Linked To 6 Felonies in 2 Hours
LEAD: The police say they believe one gunman committed at least six felonies -three robberies, two rapes and a kidnapping - in less than two hours in Queens yesterday.


Patterns
LEAD:
Polo for Boys and Trees


General Dynamics Plans Layoffs
LEAD: The General Dynamics Corporation announced today that it would consolidate two California military-related divisions that will result in 1,500 to 2,000 layoffs by the end of 1991.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.87
7.87
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.30
7.33
7.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.23
7.22
7.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.51
8.32
7.94
30-YR.


Trenton Reacts To Possibilities Of Long Protest
LEAD: New Jersey's tax revolt, up to now a citizens' protest with no recourse in this non-election year, is reverberating in both the Legislature and the Governor's office, and Democrats now fear it could carry into next year's legislative elections.


U.S. to Challenge P.&amp;G.-Rorer Deal
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company and Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. said the Justice Department had decided to challenge their agreement to form a strategic alliance.
The companies said they disagreed with the Government's stance and were considering their options.


Hiroshima, 45 Years Later


Rubbermaid Deal With Eldon Is Set
LEAD: Rubbermaid Inc. signed a definitive agreement to acquire Eldon Industries Inc., which has its headquarters in Inglewood, Calif., in a swap of stock.
Rubbermaid, based here, said it had received commitments from Eldon's leading stockholders to vote more than 2.7 million, or 29 percent of the shares outstanding, in favor of the acquisition.


AIDS Research Chief Awaits Key Report On Propriety Questions
LEAD: THROUGHOUT the late spring and summer, Dr.
Robert C. Gallo, one of America's most prominent AIDS researchers, has been feeling a withering heat that has nothing to do with the weather.


Leader in Georgia Race Driving Hard
LEAD: Lieut.
Gov.
Zell Miller, whom many see as the heavy favorite in the runoff on Tuesday for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination, campaigned Sunday among the clog dancers and fiddlers and more than 25,000 other people at the Georgia Mountain Fair in the rolling hill country where he grew up.


Wide Receivers Respond To Challenge by Parcells
LEAD: In the Giants' minicamp in May, Coach Bill Parcells issued a challenge to his veteran wide receivers.


Oppenheimer Fills Post Left Vacant for a Year
LEAD: ''It takes a sense of humor and some talent,'' Edward C. Stanton 3d said yesterday about his new job as managing director of the mergers and acquisitions unit of Oppenheimer &amp; Company.


Review/Fashion;   Clothes That Can Pack Up and Go
LEAD: Though the approaches to resort collections change dramatically from designer to designer, a strong theme pervades them all: practicality.


Fighting Crime, and Fear
LEAD: ''This is where I come for business, 'cause this is where the bread and the jelly are at,'' explains the mugger, with a smirk. ''I see a ripe vic, I tell him, 'You can do it my way or you can do it your way, but do it your way and you'll get hurt.''


Palmer, Morgan Inducted Into Hall
LEAD: The setting was unusual, but Jim Palmer and Joe Morgan finally got to make their speeches today as they were inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame.


Reviews/Dance;   Surprises at Summerstage
LEAD: The first dance program of the 1990 Central Park Summerstage festival got off to a varied start on Friday night at the pretty new outdoor performance space just east of the 72d Street Band Shell.


An Old Area Surges With New Energy
LEAD: This summer, 74-year-old Geraldine Jones has been encouraged by the view from her 12th-floor terrace in the East Tremont neighborhood of the Bronx.


The Iraqi Invasion;   Oil Prices Increase Sharply Again; World Financial Markets Tumble
LEAD: Oil prices rose sharply again yesterday and financial markets around the world plummeted as the international embargo against oil from Iraq and Kuwait appeared to be taking hold.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Crystal Brands Inc., New York, to Lewis, Gilman &amp; Kynett, Philadelphia, for Izod Lacoste golf and tennis attire.


Books of The Times;   Van Gogh in Words and His Work
LEAD:
Van Gogh
His Life and His Art
By David Sweetman
Illustrated. 391 pages. Crown Publishers. $30.
Vincent van Gogh
By Evert van Uitert, Louis van Tilborgh, Sjraar van Heugten, Johannes van der Wolk, Ronald Pickvance and E. B. F. Pey.
Illustrated. Two volumes: paintings, 292 pages; drawings, 336 pages.


Defendant's Suit Dismissed In 7-Year Molestation Case
LEAD: A Federal judge dismissed Peggy McMartin Buckey's $1 million civil suit for malicious prosecution today, saying that ''being very, very upset does not state a cause of action,''


Air Fares Climbing as Fuel Costs Rise
LEAD: The economic fallout from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait has quickly filtered to the airline passenger, with higher oil prices already translating into higher air fares.
Two airlines will add surcharges or raise fares on Thursday to offset their higher fuel costs, and several others are considering a similar move.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JOSE RAFAEL MONEO, the Spanish architect and chairman of the architecture department at Harvard's Graduate School of Design, is designing his first building in the United States.
It will be a museum and cultural center on the campus of Wellesley College, Wellesley, Mass., and is to house the school's permanent art collection, temporary exhibitions and a theater.


Banks Are Prodded to Offer Better Service in Poor Areas
LEAD: Responding to pressure from Congress and community groups, Federal regulators have withheld approval for some bank mergers in recent months until the companies agreed to improve service to poor neighborhoods.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Justice THURGOOD MARSHALL of the Supreme Court was released from a hospital yesterday.
He had fallen in the lobby of his hotel when he was in Chicago on Thursday to address the annual convention of the American Bar Association.


A Craze May Outsprint Its Creator
LEAD: Rollerblade Inc., a tiny company based near Minneapolis that brought out a roller skate with a single row of wheels, has spawned a sport called blading that in the last three years has become something of a national craze.


Chevron in Bolivia Pact
LEAD: The Chevron Corporation said today that its Chevron International Ltd. (Bolivia) unit had signed an agreement with the Government of Bolivia to explore for oil and gas in a 2.5-million-acre area in the Andean foothills.
Chevron said it would evaluate the feasibility of drilling exploratory wells at the Caipipendi block, 400 miles southwest of La Paz and 200 miles south of Santa Cruz, the country's oil center.


Governor Facing Test In the Kansas Primary
LEAD: Gov.
Mike Hayden has not lost an election since he first won a seat in the Kansas House of Representatives in 1972, but he faces a strong challenge from a political newcomer in Tuesday's Republican primary.


Coast Guard Board Blames New Carelessness in Shipping for Spills
LEAD: A Coast Guard inquiry yesterday blamed a declining standard of care throughout the maritime community for the 12 spills in the Arthur Kill and the Kill van Kull this year.


Ill-Equipped for the Crises of the 90's
LEAD: Nothing marked the euphoric and triumphant march of the Reagan Administration into Washington in 1981 more than two policies - a ''free market'' in oil (in lieu of energy independence) and a massive strategic weapons buildup.
Last week, nine years and $1 trillion later, we found ourselves threatened by our dependence on Middle East oil and unable to mount a quick and effective military response to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


Honda Denies Truck Plans
LEAD: An automotive trade journal reported today that the Honda Motor Company plans to enter the truck market and increase its United States sales by 50 percent by 1995, but Honda denied the report.


Lakers Sign Perkins
LEAD: The Los Angeles Lakers yesterday announced they had signed Sam Perkins, an unrestricted free agent, to a multiyear contract reported to be worth as much as $3 million a year.
Terms were not announced by the team.
After being selected fourth over all in the 1984 draft, out of North Carolina, the 6-9 forward played six seasons for the Dallas Mavericks.


A Confident Douglas Says He'll Fight On
LEAD: James (Buster) Douglas, the undisputed heavyweight champion, brimmed with confidence yesterday at a news conference in Manhattan promoting his first title defense, which will be against Evander Holyfield on Oct. 25 at the Mirage hotel and casino in Las Vegas, Nev.


Maurice A. Pollak, 94; Led Investment Office
LEAD: Maurice A. Pollak, president of the Maurice Pollak Investment Office in West Long Branch, N.J., died on Sunday at his home in West Long Branch, N.J.
He was 94 years old.


Souter's Record, Though Slight, Is Troubling;   Lawn of Clover
LEAD: To the Editor:


Commodity Chief Approved
LEAD: The Senate has approved the renomination of Wendy Lee Gramm as the chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.


Jordan Talks of Balance But Some See Iraqi Tilt
LEAD: As the crisis surrounding Kuwait expands, King Hussein of Jordan is struggling to balance his old friendships with his recent enthusiasm for Iraq and its strongman, Saddam Hussein.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Apple Bancorp., New York, said the Delaware Chancery Court had denied Stanley Stahl's motion seeking to compel Apple to hold its 1990 annual meeting by Sept. 14.


Mavericks Eye English
LEAD: Still stunned by the defection of the power forward Sam Perkins, who was signed as a free agent by the Los Angeles Lakers on Monday, the Dallas Mavericks said yesterday they were looking at the possible acquisition of the longtime Denver Nugget forward Alex English.


Five Years Needed to Clean Up Savings Fraud, U.S. Says
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said today that it would take the Government two to three years to secure indictments against most of the individuals it suspects of savings and loan fraud and five years to clean up most of the cases.


U.S. Will Allow Norton Merger
LEAD: The White House announced last night that President Bush would not oppose the proposed merger of the Norton Company by Compagnie de Saint-Gobain, a French conglomerate, for $90 a share, or about $1.9 billion in cash.
The deal in April ended the $1.64 billion bid made by BTR P.L.C., a British conglomerate.


Yankees' Deadline Has Flexibility
LEAD: The 20th day of August looms as an important date in the life of George Steinbrenner because it is then that he must step aside as general partner of the New York Yankees.
But Aug. 20 is not necessarily a make-or-break date for the Yankees to have found a permanent replacement.


Market Place;   Is This a Time To Buy or Wait?
LEAD: Wall Street is offering varying, and in some cases contradictory, advice for individual investors seeking a safe harbor after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


Blazers Sign Abdelnaby
LEAD: The Portland Trail Blazers announced yesterday that they have signed Alaa Abdelnaby, their first-round draft selection, to a four-year contract.
Terms were not announced.


Food Notes
LEAD:
Tomato Relish With Clout


Editor of Financial Times To Resign at End of Year
LEAD: Sir Geoffrey Owen, the editor of The Financial Times for the last decade, will step down at the end of this year, when he will be succeeded by the newspaper's deputy editor, Richard P. Lambert.


In Jogger Case, Once Viewed Starkly, Some Skeptics Side With Defendants
LEAD: For more than a year, the six black and Hispanic teen-agers charged with the rape and attempted murder of the Central Park jogger appeared to find few supporters as New Yorkers recoiled from what the prosecutors said the youths did during a brutal rampage on an April night.


Pressure for English-Only Job Rules Stirring a Sharp Debate Across U.S.
LEAD: In what civil rights groups say is a reaction to recent waves of immigrants into the United States, a growing number of businesses, ranging from hospitals to bottling plants, are requiring that their employees speak English on the job.


Goetze Pursues a Life Off the Course
LEAD: She is golf's teen-age phenomenon, with numerous championships, including the United States Women's Amateur, to her credit, but Vicki Goetze is not a golf fanatic.


Trade Ruling Against Korea
LEAD: Sweaters made of synthetic fibers in South Korea are being sold in the United States at less than fair market value, the Commerce Department said last week.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday on Federal housing legislation misstated the difference in spending between the Senate proposal and the Bush Administration plan.
According to estimates by the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the $27.9 billion Senate version would provide $4.2 billion more than the White House version.


Campaign for Early German Vote Stalls
LEAD: The campaign by the conservative Government leaders of Bonn and East Berlin to push forward the unification of Germany by seven weeks collapsed today.


Bush Plans Address On Crisis in the Gulf
LEAD: President Bush is to address the nation on the Persian Gulf crisis today at 9 A.M., the White House said late yesterday.


Impasse on Money Stalls Mississippi School Plan
LEAD: Last fall, Gov.
Ray Mabus proposed sweeping changes designed to rescue Mississippi's long-suffering schools.
This spring, the Legislature first strengthened and then swiftly approved the package.


Keep Seeking Sale, Foremost Is Urged
LEAD: Trusts that control about 34 percent of the stock of the Foremost Corporation of America have urged the company not to end its search for a buyer.
In a letter dated Friday, Mary Caroline Rottschafer, president of the Frey Foundation, and James E. McKay, trustee for various Frey family trusts, said they would be forced by Internal Revenue Service regulations to sell their 3.5 million Foremost shares within four and a half years.


Paying for New Officers
LEAD: How much is a police officer worth to a taxpayer?


EUROPE AND JAPAN SUPPORT EMBARGO
LEAD: As if anxious to dispel memories of their past support for the Baghdad Government, Western Europe and Japan have moved quickly to carry out European Community and United Nations resolutions ordering trade and arms embargoes against Iraq.


In South Africa: The Nightmare Ebbs
LEAD: The world is too absorbed by the Persian Gulf to be wholly attentive, but there's stunning news from South Africa:


Talks Continue At Western Union
LEAD: Labor-contract negotiations between the Western Union Corporation and the Communications Workers of America continued yesterday after a previous contract between the company and the union expired at midnight Monday.
The C.W.A. represents 2,500 of the 3,400 workers at the ailing financial services and telecommunications company.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in Business Day yesterday about Congressional testimony by James M. Fail, an Arizona businessman who bought 15 insolvent savings and loan associations, misidentified Mr.
Fail's lawyer.
He is Ronald S. Liebman.


Immigrant Slain At a Restaurant His Family Runs
LEAD: An Afghan immigrant who moved to New York eight years ago was shot and killed at his family-run fast-food restaurant in Brooklyn late Monday night, apparently by a customer who had refused to pay for his meal, the police said yesterday.


Review/Jazz;   Ailey Theater To Open Branch In Baltimore
LEAD: The Alvin Ailey Dance Theater Foundation will establish a second home, in Baltimore, it announced yesterday.
The foundation, which is based in New York City, is the umbrella institution for Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, a school and a junior dance company, the Alvin Ailey Repertory Ensemble.


Bridge
LEAD: At this time of tens of thousands of teen-agers around the country are at summer camps, engaged in a wide variety of sporting and cultural activities.
To that long list four camps have added bridge this season: Belvoir Terrace in Lenox, Mass.; Camp Emerson in Hinsdale, Mass.; Camp Laurel in Readfield, Me.; and Camp Merrimac, in Contoocook, N.H.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Some More Bad News For Outdoor
LEAD: The outdoor advertising industry has taken a battering lately from special-interest groups and Federal lawmakers who want to impose tough new restrictions.
Now there is more bad news: Advertising revenues for the outdoor industry in the first quarter dropped 15 percent from the period last year, according to the LNA/Arbitron Multi-Media


Hicks, Muse Buys 2 Media Services
LEAD: Hicks, Muse &amp; Company, a Dallas-based private investment group specializing in leveraged acquisitions, said it had agreed to purchase two media services companies, Neodata Services and the TMI Corporation, in transactions valued at $104 million.


Chronicle
LEAD: Business and political leaders celebrated the 20th anniversary of Black Enterprise magazine last night at the American Museum of Natural History in Manhattan.
And EARL G. GRAVES, the founder, publisher and editor, savored the moment.


The Catskills Trade In a Little Glitz for Much More Substance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bhutto Blames Army for Her Ouster
LEAD: A day after her Government was dismissed by the President of Pakistan on accusations of corruption and mismanagement, Benazir Bhutto described the unexpected action today as a ''quasi-military intervention'' organized by army headquarters.


Communist Ally of Mandela Says Rebel War Could Still Be Revived
LEAD: Joe Slovo, a leading figure in both the African National Congress and the South African Communist Party, said today that the organizations' low-key guerrilla war, suspended in what many here took as a major breakthrough, could still be revived.


U.S. Interference in Liberia Will Backfire
LEAD: To the Editor:


Virginia Inness-Brown, Arts Advocate, 89
LEAD: Virginia Royall Inness-Brown, a proponent of the arts and former consultant to the State Department, died July 28 at Miles Memorial Hospital in Damariscotta, Me.
She was 89 years old.


95-Year-Old Murder Suspect Is Killed by Bus
LEAD: A 95-year-old Manhattan man who was indicted last month in the bludgeoning death of an 88-year-old neighbor was killed yesterday and a companion was injured when they were struck by a Transit Authority bus.


Congress Completes Agenda, but Obstacles Remain
LEAD: Before its monthlong recess, Congress moved toward completing an unfinished legislative agenda of the 1980's by passing the first major bills in years on child care, housing, civil rights and the environment.
But these ambitious proposals are threatened by legislative, financial and political obstacles.


A Police Comedy That Takes Realism Seriously
LEAD: Michael J. Fox and James Woods were rehearsing a fight scene under the domed rotunda of the Beacon Theater in Manhattan.
Their director, John Badham, looked on for a while, then turned to the New York City police lieutenant standing next to him. ''Is that all right?'' he asked.


Ford Truck Offer
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company extended its truck-buyer incentive program through Sept. 26, the official introduction date of its 1991 models.
The program had been set to expire on Wednesday.
The incentive program offers special financing rates and cash allowances of $600 on Ford Aerostar, F-series trucks, Econoline van and Club Wagons, $1,500 on Ford Bronco 2 and Broncos and $1,000 on Ford Ranger.


Sir Peter Hall Quits Festival
LEAD: Sir Peter Hall has announced his resignation as artistic director of the Glyndebourne Festival Opera because, he said, he was not consulted about the director Peter Sellars's decision to delete all the spoken dialogue from his recent production of Mozart's ''Magic Flute.''


Sundstrand Pact With Milton Roy
LEAD: The Sundstrand Corporation reached a confidentiality and standstill agreement with the Milton Roy Company in return for access to the company's confidential financial information.
Sunstrand has made an offer of $28 a share, or $160 million, for Milton Roy, a waste-water equipment manufacturer based in St.


Chronicle
LEAD: CHRISTIAN BRANDO pleaded not guilty yesterday to murdering his pregnant half-sister's boyfriend during an argument at the home of his father, MARLON BRANDO.
He also pleaded not guilty to possession of an illegal weapon, a machine pistol.


Fed Setback In Bank Case
LEAD: A Federal court in New Orleans denied a request yesterday by the Federal Reserve Board for a rehearing of a case testing the validity of the Fed's power to control the financial affairs of bank holding companies.


Woes for Gastineau
LEAD: Mark Gastineau's return to professional football has not been a resounding success.
First, the former Jet All-Pro defensive end signed to play this season with the British Columbia Lions of the Canadian Football League.
Then, in his first game, he was ejected for fighting.
Now, after having cleared waivers through the league,


Bogota Party Aide Slain at Queens Home
LEAD: A 49-year-old Colombian immigrant who was a high-ranking official in the New York chapter of his country's Liberal Party was killed Monday night outside his house in Queens, the police said.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-11
Troops were ordered to Saudi Arabia by the United States Government, which declared that Iraqi forces massed in Kuwait posed an imminent threat to the Middle Eastern kingdom.
The U.S. is also sending an armored brigade and jet fighters, officials said.
Page


Eating Well
LEAD: SUMMER is the kindest time of all to those who know they shouldn't have their cake, but keep eating it.
Succulent melons, blushing nectarines, bright red strawberries, plump plums take the onus off desserts for anyone worrying about what makes most desserts taste so good: fat.


Souter Hearings Won't Be Useful For Predictions, One Justice Says
LEAD: Justice John Paul Stevens said today that it was fruitless and inappropriate to use the coming Senate confirmation hearings of Judge David H. Souter to predict how he would decide cases as a member of the United States Supreme Court.


Quick Action by Turkey On Sanctions a Startler
LEAD: By joining the worldwide sanctions against Iraq today Turkey moved more decisively than many cautious and even nervous people here had wished.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, the photographic materials and chemicals company, appointed Dennis M. Peck chief executive of Interactive Systems Corp., a computer supplies and services unit.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of incorrect information supplied by a court office, an article on July 13 about the defense lawyers' strategy in the Central Park jogger trial misstated the way the lawyers were retained.
One, Michael Joseph, who represents Antron McCray, was appointed by the court; another, Robert Burns, was originally hired by the family of Yusef Salaam and subsequently appointed by the court.


Alfred H. Lovell, Book Club Director, 74
LEAD: Alfred H. Lovell, a retired consular official and former executive at the Book-of-the-Month Club, died Aug. 1 at his home in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 74 years old.


C.D. Yields Off a 10th Week; Savings Units' Rates Mixed
LEAD: Yields on most certificates of deposit and money market accounts have fallen for the 10th straight week.
Rates at savings institutions were mixed.


Crime, Police And Politics;   A Game of Numbers With a Long History
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins's decision to hire 1,058 more police officers is the latest in a long string of similar pledges by recent mayors and would-be mayors of New York City, maneuvers in a numbers game that has as much to do with political appearances as with fighting crime.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE OIL JOLT
The rise in oil prices on world markets slowed, and the reported Saudi pledge to produce an additional two million barrels a day, combined with production increases expected from other nations, may stem further price rises, analysts said. [Page D1.]
For corporate America and the U.S.


Trade Schools: Defaults And Broken Promises
LEAD: Bonnie Rodgers says the trade school recruiters knocked on her door, left leaflets in her courtyard and even approached her outside the city welfare office, serenading her with phrases like ''financial aid'' and ''job placement.''


For U.S. Visa, Peruvians Try Lots of Ruses
LEAD: A notebook kept behind the bulletproof glass where American consular officers talk to visa applicants is proof of the desperation created by Peru's deepening guerrilla violence and economic ruin.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about problems in raising funds to fight AIDS referred incorrectly to the status of a bill authorizing $875 million for AIDS-related health care.
It has been passed by Congress and sent to President Bush.


Corrections
LEAD: The main article in Business Day yesterday about the performance of the stock market on Monday incorrectly characterized the drop in the Dow Jones industrial average in some copies.
The decline, to 2,716.34, was the biggest one-day drop since Oct. 13, 1989; the close was the lowest since May 4, 1990, when it was 2,710.36.


American Magazine Publisher Sells 50% Stake to Japanese
LEAD: In a long-expected move to save his embattled magazine company, Owen J. Lipstein, the publisher of Psychology Today, Mother Earth News and Smart magazines, announced yesterday that he had sold a 50 percent stake in his New American Magazine Company to a Japanese publishing company.
The joint venture is one of the few between American and


U.S. Is Ready to Ask Soviets to Help With Naval Blockade of Iraq
LEAD: Bush Administration officials said today that Washington was prepared to invite the Soviet Union into any international naval force assembled to enforce sanctions against Iraq.
They added that they had no doubt that Moscow would want to take part.


About New York;   Picking Up Human Spirits As Well as Trash
LEAD: With an expression somewhere between fascination and compassion, a stylish woman -the sort one expects to see on Fifth Avenue -watched a man in a dirty sweatshirt rummaging through a garbage receptacle.


Hardly a Forgotten Man, McNeil Impresses Coaches
LEAD: Coach Bruce Coslet made a startling admission today, four days before the Jets' opening preseason game: When he took over as head coach, he had virtually given up on Freeman McNeil.
But McNeil will start at running back against the Philadelphia Eagles Saturday night.


TWA Imposes Fuel Surcharge
LEAD: Trans World Airlines Inc. said yesterday that it would add a $20 surcharge for one-way trans-Atlantic travel, effective next Wednesday, to defray higher fuel costs.


The Driver Who Stopped Singing
LEAD: His mother wanted him to be a pharmacist: Hang up the old mortar and pestle at 6 P.M., go home to the wife and kids.
Steady.
Dependable.
Safe.
The father, on the other hand, did not mind if his son went into the family occupation, which is driving cars at high speed.
But Richard Petty often seemed bemused that his son,


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: MOST people think of salads as cold, but it's not necessarily so.
I have been experimenting; warm salads are excellent appetizers or main courses any time of year.


Soviets to Open Exchanges For Free Trading in Rubles
LEAD: The Soviet Union said today that it would open domestic money exchanges next year to allow businesses to trade Soviet rubles freely for foreign currencies.


Plan to Cut Phone Rates
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission issued details yesterday on its proposed plan to reduce rates by up to 50 percent for international telephone calls from the United States.
The F.C.C. said consumers pay an average of $1.20 a minute for international calls and 20 cents a minute for domestic long-distance calls, while it costs telephone companies only a little more to handle international calls.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: IT seems wicked, even wrong, these days to revel in the discovery of a fine steakhouse.
But there is good news in Minneapolis for those who still share the secret pleasures of red meat, well cut and seriously served.


Union Bars White in Asian Role; Broadway May Lose 'Miss Saigon'
LEAD: Actors' Equity denied permission yesterday for the English actor Jonathan Pryce to appear on Broadway next spring in the role of the Eurasian pimp that he created in the hit London musical ''Miss Saigon.''


Georgia Democrats Pick Miller in Runoff for Governor
LEAD: Lieut.
Gov.
Zell Miller swept the state's gubernatorial primary runoff tonight, outdistancing Andrew Young, the former Atlanta mayor, by a margin of nearly two to one.


Wine Talk
LEAD: THE old argument about French wine versus California wine goes on and on, but the wine enthusiasts who gathered here recently had no time for it.
They were wine makers, French and American, some of the most highly regarded in their profession, and they were here to learn from each other, not compete.


Bush's Aim's: Deter Attack, Send a Signal
LEAD: The American troops and planes being sent to Saudi Arabia tonight are intended to be part of a broad international force designed to deter an Iraqi attack on Saudi oilfields and to intimidate President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


Where Houstonians Go to Fill Their Wide Open Spaces
LEAD: ''WE need to stack that jury as much as we can,'' said the fellow in the shirtsleeves and tie as he took another bite of his barbecued brisket sandwich at Goode Co. ''You heard Wally say he ain't gonna settle.'' Welcome to the land where lawyers eat barbecue for lunch every day and discuss their cases, usually, one assumes, not within earshot of their opponents.


Gordon Bunshaft, Architect, Dies at 81
LEAD: Gordon Bunshaft, whose modernist skyscrapers, museums and libraries made him one of the most influential architects of the 20th century, died on Monday evening at his apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


Faltering Hopes for Accord on Deficit Are Dimmed Further by Gulf Crisis
LEAD: Democratic and Republican lawmakers said today that Iraq's invasion of Kuwait is a serious setback for already troubled budget talks between Congress and the White House and that it will probably scuttle any deficit reduction for the coming year.


Cobb of Tennessee Signs Buccaneer Pact
LEAD: Reggie Cobb, a former star runner at the University of Tennessee, has signed a three-year contract worth $1.2 million with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Cobb, who was the fifth overall pick in the National Football League draft this spring, missed 17 days of training camp before reaching the agreement on


For Congress, One Month Left
LEAD: Finding nothing so urgent that can't wait till September, Congress broke for its summer vacation right on schedule.
The budget deficit?
Manana.
Curbs on campaign contributions?
Clean air?
Child care?
Some other day.
New taxes?
Horrors.


Review/Music;   Bolcom Piece Honors William Schuman at 80
LEAD: Tanglewood's annual Festival of Contemporary Music is performed primarily by the youthful fellows and assorted faculty of the Tanglewood Music Center and takes place in the smaller theaters on the Tanglewood grounds.
This year's festival is running from Saturday afternoon through Thursday night.


Marines Evacuate 21 More in Liberia
LEAD: United States marines evacuated 21 more foreigners from Liberia today, including several Americans, as a rebel leader who seized more than a dozen hostages on Monday threatened to attack the 237 marines protecting the American Embassy in Monrovia.


Vying on Hudson
LEAD: Don Johnson, a co-star of the television show ''Miami Vice,'' who in his spare time won the 1988 world championship in the superboat division of powerboat racing, will lead a fleet of more than 40 high-powered motorboats on Aug. 18 when the New York Offshore Grand Prix is contested on the waters of the Hudson


Tokyo Stocks Post a Gain; Others Mixed
LEAD: The Japanese stock market made up some of yesterday's losses today, as bargain-hunters pushed the Tokyo Stock Exchange's key Nikkei index up 3.10 percent.
The world's other major stock markets rose or declined slightly.


June Level Of Borrowing Rose Slightly
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board said today that consumers repaid car loans much faster than they took out new ones in June, a fresh sign of shrinking economic activity that slowed credit expansion.


Chronicle
LEAD: After canceling several appearances in Japan this summer because of exhaustion, LEONARD BERNSTEIN will be back on the podium Tuesday at the Tanglewood Festival.


A New Mirror Problem for NASA May Stall Vital Weather Satellites
LEAD: A mirror flaw in a new $1 billion series of weather satellites threatens to delay their launching and leave forecasters without vital pictures to track storms and hurricanes, a situation that Federal officials say would constitute a national emergency.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher; Prices for Gold Are Mixed
LEAD: The dollar ended higher yesterday against all leading currencies except the German mark, as traders kept a close watch on the Persian Gulf crisis and its effect on interest rates.


Don't Pin Housing Drop on Savings and Loans;   Limit Deposit Insurance
LEAD: To the Editor With unerring aim, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady managed to miss the heart of the deposit insurance ''problem'' (''Brady Expects Some New Limits to Be Put on Deposit Insurance,'' front page, July 26).


Ralph M. Holdeman, Church Official, 84
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
Ralph M. Holdeman, a former official with the National Council of Churches who worked in the civil rights movement, died July 31 at Elkhart General Hospital in Elkhart, Ind..
He was 84 years old.
Dr.
Holdeman, who lived in Elkhart, died of a stroke, said his wife, Mildred.


We Can Keep Oil Cheap . . .
LEAD: How high can oil prices go?


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
7.87
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.31
7.30
8.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.27
7.23
7.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.58
8.51
7.95
30-YR.


Congress: Much Accomplished, Much to be Done
LEAD:
Airport Expansion - The House has authorized $17.7 billion in spending over the next two years to upgrade the nation's aviation system that includes letting airports levy a tax on roundtrip airline tickets of up to $12.
The tax faces strong opposition in the Senate, which has not yet acted.


Exchange Meeting Seen
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange board is preparing for a meeting tomorrow at which the approval of William H. Donaldson as the new Big Board chairman is expected to be a top agenda item, sources familiar with the plans said yesterday.
Several sources said the board had been expected to meet this month to approve the selection of Mr.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Aug. 3 1990
July 27 1990
Aug. 19894
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.4
7.4
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.1
2.8
Gasoline stocks
218.5
215.5
226.4
Distillate stocks
119.2
118.6
114.0
Crude imports, daily
6.6
7.3
5.8
Product imports, daily
2.7
2.3
2.1
Crude stocks
379.7
386.6
333.5
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
94.6
93.7
87.6


Customs Seizes Iraqi Oil Cargo
LEAD: Customs officials today seized a shipload of Iraqi crude oil at Port Arthur saying it violated the United States trade embargo.


Seeks Joint Action
Declaring that Iraqi forces massed in Kuwait posed an imminent threat to Saudi Arabia, the United States today ordered thousands of paratroopers, an armored brigade and jet fighters to the Middle Eastern kingdom, officials said.
Declaring that Iraqi forces massed in Kuwait posed an imminent threat to Saudi Arabia, the United States today ordered thousands of paratroopers, an armored brigade and jet fighters to the Middle Eastern kingdom, officials said.


Danger To Movies
LEAD: France's continuing addiction to the movies can be easily measured by the extraordinary variety of feature films broadcast at prime time, free of charge and without commercial breaks, every week on French television.


Accounting Rules Approved
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission said yesterday that it had voted 3 to 2 to approve a long-awaited consent order that it expects will make the accounting profession more competitive.


Bets Denied By Winfield
LEAD: Allegations that Dave Winfield has bet on nonbaseball sports events, raised in this week's issue of Sports Illustrated, have brought strong denials from the outfielder and his lawyer, Jeffrey Klein, who also questioned the credibility of the magazine's sources.


Getting Personal With a Lobster Doesn't Soften a Cook's Heart
LEAD: I'M looking at Louie.
Louie is looking back at me.
Louie is a two-pound lobster with little black eyes.


Baghdad Rages at 'Foreigner' But Middle East Backs Away
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq remained unrepentant in the face of growing pressure today, saying in a speech that ''Iraq will firmly confront any imperialist or Zionist attempt from any side that may stand against Kuwait's uprising or infringe on Arab dignity and land.''


Barry Jury Returns With One Verdict, Then Members Decline to Disclose It
LEAD: The jury in the drug and perjury trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. reached a verdict today on one misdemeanor count of cocaine possession, but in a suprising move it refused to disclose it.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: THE scene is the Fruit Palace, a greengrocery in the Midwood section of Brooklyn where Millie Marcus is checking out this, examining that.
Another customer enters and heads for the potato bin; the manager greets him with a wave but he passes unnoticed by Mrs.
Marcus, who is half-listening to the store radio.


Ex-Gov. Mecham Raises Hackles Again in Arizona
LEAD: Like the cactuses that dot the desert, Arizonans pride themselves on being able to stand alone, no matter the heat.


Democrats Vie for Albany Senate Coup
LEAD: Although seriously underfinanced, New York's Democrats may have their best chance in 20 years to win a majority in the State Senate this November, a victory that would demolish the last base of Republican power in state government.


Nuclear Weapon Plants Face Lawsuits Around the Country
LEAD: In the aftermath of disclosures about nuclear accidents and operations that the Government now acknowledges threatened the safety of thousands of Americans, the nuclear weapons industry is facing a spate of lawsuits brought by workers and neighbors of plants in four states.


Critic's Notebook;   Of Dueling Lears and a Fascist Richard III
LEAD: No one here would be so vulgar as to acknowledge anything so crude as a theatrical rivalry, but any visiting theatergoer can see that this is the summer of dueling King Lears on the English stage.
The country's two pre-eminent repertory companies, the Royal National Theater in London and the Royal Shakespeare Company in Stratford-on-Avon, have each just opened major productions of Shakespeare's most epic tragedy.


Saudis Make a Stand
LEAD: By allowing American troops to land on its territory and increasing its oil production, Saudi Arabia tonight proclaimed what it has been reluctant to say openly for decades: that its interests lie with the West.


Books of The Times
LEAD:
American Cassandra
The Life of Dorothy Thompson
By Peter Kurth
Illustrated. 587 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Treasury Prices Continue to Fall
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities continued to drop and interest rates continued to climb yesterday, reversing their morning course, as an uncommonly volatile fixed-income market was buffeted by conflicting reports and rumors about the Mideast crisis.


Someone Has to Pay
LEAD: My plan was to wax wroth today about gasoline prices being raised at Biff's Exxon before Iraq's Wehrmacht had moved more than 10 yards into money-rich Kuwait.
Luckily, while I was searching for the wax my gaze fell on a New York Times story that took the steam out of me.


Gail Levin Weds John B. Van Sickle
LEAD: Gail Levin, the daughter of Mrs.
Shirley Hershberg of Atlanta and the late Barron W. Levin, was married yesterday to John B. Van Sickle, son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Van Sickle of Rockford, Ill.
Judge Thomas P. Griesa of Federal District Court performed the ceremony at the Federal Court House in New York.


Colombia Swears In President, a Foe of Traffickers
LEAD: Amid tight security, Cesar Gaviria Trujillo was inaugurated today as President of Colombia.


Intel Wins Round In Copyright Suit
LEAD: The Intel Corporation won a round in its copyright suit against Advanced Micro Devices Inc. over its math coprocessor chip, the 80287.
United States District Court Judge William A. Ingram issued a ruling blocking Advanced Micro from using the phrases ''genuine Intel equivalent,'' ''100 percent Intel compatible'' or their equivalents in advertising.


Don't Pin Housing Drop on Savings and Loans;   Oklahoma Bank Sale
LEAD: To the Editor:


4 Held in Random Shooting
LEAD: Three young men and a woman from Long Island were arrested early yesterday in the East New York section of Brooklyn after one of them opened fire with a semiautomatic assault rifle from inside a car, the police said.
No injuries were reported.
The four were charged with attempted murder and reckless endangerment.


Two Vice Chairmen Appointed for Saks
LEAD: Saks Fifth Avenue, the nation's largest luxury retailer, which was recently bought by a Middle East investment group, named two vice chairmen this week, Arthur C. Martinez and Philip B. Miller.


Born-Again Yankee Fan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Iraq Jams Voice of America
LEAD: Iraq has been jamming the Arabic-language broadcasts of Voice of America for three days, the radio network said today.
The network, run by the United States Government, said it would try to beam its programs to Iraq through satellite television tonight.
The jamming has affected much of Voice of America's broadcasting to the Middle East, including the Persian Gulf and Jordan, said the network's deputy director, Robert Coonrood.


Chronicle
LEAD: ART BUCHWALD auctioned CARLY SIMON for $8,500. ''She serves you breakfast in bed - she doesn't get in the bed - with a song,'' Mr.
Buchwald explained.
WALTER CRONKITE went for $5,600.
They were among the prizes at an annual celebrity auction, with Mr.
Buchwald as auctioneer, Monday night in Edgartown, Mass., on Martha's Vineyard, where they all summer.


Xian Journal;   China in High Heels: A Wobbly School for Models
LEAD: The walls of the sweltering municipal gymnasium were grimy and the uneven light fell in dim pools, but the line of long-legged young women hardly noticed.
Waving the latest sunglasses, using mousse to hold their raven black hair just so and with sultry expressions fixed on their painted faces, they swayed happily to the rhythms of a modern


Release of 2 Hostages Is Promised in Beirut
LEAD: A previously unknown group calling itself the Palestine Revolutionary Squads said today that it would release two Swiss hostages within 24 hours.


Rioting Follows Funeral of Israeli Teen-Agers
LEAD: Crowds of Jews attacked Arabs here today to avenge the slayings of two Israeli teen-agers who the authorities say are believed to have been killed by Palestinians.


Fannie Mae Prices 2 Debenture Issues
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, also known as Fannie Mae, yesterday priced two debentures totaling $950 million.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There have been changes of a sort that cause us to believe there is a growing and continuous threat to Saudi Arabia.''
- Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman. [A8:2.]


Maker of Faulty Heart Valve Now Will Try to Reach Users
LEAD: A company that made a faulty mechanical heart valve reversed itself yesterday and said it would try to find all of the 21,000 patients implanted with the device in the United States.


Economic Scene
LEAD: While the powerful Japanese economy appears to be in a position to ride out the storm of higher oil prices and disrupted supplies relatively well, the country's weak link in an otherwise solid economic chain may be in the financial markets, economists and analysts say.


Taylor Belcher Ex-Ambassador to Peru, Dies at 70
LEAD: Taylor Garrison Belcher, former United States Ambassador to Cyprus and Peru, died on Monday at Peekskill (N.Y.) Community Hospital.
He was 70 years old and lived in Garrison, N.Y.


Tankers Scramble for New Supplies
LEAD: With oil from Iraq and Kuwait under embargo and the threat of war hanging over the Middle East, oil companies are preparing to redeploy their tanker fleets to pick up oil from alternative producers.
And they are already paying a price for the region's instability in the form of higher insurance rates for ships and cargo.


Prices of Cattle Increase; Pork and Grains Are Mixed
LEAD: Cattle futures prices surged yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, reflecting some apparent easing of economic worries linked to the Middle East crisis and strength in the cash cattle markets.


Mets Continue To Slip
LEAD: Frank Cashen, umbrella in hand and his socks soaking further with every step, walked out onto the field at Shea Stadium last night at 8:30 P.M., splashed around the outfield, deliberated briefly and then declared the scene fit for play.


Man Shoots 2 at Legal Services Office
LEAD: An apparently deranged man who had been refused help by a Bronx legal aid agency opened fire from the sidewalk into the agency's Grand Concourse offices yesterday, injuring two employees, the police said.


Chavez and King Are Playing a Cagey Game of Tag
LEAD: Ever since Julio Cesar Chavez stopped Meldrick Taylor in the final seconds of their championship bout in March, his future has been clouded by the question of whether or not he would continue his association with Don King, his longtime promoter.


Iraq's Conquest: An Eden in the Sand Ruled in a Tribal Fashion
LEAD: Oil turned Kuwait virtually overnight from a sleepy, mud-walled little fortress that sheltered pearl divers and traders into an air-conditioned Eden where wealth accumulated without work.


Pirates Defeat Expos By 4-3 in 12 Innings
LEAD: Jay Bell's sacrifice fly after Jose Lind's leadoff double in the 12th inning gave the Pittsburgh Pirates a 4-3 victory tonight over Montreal, the Expos' sixth consecutive loss, a season high.


Anti-Abortion Group Urges Boycott of Planned Parenthood Donors
LEAD: In an effort to build on its success in forcing A.T.&amp;T. to end its support of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, an anti-abortion group is calling for a boycott of all corporations that make contributions to Planned Parenthood.


Lemuel Shepherd Jr., 94, Ex-Chief Of Marines Who Served in 3 Wars
LEAD: Gen.
Lemuel C. Shepherd Jr., a former Commandant of the Marine Corps and a decorated veteran of both World Wars and the Korean War, died Monday at his home in San Diego.
He was 94 years old.


Yanks Win to Start Trip As Maas Hits 12th Homer
LEAD: He had not pitched in two months, not since the June night in Baltimore when his right elbow suddenly gave out in the second inning.
But tonight, three months after he was acquired in a controversial trade and 11 months since his last victory, Mike Witt finally won.


Gordon Bunshaft Dies


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Graf Rolls Past Rehe Steffi Graf, whose chief rival, Martina Navratilova, dropped out earlier in the day, rolled to an easy 6-0, 6-3 victory over Stephanie Rehe yesterday in her first match at the $225,000 Great American tournament in San Diego.
Navratilova, seeded second, was scheduled to play her first match last night.


2 Die When Van Holding 17 Leaves Road, Striking a Tree
LEAD: Two Brooklyn teen-agers were killed and eight were hospitalized when the van in which they were riding left a rain-slicked highway and struck a tree early today, the police said.


Don't Pin Housing Drop on Savings and Loans;   Less Than World War II
LEAD: To the Editor:


And There's Always Natural Gas
LEAD: Natural gas, long regarded by oil producers as the crab grass of fossil fuels, is getting new consideration because of the crisis in the Middle East.


Chronicle
LEAD: Many of the island's better-known residents bought each other.
KATHARINE GRAHAM bought a kayak ride with JUDY BLUME and an autographed copy of her new children's book.
Ms.
Blume bought an original sketch by SHEL SIVERSTEIN.
LOUISE GRUNWALD paid $1,100 for a weekend for two in Washington, with a tour of the Hirshhorn Museum led by OLGA HIRSHHORN.


Oil-Price Climb Slows; New Stability Possible
LEAD: The rise in oil prices on world markets slowed yesterday.
And prices could steady or even fall, analysts and traders said, if Saudi Arabia raised its production and other exporting nations followed suit.


Farm Land Values Up
LEAD: The value of farm land in the Midwest continues its climb in the second quarter of 1990, a new survey indicates.
The survey of 420 agricultural bankers in Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Wisconsin and Michigan indicates that farmland values rose 1 percent in the April-to-June period.
That means farmland values are up 33 percent from their lows more than three years ago, said Peter Heffernan, an analyst for the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.


A Stronger Future for Composites
LEAD: A decade ago came predictions aplenty that the growth of composite materials - strong, light combinations of complementary substances - would be so dramatic that all-composite automobiles and airplanes would soon become common.
But high production costs and the need for huge capital expenditures have curbed such expectations.


Don't Pin Housing Drop on Savings and Loans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rates Decline At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates declined for the fourth straight week at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.


Richard Casper Dies; Actor and Director, 41
LEAD: Robert W. (Richard) Casper, an actor, director and choreographer who worked on 30 productions for An Evening Dinner Theater in Elmsford, N.Y., died Friday at Memorial Hospital in Mount Holly, N.J.
He was 41 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Tomatoes Connected To Salmonella Cases In 4 Midwest States
LEAD: Raw tomatoes may be the common link in a salmonella outbreak that has sickened more than 100 people in four Midwestern states in the past month, health officials say.


What to Put in the Pot: Cooks Face Challenge Over Animal Rights
LEAD: THE steam from four outdoor lobster pots rose toward the blue sky and danced like happy ghosts in a balsam-scented breeze over Mount Desert Island, Me.
It was a perfect Maine day.
A lobster kind of day.
And a line of station wagons and campers, sports cars and Jeeps pulled into the Bar Harbor Snack


City Hall Asks M.T.A. to Delay 9-mm. Guns
LEAD: The Dinkins administration has asked the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to delay arming the transit police with powerful 9-millimeter semiautomatic guns, a decision the Mayor's office called ''profoundly distressing.''


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Speaking Out&gt;


GTE Stock Deal With Contel Is Set
LEAD: The GTE Corporation signed a definitive agreement with the Contel Corporation covering their previously announced agreement to exchange 1.27 GTE common shares for each Contel share.
The agreement, which was approved earlier today by the directors of both companies, ''will create a new company with a market value of $25 billion,'' G


Summer Pickings: Tomato and Peach
LEAD: IT is finally tomato and peach time again, and both are finding their way into my summer menus.


Bronx Audience Hears Dinkins Ask for Help in Fighting Crime


Defense Asks, Was Jogger Really Raped?
LEAD: A defense lawyer in the Central Park jogger trial suggested yesterday that the 30-year-old victim was not raped on April 19, 1989, but rather had had sex with someone she knew shortly before she went jogging that night.


Tobacco Companies Find Harlem Wary
LEAD: For years Harlem Week - a celebration of black culture and achievement -has relied on companies like Philip Morris and Heublein Inc. to underwrite its concerts, athletic competitions and receptions.


Book Notes
LEAD:
Children's Books


Review/Fashion;   Is the Killer Jacket Losing Its Grip?
LEAD: MEN'S fashions were center stage in New York last week as leading designers showed their spring 1991 lines.
The dominant message was hang loose.
The antidote to the french-cuffed, pin-collared, my-suit-wants-to-eat-you-for-breakfast 1980's seems to be a roomier, slouchier, less uptight Mr.
Dude.


The Emergency's Here: Use the Oil
LEAD: American consumers are being ''ripped off on a massive scale,'' Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut said yesterday, voicing anger felt around the country.
The anger is directed at gas stations and oil companies that jacked up prices even though the gasoline they were selling was imported long before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.


Democrats Urge Bush to Pressure Oil Companies on Price Increases
LEAD: Congressional Democrats accused the oil industry today of engaging in price-gouging and exhorted President Bush to stop it.


Sweet Snarl of the Chain Saw
LEAD: Scheduling a Maine vacation according to phases of the moon in August is not the easiest thing to do.
To maintain proximate sanity, one cannot disclose the scheme; it's really easier to say that you have to check the schedule with the cat sitter or the closet organizer, then sneak a peek at the moon-phase calendar.


U.S. and the Soviets as Allies: It's the First Time Since 1945
LEAD: In the five days since Iraq occupied Kuwait, the Soviet Union and the United States have begun testing a new working relationship that is without precedent since the outset of the cold war.


Giants' Dorsey Signs 2-Year Pact
LEAD: For two weeks, while six defensive starters have stayed home because of contract disputes, the Giants have struggled through training camp.
Today, the problem eased a bit when Eric Dorsey, the starting defensive left end, reported for work.


Supermarket Strike Averted In California as Talks Go On
LEAD: A strike threatened by 80,000 California supermarket workers was put on hold early today so contract talks could continue.


Bush's Gamble in Sending Troops: Stakes Are Certain, Outcome Murky
LEAD: By sending combat troops into Saudi Arabia, President Bush moved decisively today to defend fundamental American economic interests, but he also tied the United States and his own fortunes to a potentially explosive crisis with no clear outcome in sight.
The stakes behind the


At Shoal Creek, a Subdued Readiness
LEAD: By all appearances today, Shoal Creek Country Club presented the kind of setting for the P.G.A.
Championship that any major golf tournament would envy.


Steep Market Fall Is Halted; Dow Off 5.70
LEAD: The stock market continued to react nervously to events in the Middle East yesterday but steadied after a steep three-day slide.
Fears of higher oil prices and inflation were still very much on investors' minds, as the Dow Jones industrial average fluctuated within a 65-point range.


FEW CHOICES SEEN FOR IRAQI LEADER
LEAD: Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader, unexpectedly faced with a rapid and menacing global response to his invasion of Kuwait, increasingly is being backed into a corner from which his most likely options are to surrender or to lash out militarily, private and Government experts on the Middle East said today.


Southland Wins Franchise Suit
LEAD: In a victory for large franchise operations, a New York judge has ruled that franchisers can negotiate deals that vary from their offering documents.


N.C.A.A. Puts Upsala Basketball on Probation for 5 Years
LEAD: The Upsala College basketball program was placed on five years' probation yesterday, banned from post-season play for three years and ordered to trim its 1990-91 schedule to 22 games from 26.


Using Cameras to 'See' a Foggy Road
LEAD: Anyone who has driven through a heavy rain or a thick fog can remember squinting and straining to catch a better glimpse of the road.
Now engineers at BMW are working on a system using video and infrared cameras to improve drivers' perception of the road under conditions of poor visibility.


Few Blacks In Clubs For Majors
LEAD: A survey by The Associated Press shows that while most of the private clubs that hold major golf championships conducted by the United States Golf Association and the Professional Golfers' Association of America insist they do not discriminate by race, religion or sex, few have black members.


Iraqi Crisis: Reverberations
LEAD:
IRAQI DEFIANCE President Saddam Hussein said Iraq would confront any ''imperialist or Zionist attempt'' to reverse its takeover of Kuwait.
Experts said he was being backed into a corner from which his most likely options were to surrender or to lash out militarily.
Pages A9 and A11.
BUSH'S GAMBLE By sending combat troops to Saudi Arabia, President Bush tied the United States' fortunes and his own to an explosive crisis with no clear outcome.


Emerson Plans Military Spinoff
LEAD: The Emerson Electric Company said today that it was developing a plan that would spin off to its shareholders all of the equity interest in a new company that would own Emerson's military business.


Higher Recession Risk Seen
LEAD: For corporate America and the domestic economy, the sudden rise in oil prices could not have come at a worse time.
With the economy already weak, the added drag of sharply higher energy costs is likely to slash corporate profits and push the economy into a recession, many analysts and economists say.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on July 27 about laws requiring businesses to grant leave for workers who need to care for ill family members or newborn babies referred incorrectly to the status of legislation in New Jersey.
New Jersey's family-leave law, among the broadest in the nation, went into effect in May, giving employees at businesses with at least 100 workers the right to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave every two years to care for a new baby or an ill family member.


Bhutto Blames Army for Her Ouster;   Washington Is Ambivalent
LEAD: Bush Administration officials were strongly divided today in their assessments of the dismissal of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan.


Health-Tx Sued On Plant Closings
LEAD: A Federal judge scheduled a hearing for next week on a lawsuit filed by the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union to keep Health-Tex from closing six plants and laying off workers.
The union and 12 workers filed the suit against the children's wear manufacturer on Monday in United States District Court in Birmingham on behalf of 4,000 Health


Sri Lankans Kill 42 Rebels Linked to Muslim Massacre
LEAD: Government troops tracked down and killed 42 Tamil rebels held responsible for massacring Muslim villagers, officials said today.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


INSIDE
LEAD:
Trade School Problems
Critics of the nation's 4,000 private trade schools say many schools are more interested in getting Federal aid than in helping students.
Page B6.
Georgia Democrats Choose
Lieut.
Gov.
Zell Miller swamped Andrew Young, the former Mayor of Atlanta, in a runoff to win the nomination for governor.


Antibiotics After Sex Are Found To Ease Female Urinary Infection
LEAD: Women who suffer frequent urinary tract infections can gain a reprieve from that common and frustrating problem by taking an antibiotic tablet after sexual intercourse, researchers reported today.


Wood, Healy Re-signed
LEAD: The Islanders have re-signed Randy Wood, one of their outstanding wings, and Glenn Healy, one of their regular goaltenders, to multiyear contracts.
Terms were not disclosed.


A Black Congressional Hope in Connecticut
LEAD: Here in the Naugatuck Valley, long a bastion of the white working class, Gary Franks is an unlikely candidate for a seat in Congress.
He is a black Republican.


Saddam's Next Target
LEAD: Win or lose in the gamble for control of the world's oil, Saddam Hussein's next major target will be Israel.


Key Pinch-Hit Homer for Barfield
LEAD: His voice is even, almost unemotional.
But behind the words, Jesse Barfield is angry and unhappy and determined to change his course.
He still wants the Yankees to trade him.


Democrats Hopeful After Miller's Georgia Victory
LEAD: Campaign strategists for Lieut.
Gov.
Zell Miller said today that their candidate's lopsided victory Tuesday in Georgia's Democratic runoff for governor demonstrated a surprising amount of unity in the party and put Mr.
Miller in a strong position for the general election.


Yields Down For Week
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report fell for the week ended yesterday.


Quayle Presses Peru to Take U.S. Military Aid
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle said today that the United States does not intend to send American soldiers to Peru to fight drug traffickers.


The U.S. Stands Up. Who Else?
LEAD: Now it's up to other countries, particularly Arab countries.
President Bush has drawn a line in the sand, committing U.S. forces to face down Saddam Hussein.
The costs and risks are momentous, going well beyond U.S. military operations in Lebanon, Grenada and Panama.


Praslin Journal;   Where the Tortoises Play, Tourists Are Limited
LEAD: Mountainous granite islands poking out of turquoise water and slivers of coral atolls that barely peep above the horizon make up this tiny nation that hopes to impress the world with its sensitivity about the environment.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   ISRAELIS PRAISING DECISION BY BUSH
LEAD: Israeli leaders offered warm praise today for President Bush's decision to send military forces to Saudi Arabia while also reaffirming that Israel has no intention of getting involved in the conflict.


Sharper Image
LEAD: The Sharper Image Corporation, a retailer of unusual high-technology products, announced today that it would cut its nationwide workforce by 10 percent.
The layoffs of about 110 of the company's 1,100 workers include corporate and store employees.
The layoffs come amid a sales slump for most types of retailers.


Supplier of Parts for Shuttle Is Indicted on Fraud Charges
LEAD: A Federal grand jury in Tampa, Fla., indicted a Florida company today on charges of defrauding the Government by falsely certifying the quality of electronic parts it provided for the space shuttle and numerous weapons programs.


Pet Chief Quits In Dispute
LEAD: The chief executive of Pet Inc., J. Robert Copper, has resigned, citing differences with the food company's parent, the Whitman Corporation of Chicago.
A spokesman for Whitman, Chuck Connolly, said Mr.
Copper, who is 50 years old, and Whitman's management had agreed on Tuesday that a change was needed at


Plain Cleaning or Fancy? Pick Fancy.
LEAD: HOW do you find a good dry cleaner?
One who will not return white linen shirts looking yellow or gray, and who knows how to handle a sequined dress?


Food Supply Is Vital in Embargo
LEAD: Embargos on trade with Iraq and Kuwait have focused on oil exports, but the effect on Iraq's food imports may also prove critical.


Connecticut Inmates Arraigned on Riot Charges


At the Mansion, A Gorgeous Mosaic To Please Any Mayor
LEAD: ''IT'S hard to believe you're in the city,'' Joyce B. Dinkins said as she walked past the perennial borders and towering trees that encircle Gracie Mansion. ''I've always lived in an apartment, and I don't have a green thumb,'' she added, clearly happy to have as her first garden such sylvan surroundings.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Courts Syria and Iran To Join Anti-Iraq Coalition
LEAD: The United States has approached Syria and Iran, Iraq's two most bitter enemies, to see if they would be prepared to take part in the international effort to isolate Baghdad, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today.


Brady Wants Rate Cut, But Sees No Recession
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that oil price shocks need not topple the economy into a recession, and he called on the Federal Reserve to stimulate growth with lower interest rates.


Train Derailed in Vermont
LEAD: A railroad bed washed away by heavy rain caused the derailment of 11 cars from a northbound freight train on Tuesday.
Two crewmen were injured, and 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel spilled into a stream that feeds the White River.
Christopher Burger, general manager of the Central Vermont Railway office in St.


Currents;   Permanence for Images Etched on the Berlin Wall
LEAD: SINCE 1984, Hermann Waldenburg, a 50-year-old graphic designer, has been photographing the evanescent images painted on the Berlin wall - the Statue of Liberty, dancing skeletons, heart-shaped faces.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Pit Marks on Aluminum


Bar Group, in Shift, Adopts Neutral Policy on Abortion
LEAD: In a vote reflecting a deep and painful schism in this traditionally collegial group, the policy-making body of the American Bar Association voted today to abandon its six-month-old stance in favor of abortion rights and to adopt a policy of neutrality instead.


In an Unaware India, AIDS Threat Is Growing
LEAD: Medical authorities say India is facing a growing threat from AIDS because there is not enough public awareness about the dangers of sexual promiscuity and contaminated blood products.
The illness has not been treated as a priority in a nation where millions suffer from other diseases.


Currents;   The Instant Art of Capturing History
LEAD: THE Polaroid Corporation in Cambridge, Mass., has introduced a new replica service.
Any two-dimensional image, a pastel, watercolor, oil painting, fresco or tapestry, can be reproduced in sizes up to 40 by 80 inches.


Around U.S., a Cautious Chorus of Support
LEAD: If President Bush had been listening, he might have been reassured by the talk the last couple of mornings around the tables at Bert &amp; Ernie's Restaurant in Plattsburg, a town of 2,100 people in western Missouri farm country, where patrons begin filtering in at the first daylight.


REBEL CHIEF FREES CAPTIVES IN LIBERIA
LEAD: The leader of a rebel faction today freed foreigners whom his forces had taken hostage in an effort to provoke international intervention in Liberia's tribal war.


Japanese Education Is More Rigid Than Ours;   Breaking the Ice
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Airlines Is Raising Fares 10%
LEAD: American Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, said yesterday that it was raising air fares across the board by 10 percent because of the rapidly rising cost of jet fuel.


Review/Fashion;   Structured Bra Returns to Swimsuits Maybe it's the influence of Madonna.
LEAD: THE string bikini that bares all, the thin film of Lycra that stretches over the body concealing nothing - these glorifications of the natural woman on the beach are now part of the arriere-garde.
The bra is back in swimsuits.


Futures Chief's Severance Pay
LEAD: The former chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, Karsten Mahlmann, who stepped down amid charges that his trading firm had misused customer's funds, will get $120,000 in severance pay, officials of the futures exchange said on Tuesday.


Council Questions Brown on Efforts to Fight Crime
LEAD: The New York City Council aggressively questioned top Dinkins administration officials yesterday about their efforts to fight crime, with one committee chairman saying New Yorkers now know ''how the average Roman felt while Rome burned and Nero fiddled.''


Kuwait and Panama
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rumors Haunt Morris, But He Is Resisting Them
LEAD: Joe Morris reads it in the newspapers and hears it on television and radio.
He hears people say he is not the runner he was, that his job is in danger, that when the pro football season begins in less than five weeks he may no longer be a Giant.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From Iraq's Statement on Kuwait
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a statement today by the ruling Revolutionary Command Council of Iraq announcing Iraq's annexation of Kuwait, as translated by the British Broadcasting Corporation:


Books of The Times;   The Artist as Icon, Busybody and Chief Executive
LEAD:
Holy Terror
Andy Warhol Close Up
By Bob Colacello
Illustrated. 514 pages. HarperCollins. $22.95.


Felony Charges Are Reduced In Dart Case
LEAD: The most serious charges filed against a 33-year-old messenger who the police identified as the so-called Dart Man were reduced to misdemeanors yesterday by the Manhattan District Attorney's office.


'Star Wars' Makes Even More Sense Now
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf; Strategy: Embargo;   U.S. Bets Its Troops Will Deter Iraq While Sanctions Do the Real Fighting
LEAD: By sending American troops to Saudi Arabia, President Bush moved to deter an Iraqi invasion and committed the United States to a long stay in the Middle East kingdom, gambling that a steady tightening of economic pressure will force President Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait, Administration officials said today.


Ex-Jet Is Barred as Broker
LEAD: William H. Mathis, the captain of the New York Jets football team that won the Super Bowl in 1969, was barred today from the securities business for two years for his role in an insider trading scandal in 1984.


Review/Television;   Pessimistic Look at Parole System
LEAD: If there is any promising element in America's system for dealing with criminals, parole is not it.
That is the message of ''Convicts on the Street: One Year on Parole,'' tonight's streetwise documentary, at 10:45 on the HBO cable network.


Ex-Nynex Worker Tells Of Purchases
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation made previously unacknowledged purchases from employers of two men who helped organize lewd parties in Florida for the company's purchasing managers, according to testimony filed yesterday with the New York State Public Service Commission by a former Nynex executive.


Arthur Tildesley, 58, A Priest in New Jersey
LEAD: The Rev.
Arthur H. Tildesley, an Episcopal priest, died on Saturday at his home in Fair Haven, N.J.
He was 58 years old.


Jets Will Rely on Former Chargers
LEAD: The reconstituted Jets, so new in so many ways, will be unveiled for the first time in an exhibition game on Saturday night against the Eagles in Philadelphia.
No one will remember for long who wins or loses, but there will be a close inspection of the various new parts of the New York team.


Smithsonian Agrees to Share Sculptor's Estate With Town
LEAD: A highly publicized dispute between the town of Rockport, Mass., and the Smithsonian Institution has been resolved in a settlement that declares the town to be the rightful beneficiary of a $1 million bequest from a local millionaire's estate.


Metro Matters;   Life Goes On: Shrugging Off Crime and Fear
LEAD: Rosemary Baker hummed to herself on the No. 5 train to the Bronx on her way to work at a construction site.
She shrugged off fears of crime, even after the rash of violence in recent weeks that has left four children dead.


Jury in Barry Trial Reviews Videotape Of Mayor at Hotel
LEAD: The jury weighing the Government's drug and perjury case against Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. took another look today at an 84-minute videotape that shows him smoking crack and being arrested in a room at the Vista Hotel here last January.
But the Federal panel recessed without announcing any verdict.


Profit Up 47.5% At SmithKline
LEAD: SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., the British-American health and household products company, said today that its second-quarter profit jumped 47.5 percent from the period a year ago because of continued sales growth, strong operating profits and large debt reduction.


John Wilson, 76, Dies; Headed U. of Chicago
LEAD: John T. Wilson, a former president of the University of Chicago, died Saturday at Rush Presbyterian St.
Luke's Hospital in Chicago.
He was 76 years old.


INSIDE
LEAD:
'Miss Saigon' Canceled
The Broadway production was canceled in a dispute with Actors' Equity over casting, and 140 members challenged the union's stand.
Page C15.
Lawyers Shift on Abortion
The American Bar Association's policy-making body abandoned its stand favoring abortion rights and instead embraced neutrality.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about remarks by Justice John Paul Stevens before the American Bar Association misstated his educational background.
His undergraduate degree is from the University of Chicago; his law degree is from Northwestern University.


A New Kind of Crisis
LEAD: For the first time in many years, an American President has discussed a grave international crisis and the serious actions it requires of him without issuing a call to arms against Communism or raising the old, familiar cold war fears.


Baseball Notebook;   Brewers Fighting Yankees for Last
LEAD: Until a couple of weeks ago, even the possibility would have been unthinkable.
Now, however, the Yankees are within sight of sixth place and have a legitimate chance of escaping a last-place finish.
They owe it all to the Milwaukee Brewers.
The Yankees, who have been in last place for two and a half months, since late May, were nine and a half games from sixth as recently as July 26.


Thorn EMI Buys Filmtrax
LEAD: The entertainment and electronics giant Thorn EMI P.L.C. said today that it was buying a British music publishing company with rights to such musical titles as ''Stormy Weather'' and ''Itsa Itsy Bitsy Teeny Weeny Yellow Polka Dot Bikini.''


Review/Ballet;   Youthful Talent From Puerto Rico
LEAD: The Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival offered a tantalizing glimpse of a fine young company when it presented Ballet Concierto de Puerto Rico on Tuesday at the Damrosch Park Band Shell.
In its first Manhattan performance, the 12-year-old company presented a tasteful selection of classical and modern ballet pieces, several of them featuring Diana Perez, a 15-year-old who won a gold medal at the 1990 International Ballet Competition in Jackson, Miss.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraq Says Israel Plans Attack With U.S. Aid
LEAD: Iraq said today that Israel was preparing to attack it using planes painted with American colors.


Currents;   Music Floating in the Air, And So Are Two Pianos
LEAD: TONIGHT at 8, Paul Panhuysen and Johan Goedhart, Dutch multi-media artists, will turn the Great Hall of the National Building Museum in Washington into a concert hall.
The performance is called a Long String Installation.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: A 4-YEAR-OLD boy threw torn pieces of bread at the seagulls that greedily swooped to claim the free meal.
One gull was more aggressive than the others and was clearly getting the most food.
The boy looked at the bird sternly and sharply admonished him with the words he had apparently been hearing at home: ''You're not sharing!


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Apr.-June
Change
1990
From '89
Amoskeag Co.
$ (3,100,000)
-
Clorox Co.
42,300,000
+125.0
Moore Corp. Ltd.
4,400,000
-90.5
Pacific Enterprises
(229,000,000)
-
Viacom Inc.


Prescott A. Tolman, Executive, 80
LEAD: Prescott A. Tolman, a retired vice president of the E. F. MacDonald Incentive Company and a sport fisherman, died on Friday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Bethlehem, Pa.
He was 80 years old and lived in Swiftwater, Pa.
He died of leukemia, his family said.
Mr.
Tolman joined MacDonald, the Plaid Stamp company that is now part of the Carlson Marketing Group, in 1952 and was vice president for international relations when he retired in 1982.


Currents;   Highchair For Future Lifeguards
LEAD: CHILDREN can now eat in a highchair that looks like a lifeguard's chair.
Its designer, Caleb Kercheval, calls it the Hampton Highchair.


British Airways Net Up
LEAD: British Airways P.L.C. said Tuesday that its first-quarter profits rose 79 percent despite a slower rise in sales.
British Airways' profits for the three months that ended June 30 came to $:111 million, or about $194 million, up from $:62 million in the corresponding period a year earlier.
The carrier's sales rose 14 percent, to $:1.33 billion, or about $2.3 billion, from $:1.17 billion.


Congress, in Switch, Plans to Give Census Workers Jobless Benefits
LEAD: Two months after voting to deny unemployment benefits to thousands of temporary census workers, Congress has decided to reverse itself.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly
SPECIAL COMMITTEE OF 24 - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Washington at Work;   Modern Cassandra With a Message That Angers but Still Wins Support
LEAD: A basic tenet of Washington politics is that bad news doesn't sell.
Jimmy Carter found that out in his now-infamous ''malaise'' speech, when he painted a picture of a country entering a moral and economic decline, a speech that many analysts say was the beginning of his political demise.


Dean Witter to Appeal
LEAD: Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. said this week that it would appeal a court ruling ordering it to pay $23.4 million to Daniel Waite, a former commodities broker who was dismissed in 1982.
Mr.
Waite contended that Dean Witter, a unit of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, had libeled and slandered him in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission and in a statement to a potential employer.


Review/Jazz;   Benny Carter Revisits the Swing Era
LEAD: Better late than never, Lincoln Center commissioned its first jazz composition for the Classical Jazz concert on Tuesday night at Alice Tully Hall.
The composer was Benny Carter, who turned 83 years old yesterday, and the piece was ''Good Vibes,'' a suite for big band with two vibraphone soloists, Milt Jackson and Bobby


For Higher Gas Prices, Many Villains to Blame
LEAD: Paul Evantoff paid 5 cents a gallon more this morning to fill his gas tank at Fred's Chevron than it did last week, a development he attributed to the eagerness of the big oil companies to cash in on the turmoil in the Middle East. ''It's really greed with a capital 'G,' '' Mr.
Evantoff said.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   The Longest Week: How President Decided to Draw the Line
LEAD: When President Bush and Margaret Thatcher met in Aspen, Colo., last Thursday as the large army of Iraq swarmed into the small kingdom of Kuwait, the British Prime Minister warned Mr.
Bush about President Saddam Hussein of Iraq: ''He won't stop.''


Lawsuits Transferred
LEAD: Two lawsuits filed regarding the death of Hank Gathers, the former Loyola Marymount basketball star, were transferred yesterday to the Torrance Superior Court in California.


William L. Ellis, 82, Administrative Judge
LEAD: William Leigh Ellis, a retired administrative law judge with the Federal Power Commission, died at the age of 82 on Monday at his home in Arlington, Va.
The cause of death was cancer, a family spokesman said.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   NATO, Bereft of a Military Role, Redefines Itself as the West's Political Galvanizer
LEAD: The United States briefed its NATO allies today on its decision to send troops to Saudi Arabia and encouraged them to participate in an international force being formed in response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, NATO officials said.


East Germans Fail to Approve Voting Plan
LEAD: The East German Parliament raised new doubts about the timetable for unification today when it failed to ratify an accord outlining procedures for joint elections with West Germany.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraq Confines 38 Americans, But Their Status Is Unclear
LEAD: Iraq released an American child today and permitted United States officials to visit 38 other Americans confined to a Baghdad hotel, but it continued to hold them under armed guard, the State Department announced today.


Trump Documents Ordered Released
LEAD: Casino regulators in New Jersey ruled today that more than 1,000 J. Trump's financial rescue package must be made public.
The documents, however, will remain secret while his lawyers appeal the decision.


Arthur Samuel, 88, Pioneer Researcher In Computer Science
LEAD: Arthur L. Samuel, a computer scientist who did early research on machine learning and artificial intelligence, died July 29 at Stanford University Memorial Hospital in California.
He was 88 years old.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: Think of the worst pain you ever experienced.
Now double it.
That is how one sufferer with cluster headaches described the pain that accompanies his attacks, which occur about five times a day for two or three weeks at a time, then mysteriously disappear for six months or more.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher On Fears Over Middle East
LEAD: The dollar ended higher yesterday against all major currencies except the yen and the Canadian dollar, bolstered by the tensions in the Middle East.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.00
9.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.38
7.31
7.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.32
7.27
7.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.60
8.58
8.01
30-YR.


Genetic Research Leads Team To Marijuana Target in Brain
LEAD: Scientists report that study of genetic material has led to the discovery of receptors in the brain that are stimulated by marijuana.


Navratilova May Play
LEAD: Although Martina Navratilova believes the leg injury she suffered before the Great American tournament in San Diego this week should not prevent her from playing next week, her surgeon thinks otherwise.


Sterling Drug Explores Ventures
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company's Sterling Drug unit, a midsize competitor in a consolidating industry, is in talks about joint ventures with other pharmaceutical groups, Kodak's chairman and chief executive, Kay R. Whitmore, said. ''We''re not prepared to divulge anything specific, but I think you can assume that Sterling Drug is busily talking to other people about what can be done jointly,' Mr.


Joaquin E. Meyer, Former Cuban Diplomat, 83
LEAD: Joaquin E. Meyer, a former Cuban diplomat who later served at the Inter-American Development Bank, died on Sunday at the Hospice of Washington.
He was 83 years old and lived in Washington.


Sears Chairman Is Taking Reins of Merchandise Group
LEAD: In a management shake-up announced today, Edward A. Brennan, chairman and chief executive of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, will take direct control of the company's troubled merchandise group.
Mr.
Brennan will assume the additional title of chief executive of that group.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
SKIING
Roth Wins Opening Race Peter Roth of West Germany overcame 13 rivals with a sizzling second run and won the opening slalom race of the 1990-91 World Cup season by a hundredth of a second over Michael Tritscher of Austria yesterday in Mount Hutt, New Zealand.
The victory was the 29-year-old Roth's first in 12 years on the World Cup circuit.


Jamaica Swaps Debt for Equity
LEAD: Jamaica said last week that it had agreed with Mexico on a debt-equity swap program that would reduce the island's Government debt by $30 million.
The program means Mexican citizens can buy Jamaican Government debt at 42 cents on the dollar.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Cuomo Says Air Guard Unit Is to Join Forces in the Gulf
LEAD: Governor Mario M. Cuomo said tonight that a unit from the New York Air National Guard will join United States forces in the Persian Gulf.


Underpaid in Salary Scheme, 21 Sailors to Get $32 Million
LEAD: In what shipping industry officials call the largest wage award in maritime history, a Federal district judge has ordered that 21 Filipino sailors be given $32 million to make up for a wage system in which some were paid only a fraction of what was reported by ship owners.


Burmese Forces Said to Fire On Marchers Led by Monks
LEAD: Burmese security forces opened fire today on a peaceful dawn march led by Buddhist monks in Mandalay, killing at least four people, Western diplomats in Rangoon said.


Farm Credit Bank's $275 Million Issue
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Bank is offering $275 million in system bonds due in 1995 through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Vincent Angered by New Steinbrenner Move
LEAD: Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, said yesterday that any attempt by George Steinbrenner to revise an agreement that limits the control of the Yankees' principal owner over the team could lead to further serious sanctions against him.


F.B.I. SETTLES SUIT BY A BLACK AGENT
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation has settled a lawsuit against it by a black agent who complained he had been a victim of racial discrimination, the bureau said today.


Albany Alters Cable TV Pact For Manhattan
LEAD: After rewriting a handful of major provisions that New York City negotiators had worked out in round-the-clock bargaining, the state commission that regulates cable television gave final approval today to franchise renewals for the two cable companies serving Manhattan.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From Bush's Statement on U.S. Defense of Saudis
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's address from the Oval Office yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From the TV Talk By Mubarak to the Egyptians
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Hosni Mubarak's nationally televised speech today on Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, as translated by The Associated Press:


Review/Art;   A Soviet Movement That Tried To Change All Aspects of Life
LEAD: Death to art, declared the Russian Constructivists in the aftermath of the Russian Revolution, and in its place they envisioned an art devoted, like the revolution, to technology, utilitarianism and social progress.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   PRESS LEFT OUT OF GULF AIRLIFT
LEAD: For the second time in eight months, American troops today headed into a foreign military operation without the special contingent of reporters and photographers that the Pentagon has pledged to summon when United States forces are sent abroad.


Indicted Navajo Leader Wins Spot in Tribal Race
LEAD: Despite his suspension as leader of the nation's largest Indian tribe, Peter MacDonald finished only 3,500 votes behind the front runner in Tuesday's tribal presidential primary and will face him in a general election on Nov. 6.


Review/Jazz;   Saxophonists Spurred By Moment
LEAD: The tenor saxophonists Johnny Griffin and Von Freeman, both playing at the peak of their abilities, stormed through their concert at the Classical Jazz festival at Alice Tully Hall on Monday night, offering intense, complicated improvisations.


G.M. Maintains Sales Estimate
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it was maintaining its United States auto industry sales projection for 1990 of 14.7 million vehicles despite the potentially ominous consequences of the Middle East crisis.
G.M.'s president, Lloyd


New York's Financial Disclosure Laws Suffice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Karl Weber, 74, Dies; Actor and Guild Leader
LEAD: Karl A. Weber, an actor and former president of the Screen Actors Guild of New York, died on July 30 at New England Baptist Hospital in Boston.
He was 74 years old and had homes in Fort Myers, Fla., and Edgartown, Mass.


Savings Bond Sales Up
LEAD: Americans bought $629 million worth of United States savings bonds in July, up 4 percent from the period a year earlier and 2 percent from June, the Government reported on Tuesday.
The Treasury Department said July's purchases brought total sales for the first 10 months of the 1990 fiscal year to $6.58 billion, up from $6.57 billion in the corresponding period of 1989.


New York City Signs an Accord On Water Rules
LEAD: Under heavy pressure from state officials, New York City today legally committed itself for the first time to a broad series of water-conservation measures.


Japanese Education Is More Rigid Than Ours;   Pattern of Prejudice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rose Starts Serving Five-Month Sentence
LEAD: Pete Rose arrived at the Federal work camp here today to begin serving a five-month sentence for cheating on his income-tax returns.


Fed Report Says Economy Slowed Before Mideast Crisis
LEAD: A Federal Reserve survey released today shows the economy was slumping even before the onset of the Middle East crisis that has heightened the possibility the nation will be thrown into a recession for the first time in nearly eight years.


Japanese Education Is More Rigid Than Ours;   The 3-8-0 Solution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Applying Lessons of the Civil Rights Struggle
LEAD: When the Rev.
Abraham Lincoln Woods speaks to visitors in the quiet of his cramped office at St.
Joseph's Baptist Church, it is often with his eyelids nearly closed, his mind drawing on the hard lessons of 35 years on the battlefields of the civil rights movement.


Corrections
LEAD: A caption in some copies of Sports Pages yesterday about the New York Jets training camp misidentified the coach shown.
He was Bruce Coslet, the head coach.


Tamara Deutscher, Writer, 77
LEAD: Tamara Deutscher, a writer and editor who with her husband, the late Isaac Deutscher, researched the leaders of Soviet Communism, died on Tuesday in London, where she lived.
She was 77 years old and, according to family friends, had suffered from emphysema.


Infinity Stake To Shearson
LEAD: Merchant banking funds headed by Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. have agreed to buy a minority stake in the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, which owns 17 radio stations.


Vincent Plays Down Allegations on Winfield
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent said today that gambling allegations involving Dave Winfield were ''not a serious issue.''


Woolworth Net Up 4.2%
LEAD: The Woolworth Corporation reported yesterday that it earned 4.2 percent more in the second quarter than a year earlier, as revenue rose 10.6 percent.


Judge Orders A Correction
LEAD: A United States District Court judge in New York ordered a conservative religious organization yesterday to distribute a correction to a pamphlet used to press its view that the National Endowment for the Arts is supporting pornography.


Theory Hints Sunscreens Raise Melanoma Risks
LEAD: The use of common sunscreens may increase the risk of developing melanoma, a deadly skin cancer, two researchers have suggested.
But other dermatologists caution that the theory is speculative and remains to be proved.


Tokyo Stocks Fall Sharply On Worries About Mideast
LEAD: Japanese stock prices fell sharply today, wiping out all of the Tokyo market's gains from yesterday.


3 Youths on Brooklyn Street Wounded by Shotgun Pellets
LEAD: Three youths defending a girl were wounded by shotgun pellets fired by a teen-ager in Brooklyn Tuesday night, the police said.


New Treatment Curbs Lung Ailment in Babies
LEAD: Doctors have a new way to treat a lung disease that kills 3,000 premature infants a year.


A Bank Chairman Is Charged in Queens In a Bribery Scheme
LEAD: A Queens bank chairman was arrested yesterday on charges that he had bribed a Federal tax agent to end an investigation of his finances and then prompted the agent to investigate three of the bank's customers.


Market Place;   Mixed Feelings On Bank Stocks
LEAD: FOR contrarian investors in bank stocks, willing to fight the downward trend in prices and steady flow of bad news, the problem in recent months has been to know just which hour is the darkest one that precedes the dawn.


New Drug From an Old Preparation Offers Hope Against Bladder Cancer
LEAD: Last year at the American Urological Association meeting, 1,500 physicians signed a petition to the Food and Drug Administration extolling the virtues of a tiny germ that causes tuberculosis in cows.
The germ has emerged as an effective, if unlikely, weapon against certain bladder cancers that might otherwise require surgery to remove the organ.


To Our Readers
LEAD: Because of a technical problem experienced by the Chicago Board of Trade in transmitting data to The Associated Press, the volume and open interest figures for commodity futures and options on futures on that exchange are incomplete in the tables on page D15.


Chartwell Buys A Block of Avon
LEAD: Chartwell Associates L.P., an investment partnership, has completed its previously announced purchase of Avon Products Inc. stock from the corporate raider Irwin L. Jacobs, a spokesman for Avon said.
Chartwell includes the Mary Kay Corporation, the Dallas-based cosmetics concern; Gordon Getty, an heir to the Getty oil fortune, and the Fisher family of New York The latest purchase involves 1.23 million Avon shares bought for $37.50 a share under an agreement on July 5 between Mr.


Review/Music;   New Orleans In Spirit
LEAD: Walter (Wolfman) Washington's ecstatic second set at Tramps on Saturday night had an easy versality.
Mr.
Washington, who comes from New Orleans, shows off an urban curiosity, and secular blues, religious gospel, jazz, rock and just about every other form of American music made their appearance.
Mr.


Sect Takes Defamation Of Gays for Its Premise
LEAD: To the Editor:


Expos End Six-Game Slide With Victory Over Pirates
LEAD: Tim Raines broke out of an 0-for-18 slump with two run-scoring doubles to back Dennis Martinez's six-hitter as the Montreal Expos beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 6-2, tonight.


Spelling Is Off the Block
LEAD: Spelling Entertainment Inc., which produces movies and television series, said today that it was no longer exploring a sale of the company.
Spelling said it had received some interest but not at a level that it believed reflected its value.


Marwick's Chairman Leaving Post
LEAD: Larry D. Horner, the head of the world's largest accounting firm, said yesterday that he would step aside as KMPG Peat Marwick's chairman when his six-year term expires in October.


TV Reporting Recalls Radio Days
LEAD: Television news organizations, their camera crews and correspondents barred along with other journalists from Iraq and Kuwait, returned this week to what a senior network news executive described as the kind of reporting that radio did during World War II: broad based and, of course, picture-free.


Defeat for Democracy in Pakistan
LEAD: Benazir Bhutto's removal as Prime Minister of Pakistan has the smell of a constitutional coup shrewdly timed to take advantage of the world's preoccupation with Iraq.
It threatens to enfeeble Pakistan's tenuous democratic traditions unless President Ghulam Ishaq Khan honors his promise to hold elections on Oct.


Another Child Is Hit by a Stray Bullet


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''A line has been drawn in the sand.''
- President Bush.
[A1:6.]


Vandalized Memorial Returned for Repairs


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-19


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JESSICA TANDY and HUME CRONYN were denied a zoning variance for their home in affluent Easton, Conn.
Mr.
Cronyn and Miss Tandy, who won an Oscar for her role in ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' had hoped to house a chauffeur in an apartment upstairs in their three-car, detached garage.


Dow Rises 24.26 Points as Oil Prices Drop
LEAD: Stocks advanced strongly in active trading yesterday, as oil prices turned downward following President Bush's morning address to the nation explaining the dispatch of United States troops to Saudi Arabia.


Ratners May Alter Kay Jewelers Bid
LEAD: Britain's largest jewelry chain, Ratners Group P.L.C., said it was holding talks to revise its offer to bondholders as part of its $328 million takeover bid for Kay Jewelers Inc. of the United States.
Ratners declined to say how much of the debt had been tendered so far.


Extra Year Granted
LEAD: The N.C.A.A. has granted the leukemia-stricken University of Arizona linebacker Kevin Singleton a sixth year of eligibility, The Tucson Citizen said yesterday.


A SWISS HOSTAGE FREED IN LEBANON
LEAD: A Swiss Red Cross worker who had been held hostage in Lebanon for 10 months was freed today and handed over to Swiss authorities, officials and witnesses said.


Hear Ye! Hear Ye! Our Baby Is Here!
LEAD: ALTHOUGH most newborn babies seem to look alike - eyes closed and jowly - their birth announcements do not, at least not these days.
In recent years, the generation that became parents in their 30's has taken to commissioning professional designers and illustrators to trumpet the event.


Lost Courage, Lost Play
LEAD: Actors' Equity asserts that a British actor portraying a Eurasian in the musical ''Miss Saigon'' would be ''an affront to the Asian community.'' But refusing to let him repeat his London role on Broadway is an affront to the essence of theater.


Insurance Soars on Ships in the Middle East
LEAD: Insurance rates soared in London today for cargoes and ships in the Persian Gulf amid fears that further fighting would break out in the region.


Dealers Act To Stabilize Bond Market
LEAD: Treasury securities dealers moved swiftly yesterday to keep interest rates from soaring further by absorbing most of the $10.5 billion in 10-year notes that the Government auctioned as part of its quarterly refunding.


Bridge
LEAD: When an opponent commits an irregularity and is subject to a penalty, it is perfectly proper to try to take maximum advantage of the situation.
But players who do so must calculate carefully, and can sometimes bring an avalanche upon themselves.


Creative Difficulties At Scali
LEAD: SCALI McCABE SLOVES, once one of the most talked-about agencies on Madison Avenue because of its innovative work for Perdue chicken and Volvo, is now getting the kind of critical attention most agency executives abhor.


Events: Vegetables, Crafts and Antiques
LEAD: City-Grown Harvest, Gateway National Recreation Area, Floyd Bennett Field, near Exit 11S on the Belt Parkway, Brooklyn; (212) 233-2926.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   OIL MARKETS EASE; STOCK PRICES RISE
LEAD: Oil prices fell and the stock markets in the New York and Tokyo steadied yesterday after the United States decision to send troops to Saudi Arabia and reports that the oil-rich kingdom would increase its production.


New Rate Rules For Truckers
LEAD: To compensate for rapid increases in fuel prices, the Interstate Commerce Commission said yesterday that trucking companies could increase shipping rates with only three days' notice, rather than the seven days normally required.


A 'Home' For Mother And Baby
LEAD: It could be anyone's home.
In the living room, a striped sofa and a pine armoire, and down the mauve moire-papered hall is a bedroom with sponged pink walls, white wicker furniture and floral sheets.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From News Conference by Cheney and Powell at the Pentagon
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a news conference at the Pentagon today by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen.
Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription agency:
OPENING STATEMENTS


Miller Helps Mets Revive
LEAD: Bud Harrelson, who had said he wasn't much of a preacher anyway, opted against holding any revival meeting.
Still, as he sat in his office before yesterday's game against the Phillies, the manager of the Mets felt compelled to do some thing inspirational.


Novelist's Home Is Saved
LEAD: Erskine Caldwell's boyhood home has been saved from destruction and moved to the Moreland town square, where it will become a museum honoring him.
Mr.
Caldwell, author of ''Tobacco Road,'' ''God's Little Acre'' and at least 50 other books, was born in the house on Dec. 17, 1903, and lived there until he was 14.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Champion of Arab Poor? Hussein Grasps for Nasser's Revolutionary Mantle
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is trying to claim the mantle of Gamal Abdel Nasser as the revolutionary leader of the Arab world, not only by inveighing against traditional enemies like foreign domination and Israel, but also by setting poor Arabs against the long-ruling, oil-rich royal families of the Persian


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE OIL JOLT
Oil prices fell and financial markets steadied around the world after the U.S. decision to send troops to Saudi Arabia and reports that the oil-rich kingdom will increase its production.
But the calm seemed tentative, with the economic outlook hinging entirely on the uncertain prospect of developments in the Middle East.


WPP Group's Earnings Up 92.9% in First Half
LEAD: The WPP Group P.L.C. said on Tuesday that its first-half earnings rose 92.9 percent, to $:27 million ($45.3 million), from $:14 million ($23.2 million) in the comparable period last year.
Pretax profits rose 76.9 percent, to $:46 million ($76.9 million), from $:26 million in the first half of last year.


Study Finds Housing Costs Keep 32% Poor
LEAD: Nearly one-third of Americans are ''shelter poor,'' spending so much of their income on housing that they cannot afford other necessities, a study released today said.


Indonesia and Beijing Put End to 23-Year Rift
LEAD: China and bitterly anti-Communist Indonesia restored diplomatic relations today, putting an end to 23 years of discord.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   First American Deployment to Gulf Is 'Tip of Wedge,' the Pentagon Says
LEAD: Pentagon officials said today that the initial deployment of United States forces to Saudi Arabia was ''the tip of the wedge'' and that the number of men and arms sent to the Persian Gulf would grow substantially in the next few weeks.


Bronx Man Is Held in Slaying Of Former Broadway Dancer
LEAD: A 19-year-old Bronx man was arrested yesterday and charged in the slaying of a teen-ager who had danced on Broadway, the police said.


Jacques Soustelle, Leader in Fight For a French Algeria, Dies at 78
LEAD: Jacques Soustelle, an anthropologist and former Cabinet minister who was one of the leaders of an underground movement that fought against Algerian independence, died Tuesday in the Paris suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine.
He was 78 years old.
The cause of death was not reported.
Dr.
Soustelle, who was named to the Academie Francaise in 1983, was one of Europe's foremost experts on pre-Colombian civilizations in Mexico, on which he wrote several authoritative studies.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Foreigners in Gulf Fearful
LEAD: While the leaders of the oil-producing countries of the Persian Gulf region welcomed the arrival of American troops in Saudi Arabia and the commitment by President Bush to defend the kingdom, anxiety was evident at airline offices and banks.


Japanese Education Is More Rigid Than Ours
LEAD: To the Editor:


Small Soviet Businesses
LEAD: Citizens of the Soviet Union are now allowed to set up small businesses under regulations approved today by the Government.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page listing yesterday headed ''Iraqi Crisis: Reverberations'' misstated Tuesday's price of the benchmark American crude oil on the New York Mercantile Exchange in some copies.
The contract for September delivery closed at $28.31, up 26 cents.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Dutch Dairy Bureau to the New York office of Hal Riney &amp; Partners, for the United States advertising of Dutch cheeses.


In Kenya, Clergy Too Suffers Reprisals
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gold Slips and Copper Rises As Oil Prices Turn Down
LEAD: Prices of gold futures fell yesterday and copper futures climbed as a downturn in oil prices prompted an abrupt change in speculation about the economy.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a news analysis article from Washington yesterday about President Bush's decision to send troops to Saudi Arabia appeared without a byline in some copies.
The writer was Thomas L. Friedman.


More Babies Are Dying
LEAD: Born in the U.S.A.: it should be a matter of pride.
But for too many children, being born here constitutes bad luck.
That's the substance of a sidetracked report by the White House Task Force on Infant Mortality.


Florio to Talk Directly to Citizens on Tax Increases
LEAD: Confronted with a tax protest that refuses to go away, Gov.
Jim Florio announced today that he would go to the voters on television and in fireside chats to explain the record $2.8 billion tax increase he pushed through the Legislature six weeks ago.


Thick Rough Looms at P.G.A. Event
LEAD: Golf's best players today sounded off on a topic they could be truly passionate about: the grass at Shoal Creek Country Club.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From Bush's News Conference on the Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference today on the Iraq crisis:
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS


Officer's Vest Stops a Bullet
LEAD: A bulletproof vest stopped a shot that could have killed a 24-year-old police officer in the South Bronx yesterday morning, officials said.
The officer, Joseph T. Dietrich, was listed in stable condition at Jacobi Hospital with a blunt trauma wound to his abdomen.
The bullet, from his own gun, was said to have been fired by an auto-theft suspect.


On Tapping Oil Reserve
LEAD: Key members of Congress, as well as many energy economists, are dismayed by the Bush Administration's reluctance to counter the last week's run-up in oil prices by selling stocks from the Government-owned Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
Although President


Poor Training Cited in Steam-Pipe Blast
LEAD: The New York State Public Service Commission said yesterday that poor training of Consolidated Edison workers led to the explosion of an asbestos-lined steam pipe in Gramercy Park last year that killed three people and injured 30 others.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: GERARD DEPARDIEU received a two-month suspended prison term and a six-month suspension of his driver's license plus a fine of nearly $2,000 on charges of drunken driving and causing an accident.
The actor, who was driving near Vichy in central France following work on his latest film, ''Uranus,'' crashed into a car coming from the opposite direction.


IRAQ PROCLAIMS KUWAIT'S ANNEXATION;   BUSH DRAWS 'LINE'
LEAD: Thousands of elite United States troops, the vanguard of a force that senior defense officials said may reach 50,000, took up positions in Saudi Arabia today as President Bush vowed to defend the Middle Eastern kingdom and its oil reserves, the richest in the world.


Talking Deals;   Unusual Alliance For McDonald's
LEAD: THE McDonald's Corporation and the Environmental Defense Fund announced a highly unusual deal last week that, if it works, could change the way environmental groups interact with Corporate America.
But if it fails, positions could harden on both sides, with executives dismissing environmental advocates as impractical visionaries and environmentalists becoming more determined than ever to use the courts and political process to force change.


Lobby as Urban Living Room
LEAD: FORGET about potted palms and intimate corners in which to rendezvous.
There is no clock to meet under.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: While Japan commemorates the 45th anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, AKIRA KUROSAWA said yesterday that his new film would depict the horror of nuclear war.
Shooting has begun in a village outside Tokyo for ''Rhapsody in August.''


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a weekly television ratings chart yesterday misidentified the Middle Eastern leader interviewed on Sunday by Dan Rather on the CBS News program ''60 Minutes.'' It was King Hussein of Jordan.


Rangel and Others Pressing To Salvage Ballroom Project
LEAD: Pressure intensified yesterday to salvage a proposed biomedical center on the site of the Audubon Theater and Ballroom as Representative Charles B. Rangel and a group of New York City legislators urged Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan to withdraw her challenge to the $34 million project.


New Chief at RCA Records
LEAD: The Bertelsmann Music Group said yesterday that the president of its RCA Records label in the United States, Robert Buziak, had been replaced by Joseph Galante, another executive at the label.


Eugene F. Black, 87, Ex-Justice in Michigan
LEAD: Eugene F. Black, a former Michigan Supreme Court justice, died Saturday at his home in Port Huron, Mich.
He was 87 years old.
The cause of death was not announced.
Justice Black was a member of the State Supreme Court from 1955 until 1972, when he returned to private practice.
He was Attorney General of Michigan from 1946 to 1948.


Once Again, Tired and Terrified Internal Refugees Wander Over Cambodia
LEAD: Fleeing or forced from their homes by the stepped-up war in the Cambodian countryside, huddling against a torrid sun or stinging rain in crude shelters of thatch and plastic sheeting, they have the semivacant stare of refugees everywhere.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


4 Younger Executives Move Up at Chemical
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation announced a reorganization of its top management yesterday, drawing from its own cadre of executives to name a new president and to create an office of the chairman with four younger executives.


Jogger Attack Is Recounted By Prosecutor
LEAD: The prosecutor in the Central Park jogger trial, seeking to rebut what the defense called crucial discrepancies in the state's case, recounted in terrifying detail yesterday the attack on the 30-year-old victim.


John Aston, 87, Dies; Pioneer in Cryogenics
LEAD: John G. Aston, emeritus professor of organic chemistry and former director of the Low Temperature Laboratory at Pennsylvania State University, died Monday at Centre Community Hospital in State College, Pa.
He was 87 years old and lived in State College.


Honeywell Plans To Sell Business
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. said it had tentatively agreed to sell Honeywell Federal Systems Inc. to Bull HN Information Systems Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.
Honeywell said the planned sale continues a transition begun in 1987 to focus the company on its controls businesses.


Morris Ginsberg, 83; Backed Ships to Israel
LEAD: Morris Ginsberg, a retired steamship company executive who helped buy ships to settle Jews in Palestine in the 40's, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.


Producer Cancels 'Miss Saigon'; 140 Members Challenge Equity
LEAD: The producer of the hit London musical ''Miss Saigon'' announced yesterday that he was canceling the show's Broadway production, which had already sold a record $25 million in advance tickets, because Actors' Equity had denied permission for the English actor Jonathan Pryce to repeat his performance in New


Corrections
LEAD: A subheading on the Education page yesterday, with a report about defaults on loans to trade-school students, described the article incorrectly in some copies.
It was the first of two articles.


Son of Former Military Ruler Goes Into Politics in Pakistan
LEAD: A son of Gen.
Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, convinced that the time is right to revive the name of Pakistan's late military ruler, has set aside a career in banking and plunged into politics in anticipation of elections on Oct. 24.


W. M. Spackman Is Dead at 85; Author of Novels About Romance
LEAD: W. M. Spackman, a writer and classicist who in a burst of creativity late in life became the author of five novels, died on Friday at his home in Princeton, N.J.


People
LEAD: *
Chris Dickens has been appointed worldwide media director at Young &amp; Rubicam.


Illness Is Tied to Way Diet Additive Was Made
LEAD: The recent outbreak of a potentially fatal disease linked to L-tryptophan probably came from an impurity introduced by a change in how the dietary supplement was made, scientists say.


Raphael Yavneh, 60, Executive and Editor
LEAD: Raphael Yavneh, retired president of the Forbes Investors Advisory Institute, an affiliate of Forbes Inc., the magazine publisher, died on Monday at New York Hospital.
He was 60 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Follower of Winnie Mandela Sentenced to Death
LEAD: Jerry Richardson, coach of a soccer team that formed part of Winnie Mandela's entourage, was sentenced to death today for the murder of a 14-year-old youth last year in circumstances termed ''particularly brutal.''


Japan's Oil Safety Net Faces a Test: Will It Hold?
LEAD: For more than a decade, Room 325 has been a backwater of Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry: two cluttered rows of battered gray desks where bureaucrats watched over oil stockpiles while others fought trade wars or built new industries in electronics or aerospace.


Executives Back Action by Military
LEAD: Corporate executives polled by telephone this week strongly support military action in the face of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.


The Man Wearing the Knickers


Currents;   Grinding Time Out of Stainless Steel
LEAD: TWO years ago, Constantin Boym, a Manhattan product designer, began an experiment with a sheet of stainless steel.
He sawed, riveted and bolted away, trying to find what processes would leave interesting marks on the metal.


Tagliabue Rejects Request by Allen
LEAD: Paul Tagliabue, the National Football League commissioner, has rejected a request for reinstatement by Kevin Allen, a former Philadelphia Eagles defensive tackle, who spent 33 months in jail for a sexual assault conviction.
Walter Lesnavich, Allen's attorney, said yesterday that he received on Tuesday a copy of Tagliabue's decision, which advised that Allen may reapply next


Heady Days Coming for East German Pupils
LEAD: In less than a month, with a new school year, the doors of 7,124 schools will open for East Germany's 2.6 million pupils.
And a new and largely unfamiliar world will unfold.


What Is Traditional?
LEAD: To The Home Section:


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bank One Texas, a unit of Banc One Corp., said it would buy 400 automated teller machines from Diebold Inc. of Canton, Ohio, for installation in Diamond Shamrock-owned convenience stores in Texas.


Caretaker Premier Pledges Investigation of Bhutto
LEAD: Pakistan's new caretaker Prime Minister, Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi, who took office Monday after the abrupt dismissal of Benazir Bhutto's Government, pledged today to investigate and punish those responsible for what he called ''the worst corruption in Pakistan's history.''


W. O. Martin Jr., 79, Ex-Louisiana Official
LEAD: Wade Omer Martin Jr., Louisiana Secretary of State for 32 years, died Monday at his home in Baton Rouge, La.
He was 79 years old.
The cause of death was not given.
Mr.
Martin, a lawyer, was elected Secretary of State in 1944 at the age of 33.
He quit in 1976 to run for governor.
After defeat in that race, he retired to private practice and served as a consultant to the Louisiana Elections Integrity Commission.


Gulf Crisis: Words and Deeds
LEAD:
EXPLAINING THE MOVE ''I ask for your support in the decision I've made to stand up for what's right and condemn what's wrong,'' President Bush said in an address.
Excerpts, page A15.
WHEN WILL IT END? ''The situation's uncertain,'' Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said. ''We don't know how long it will last.


United Air Group's Bid Extended
LEAD: United Airlines' parent company, UAL Inc., tonight gave an employee buyout group an extra two months to arrange financing for its $4.38 billion bid.


Burmese Rebel Recalls Days of Violence
LEAD: Every Saturday for the last month, denying himself food or drink, Min Sun Min dons one of his two suits, knots his one red polyester tie and rides the subway to the Upper East Side for an act of revolutionary defiance.


Ex-Casino Worker Wins Suit
LEAD: A jury has awarded $235,000 to a former banquet supervisor at Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino because she was not promoted to maitre d'hotel.
The former supervisor, Adriane Truscello, contended that Trump Plaza had failed to fulfill its promise to promote her to maitre d'hotel of a new restaurant and also interfered with her efforts to get another job.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Avon Products Inc., New York, the cosmetics company, appointed Joseph A. Faranda vice president of marketing research.
Edwina D. Woodbury was named vice president of operations analysis.


Oil Drops More Than $2 a Barrel
LEAD: The price of oil dropped more than $2 a barrel yesterday, and the price of gasoline fell more than 6 cents a gallon, following reports that members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries would increase their production to mitigate a feared oil shortage.


Home Improvement
LEAD: CEDAR closet lining, which repels moths without the need for chemicals, is not difficult to install as long as the surfaces are suitable.
As noted last week, there are two types of lining; sheets are less expensive and easier to install, but many people find them less attractive than strips.
Either kind can be fastened to flat, smooth walls, or to furring strips if the wall has bumps or hollows.


Close to Home
LEAD: ALL of us were talking about where we were going to go on holiday.
In another month or so, one of the guests was heading for the north of Portugal, where the grapes would be ripe for the picking and men and women with funny flat-sided baskets lashed to their backs would be climbing the steep slopes.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   To Baghdad, Poison Gas Is 'Poor Man's A-Bomb'
LEAD: Poison gas, a weapon no United States serviceman has had to confront since 1918, could make the Arabian desert virtually impassable for American ground troops in a no holds-barred war with Iraq.


Demonstrator Maimed by Navy Train Settles Suit
LEAD: An anti-war demonstrator whose legs were severed by a Navy train carrying munitions has agreed to settle his lawsuit against the Government and train crew for $920,000, his lawyer says.


Occidental Pact On Museum
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said today that Delaware's Chancery Court had approved the settlement of several shareholder lawsuits claiming the company had wasted assets by supporting an art museum being built by the company's chairman, Armand Hammer.


IRAQ PROCLAIMS KUWAIT'S ANNEXATION;   'MERGER' DECLARED
LEAD: Responding to an airlift of United States forces to Saudi Arabia and the international embargo that has stilled the flow of his country's oil, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq today defiantly announced his outright annexation of Kuwait, the tiny state his army overran six days ago.


Racketeering Is Still Found at Fulton Fish Market
LEAD: Two years after being appointed to help drive racketeers out of the Fulton Fish Market in Manhattan, long investigated as a Mafia stronghold, a Federal administrator said yesterday that an ''atmosphere of lawlessness'' and brutality still prevailed there.


Jonathan Pryce, 'Miss Saigon' and Equity's Decision
LEAD: Only a few hours after Actors' Equity in New York announced its decision to bar Jonathan Pryce from acting in a Broadway production of ''Miss Saigon,'' Mr.
Pryce was back on stage here, doing his job in the theater, giving an electrifying performance in the role of his career.


Sun Reports Profit in Period
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc., helped by strong sales of its low-priced computer work stations, reported sharply improved results for its fourth quarter and 1990 fiscal year.


Minor Quake Hits California
LEAD: A minor earthquake rolled through this coastal city early today, jostling nerves but causing no damage or injuries, the authorities said.
The 6:15 A.M. temblor had a preliminary reading of 3.0 on the Richter scale, said Heidi Aspaturian, a spokeswoman for the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.


Shearson Holders Approve Merger
LEAD: Shareholders of Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. approved the Wall Street firm's merger with its parent, the American Express Company.
Shearson said the merger would take effect today.
At a shareholders meeting, 91.59 percent of the votes cast supported the merger, said a Shearson spokesman, Steven Faigen.


Head-Smashed-In Journal;   In the Bison's Land, Pride Lives On
LEAD: Kenneth Eaglespeaker looked out over the plains that run eastward from the Rocky Mountains to the horizon, past clusters of visitors intent on learning about his ancestors, the Blackfoot Indians who hunted these plains for at least 6,000 years.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   As U.S. Forces Build, a Military Stalemate Shapes Up
LEAD: As American forces pour into Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf, there are signs that a military stalemate between Iraq and the United States is rapidly developing.





Johnson Permitted
LEAD: To Run for Canada Ben Johnson, who lost his Olympic gold medal and 100-meter world record after testing positive for steroids at the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, was given Government clearance yesterday to run again for Canada.


At Least 30 Killed in Clashes With Riot Police in South Africa


Economic Scene;   How Hussein Miscalculated
LEAD: The crisis in the Persian Gulf struck at a time when demand for oil was weakening and prices sagging.
In fact, Saddam Hussein's decision to gobble up Kuwait was driven by his need to shore up Iraq's failing economy, undermined by the long war with Iran.
So he has put his unemployed, million-man army back to work, both to grab his neighbor's oilfields and refineries and also to panic the world oil market into a steep run-up in price.


Quick Deal For Montana
LEAD: Joe Montana quickly negotiated one of the richest contracts in National Football League history today with Edward J. DeBartolo, the owner of the San Francisco 49ers.
The 34-year-old quarterback agreed to a four-year deal reported to be worth $13 million.


A Stroke of Luck in Tumor Research
LEAD: Through a mixture of ferocious drive and almost magical good luck, scientists who just a month ago reported finding the gene responsible for a disfiguring disorder of the nervous system have now discovered how the gene causes it.


Chrysler Delay On Luxury Car
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation, which has said its financial problems would not hurt new-product development, said today that it would delay the development of its LX luxury car program.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   ISRAELIS TEST FIRE A DEFENSE MISSILE
LEAD: Israel conducted its first test of the Arrow air-defense missile today in a clear response to an Iraqi threat on Wednesday to attack Israel with chemical weapons.


Review/Film;   Young Doctors Explore the Boundary Between Life and Death
LEAD: There is no innocence in the world of ''Flatliners'' - not in childhood memories, not in the motives of the medical students who push themselves beyond death and then return to life, not in the film's borrowings from classic horror movies.
And all of that is to the good. ''Flatliners'' is a stylish, eerie psychological horror film laced with wit, a movie that thrives on its characters' guilty secrets and succeeds on the strength of the director Joel


Soviet Lake Offers Look at Evolution
LEAD: Scientists probing the depths of Lake Baikal in the Soviet Union have discovered heat escaping from cracks in the lake bottom to support rich communities of exotic life, much like those around hydrothermal vents in the midocean ridges.
It is the first time such a phenomenon has been found in fresh water.


Critic's Choice
LEAD: Vivaldi's unassuming ''Four Seasons'' has become the very emblem of crass commercialization in classical music.
In listener polls, broadcasters report, the concerto cycle ranks second only to Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, and since it is handily separable into bite-size units, it constitutes the cornerstone of ever smaller, safer ''play lists.


Lightning Sparks More Fires; California Homes in Danger
LEAD: Forest fires spread over 60,000 acres in California yesterday, threatening homes in their path, while lightning ignited more than 100 new fires in Oregon and Idaho.


Review/Art;   Duality of the Divine, In an Unlikely Setting
LEAD: The centerpiece of the wonderful hodgepodge that is the summer show at the Salander-O'Reilly Galleries is a surprise.
This gallery, which specializes in 20th-century art, has put on display ''Christ on the Cross'' by Francisco de Zurbaran, the 17th-century Spanish painter whose finely cut, firmly modeled, sculptural figures, bathed in bright light and black darkness, have appealed to a host of modern artists.


Report Is Expected to Lift Corn and Soybean Prices
LEAD: Grain analysts predicted a rally in corn and soybean futures prices after the Agriculture Department yesterday released harvest projections that fell short of market expectations.


Review/Film;   A Jake Gittes Who's Older (And Wider)
LEAD: Anybody can begin a movie.
It's what happens from the mid-point on that separates the men from the boys.


Ms. Messinger's Obstructionism
LEAD: Manhattan Borough President Ruth Messinger's veto of a Columbia University plan to build on the site of the old Audubon Ballroom could hasten the decline of a deteriorating community and leave those who want to honor Malcolm X, murdered in the ballroom 25 years ago, with nothing but a building in ruins.


Oxygen-Depleted Waters Killing Fish in Maine


AIDS Programs Are Successfully Enlisted in Drug Addiction Fight
LEAD: A Federal effort to reach drug addicts with programs born out of the AIDS epidemic has recorded success rates as high as 47 percent in getting them to quit, the Centers for Disease Control reported today.


Lincoln Center's 'Roman Holiday'


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Texaco to Relocate Workers
LEAD: Texaco, which employs 67 Americans in and around Saudi Arabia, has made arrangements to relocate the workers and their families from the area, a company spokesman said today.


Panel Finds Error by Manufacturer of Space Telescope
LEAD: The Federal panel investigating the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope has found what appears to be the cause of the instrument's flawed mirror: a spacing error of about one millimeter in an optic device used to guide the making of the telescope's main mirror.


Key Witness Slain in Bogota
LEAD: Two gunmen disguised as policemen killed the Government's chief witness in the assassination of the presidential candidate Luis Carlos Galan, the police said today.


Don't Tempt Them With Your Cigarettes
LEAD: To the Editor:


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A2-11
A blockade of Iraq will begin in the next few days and will be enforced by the United States and allied naval forces in the Red Sea, Indian Ocean, Mediterranean Sea and Persian Gulf, U.S. officials said.
Page A1
A meeting of Arab leaders ended abruptly after an Iraqi delegation turned up unexpectedly and demanded to take over the seat reserved for Kuwait.


What '9-Year-Old Shot in Head' Means;   Hotline for Dealers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Berlin Tourist Attraction


Gabelli-Paramount
LEAD: A group of companies controlled by the New York investor Mario J. Gabelli, the owner of Gabelli &amp; Company, has acquired 5.08 percent of Paramount Communications Inc. for $225.8 million.
In a Securites and Exchange Commission filing, the Gabelli group said it now controlled 6.04 million of the entertainment company's 118.9 million shares outstanding.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising-ADDENDA;   People
LEAD: *
Dean Scaros, the president of Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., the United States division of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, has been given the additional title of chief operating officer of the division.
The promotion of Mr.
Scaros fills the position left vacant since the retirement last year of G.


After 32 Years of Democracy, Fears of a Coup in Venezuela
LEAD: In one day, the Defense Minister was replaced and 143 officers retired.
Such military changes take place peacefully here, but some Venezuelans wonder how long that will continue.


Perrier Sale Backed
LEAD: The Department of Trade and Industry cleared Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C.'s $211 million acquisition of Source Perrier S.A.'s non-cola soft-drinks business.
The purchase includes two plants in the Paris area and another in Marseilles for various brands of a Perrier unit that includes Oasis and Bali orange squashes, Pschitt sodas and Gini lemonade.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day last Friday misstated the corporate affiliation of Cluett, Peabody &amp; Company.
It was acquired by Bidermann Industries from West Point-Pepperell Inc. in March.


Market Place;   A Good Deal? Yes, for Lorenzo
LEAD: In walking away from the tottering airline empire he created, Frank Lorenzo has arranged a far better deal for himself than is available to other shareholders.


Edward F. Buxton, Ad Executive, 73
LEAD: Edward F. Buxton, an author and advertising executive, died on Tuesday at New England Memorial Hospital in Boston.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Friday (until 8 P.M. on Tuesday) and 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on weekends; gift shop and cafeteria are open the same hours.
Admission: children under 3, free; ages 3 to 12, 25 cents; over 65, 50 cents; others, $1.
Information: 861-6030.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   For Americans, a Dash Across Desert
LEAD: Frank J. Jiral, a Texas oil man, and five other Americans piled into two cars at 4 A.M.
Wednesday and headed south out of Baghdad across the scorching desert, bound for the Iraqi-Jordanian border.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Lever to Use More Recycled Plastics
LEAD: In response to growing environmental concerns among consumers, the Lever Brothers Company said it was planning to use more recycled plastics in the bottles of its liquid soaps and other products.
The New York-based company pledged to buy at least 10 million pounds of recycled high-density polyethylene a year.


Steinbrenner Is Growing Unhappy With Deal, Signs Suggest
LEAD: There are signs that George Steinbrenner is becoming increasingly unhappy with the agreement he struck with Fay Vincent and may be heading for an even bigger clash with the commissioner of baseball.


Oil Rise Helps Soviets, Hurts East Europe
LEAD: The sharp rise in oil prices resulting from Iraq's invasion of Kuwait will give a windfall to the Soviet Union, the world's leading oil producer, but create havoc for the fragile economies of Eastern Europe, which depend heavily on imported oil.


Paul V. Callahan, Priest, 68
LEAD: The Rev.
Paul V. Callahan, a Jesuit priest and a teacher of classical languages for 33 years, died on Wednesday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Residence in Manhattan, where he lived.
He was 68 years old.


Cuomo Signs Bill Limiting Medicare Charges


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Families of Americans Held in Iraq Wait, Hope and Tie Yellow Ribbons
LEAD: At the Walterscheid home in the tiny town of Jacksboro, Tex., the trees are festooned with yellow ribbons.
Family members give directions to the house by telling visitors to turn left at the trees with the big yellow bows.


Food at the Ball Park: Now It's Cuisine
LEAD: FOR generations, hot dogs and beer have been as much a part of the baseball ritual as chewing tobacco and pudgy managers throwing tantrums at home plate.
It was inevitable, though, that the food revolution sweeping across the land would scale the walls of the nation's ballparks, threatening to turn our ingenuous national pastime into a food event.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   No Oil Emergency Yet, Energy Officials Assert
LEAD: With oil markets still jittery today, the industrial world's senior energy officials sought to reassure the industry and investors that there were sufficient oil supplies worldwide.


Frances O'Brien, 86; Did Portraits of Famous
LEAD: Frances O'Brien, a portrait artist, died Tuesday at her home in Tucson, Ariz.
She was 86 years old.


Judge Rejects Defense Claim In Central Park Jogger Case
LEAD: The judge in the Central Park jogger trial told the jury yesterday that contrary to defense assertions, the law did not necessarily require parents to be present for the questioning of the three youthful defendants.


Reporter's Notebook;   After the Arguments: Jogger Jury Weighs a Jumble of Details
LEAD: After all the witnesses are gone and all the arguments are finished, big court cases often hang on fragments - bits of jumbled facts and incomplete memories - that jurors fix on to test a theory or a witness's account as they try to decide what really happened.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.12
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.41
7.38
7.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.29
7.32
7.56
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.52
8.60
7.91
30-YR.


Court Suspends Whistleblower In Corruption
LEAD: A lawyer who played a major role in exposing corruption in New York City government by disclosing he had paid kickbacks on a city contract has been suspended from practicing law for five years for his part in the scheme.


The Editorial Notebook;   Vietnam Again, for the First Time
LEAD: Fifteen years after North Vietnamese tanks smashed into Saigon's Presidential Palace, there are still two Vietnams.
The Republic of (South) Vietnam, that artificial creation of French colonialism and cold war politics, is no more.
But commercial capitalism, the American presence and the Viet Cong-led insurrection pressed a distinctive subculture onto the South.


Officer Kills Suspect in a Chain-Snatching
LEAD: A transit police officer chasing a chain-snatcher across several blocks of the Bronx yesterday caught the young man as he hopped into a gypsy cab and shot him to death in the back seat, the police said.


5 in Queens Indicted in Drug Ring
LEAD: A New York State investigation into a major Colombian drug cartel has led to the indictments of five Queens residents on cocaine-trafficking charges and has shed light on what the authorities say is the structure of the cartel's New York operations.


Rob Moore Stays Close To Home
LEAD: Most football players don't go home for lunch.
It's too far, in all senses of the word.
But whenever the schedule allows, Rob Moore travels three miles down Hempstead Turnpike to visit his family.


Drivers and Owners of Livery Cabs Demonstrate at City Hall


Review/Jazz;   Thoughts On America By Ellington
LEAD: For most of the second half of his career, Duke Ellington, in concert, brought together his hits with longer, more ambitious works.
Stung by the mixed critical reception of ''Black, Brown and Beige'' in 1943 and forced by financial necessity, Mr.
Ellington walked the line between the traditional function of the big bands, which was to keep a dancing audience happy, and his own aspirations as a serious composer.


Review/Film;   Gibson as C.I.A. Pilot
LEAD: There are people who will see Mel Gibson in absolutely anything.


Mob-Linked Businessman Slain Outside His Home
LEAD: A construction company owner who illegally demolished four buildings in Times Square in the middle of the night in 1985 was shot to death Wednesday in front of his house in Brooklyn in what the police described as a mob-style slaying.


'Roman Holiday' Festival Schedule
LEAD: ''A Roman Holiday: Masterworks of Italian Cinema from Neo-Realism to the Present'' will run through Aug. 26 at Alice Tully Hall.
Single tickets to each program are $5.50 ($4.50 each for orders of eight or more tickets).
Information: 877-1800, extension 492 or 562.
Here is a schedule.
TODAY


More Caution by Sponsors After Shoal Creek Furor
LEAD: The scandal over a country club's racially exclusionary membership policy will make corporations more cautious about paying to associate their names with athletic events, a $2 billion industry that until now has been growing explosively.


Study Offers Hope for Reducing Assault Injuries
LEAD: Perpetrators of family violence often have records of repeated violence, a new Federal study shows, leading researchers to suggest that people at high risk could be identified.
This would allow the development of strategies to prevent the assaults, significantly reducing injury and death, the researchers said.


Robert Synes, Game Show Producer, 58
LEAD: Robert Synes, a producer and writer of television game shows, died Sunday at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 58 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.N. Council Declares Void Iraqi Annexation of Kuwait
LEAD: The United Nations Security Council voted unanimously today to declare Iraq's formal annexation of Kuwait null and void in international law.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   News Organizations Angry at the Lack of a Press Pool
LEAD: Many of the nation's news organizations expressed frustration and dismay yesterday that a pool of journalists has not been allowed to accompany American troops as they move into position inside Saudi Arabia.


P.&amp;G. Profit Surged 66.1% In Quarter
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, one of the world's largest makers of consumer products, said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings had surged 66.1 percent, to $284 million, or 78 cents a share.


Review/Design;   Demure to Demystified, Swimsuits' Hall of Fame
LEAD: It's often said that every picture tells a story, but, in fact, so do many objects, especially when similar ones are grouped in an orderly profusion. ''Splash: A History of Swim Wear,'' a sometimes surrealistic exhibition at the Fashion Institute of Technology, deploys just such order and profusion in behalf of that essential modern invention, the swimming suit.


Curbs Due on Rackets at Fish Market
LEAD: On the heels of a warning by a Federal administrator that racketeers still control the Fulton Fish Market, New York City officials said yesterday that they have a plan for ''comprehensive reform.'' But they said they would withhold details of the plan for about 30 days.


Reading Saddam's Mind
LEAD: A great leader, a new Saladin, is known for the enemies he makes.
I now have the enemies I need.


UAL Workers Hopeful on Bid
LEAD: United Airlines workers indicated today that they were encouraged by a decision extending the life of a $4.38 billion employee buyout bid.


Big Record Labels Making Big Investments in Rap Music
LEAD: In late 1988, MCA Inc. paid about $1 million to sign on Erik B. and Rakim, a popular rap group whose recordings were previously distributed by the tiny label 4th and Broadway.
Earlier this year, Warner Brothers Inc. lured the Jungle Brothers, another rap ensemble, away from Warlock Records, a small New


Yanks Win and Enjoy A Streak and a Sweep
LEAD: Hard to believe, but it's been three months since the Yankees enjoyed a stretch like this.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Canton Industrial Corp., Canton, Ill., a truck company, said it was in talks with Abbott Products Inc., Chicago, an industrial contractor, about consolidating the companies.


Richard Styskal, 53, CUNY Center Deputy
LEAD: Richard A. Styskal, deputy director of the Center for Labor-Management Policy Studies at the City University of New York, died on Sunday.
He was 53 years old and lived in Mountainside, N.J.


Auctions
LEAD: 3 houses in London to sell rock memorabilia, including Presley's library card and first driver's license and much from the Beatles.
Going by the collected wisdom of 1960's rock songs, summer is a time for surfing, romance, street-fighting or just getting gritty on the city streets.
Songwriters seem not to have caught on yet, but in the last decade summer has also turned into a hot time for buying and selling rock-and-roll memorabilia.


Tampa F.B.I. Is Said to Have Helped Steinbrenner
LEAD: Drawing on a 20-year working relationship with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, George Steinbrenner often enlisted past and present agents of the bureau's Tampa office to conduct unofficial background checks of business associates as well as his own employees, former F.B.I. investigators said today.


As a Political Issue, S. &amp;L.'s Fail Again
LEAD: The nation's governors are calling for a Presidential commission to investigate the savings and loan mess.
The head of the Federal bailout agency, L. William Siedman, is asking for an extra $50 billion just to get him through next year.
As Congress heads toward its August recess, there is a rush to sponsor bills to create a special prosecutor, extend the statute of limitations, provide more investigators.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising-ADDENDA;   Profits at Foote, Cone Are Up 9.4% for Quarter
LEAD: Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc., the Chicago-based agency, said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose 9.4 percent, to $7.5 million, or 73 cents a share, from $6.8 million, or 67 cents a share, in the comparable period last year.
Revenues rose 6.4 percent, to $84.7 million, from $79.6 million a year ago.


Fred L. Heyes, Broker, 70
LEAD: Fred L. Heyes, a former vice president of F. Eberstadt &amp; Company, a Manhattan brokerage firm, died on Wednesday at his home in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 70 years old.


Port Authority Board Names Brezenoff to Head the Agency
LEAD: The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey yesterday formally appointed Stanley Brezenoff, a former First Deputy Mayor of New York City, executive director of the agency.


Keating and Five Associates Sued by Savings Regulator


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., New York, appointed Richard S. Bodman senior vice president of strategic planning and corporate development.


Long-Term Securities Rebound
LEAD: Prices of long-term Treasury securities rebounded strongly yesterday after the Government's successful auction of $10.25 billion of 30-year bonds, the last of its record $32.25 billion quarterly refunding sales this week.


Perez Has Surgery
LEAD: Pascual Perez, the Yankee pitcher who signed a three-year, $5.7 million contract and then pitched just 14 innings this season, underwent surgery on his right shoulder today in Birmingham, Ala.


Fierce Fighting Erupts Near Monrovia
LEAD: Liberian rebels fought fierce gun battles with the Government army today as they pushed through the suburbs of the capital, Monrovia.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page caption yesterday about Americans' reactions to the Persian Gulf crisis misidentified the man shown.
He was Bruce Kennedy of Plattsburg, Mo., not Bruce Wilkinson, who was quoted in the caption.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
3 BY BECKETT


Oil-Price Rise Poses a Threat For the Region
LEAD: While the New York region is proportionally less dependent on energy than other parts of the country, the higher oil prices that have prevailed since Iraq invaded Kuwait endanger a local economy that is already among the frailest in the nation.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''He was taken hostage.''
- Connie Ogle, whose father-in-law is one of 38 Americans held in a Baghdad hotel.
[A9:1.]


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in The Home Section yesterday about the gardens at Gracie Mansion misattributed a quotation.
It was Maureen Hackett, the mansion's gardener, who said, ''A lot of guests never leave the porch, so this view across the lawn of flower color seen against the river is important.


German Leaders Agree On Elections on Dec. 2
LEAD: In an abrupt shift, the leaders of West and East Germany agreed this evening to hold the first all-German elections since 1933 on Dec. 2.


A Turnaround Manager To Head Jos. A. Bank
LEAD: Timothy F. Finley, a turnaround manager, has been named president and chief executive of Jos.
A.
Bank Clothiers Inc., which operates 40 retail clothing stores throughout the United States and is known for its American-made men's suits.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Five people have been awarded the Charles Frankel Prize by the National Endowment for the Humanities.
MORTIMER J. ADLER, the philosopher and author; HENRY HAMPTON, a documentary film producer; BERNARD M. W. KNOX, an author and a former director of Harvard University's Center for Hellenic Studies; DAVID VAN TASSEL, professor of history at Case Western Reserve and founder of National History Day and ETHYLE R.


Sallie Mae Notes
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, will redeem on Sept. 10 all of its outstanding 9.25 percent fixed-rate notes due Sept. 10, 1992, which were issued in 1987.
The notes will be redeemed at 100 percent of the principal amount, with interest accrued up to Sept. 10 of $46.25 per $1,000 principal amount.


In Sex Case, Focus Is on Multiple Personalities
LEAD: In a case that is likely to present some uncomfortable legal issues, an Oshkosh man is to stand trial next month on charges of sexually assaulting a 26-year-old acquaintance suffering from what has been diagnosed as multiple personality disorder.


Gulf Crisis: Wide Effects
LEAD:
IRAQI TROOPS MOVE As an intelligence report said tens of thousands of Iraqi troops were moving toward Kuwait and the Iraqi-Saudi border, American officials said it would take a month to deploy the United States force in Saudi Arabia.
Page A8.
TURKISH COOPERATION After talks between Secretary of State James A.


What '9-Year-Old Shot in Head' Means;   They Prefer Handguns
LEAD: To the Editor:


Court Sets Terms for Whites Adopting Black
LEAD: A referee in Hamilton County Court has ordered that a white family seeking to adopt its black foster child undergo education on black culture as a prelude to legally adopting the girl.


Results Plus
LEAD:
BASKETBALL
United States Beats South Korea
The United States routed South Korea, 146-67, yesterday in a game that was a far cry from the harried overtime victory over Greece on Wednesday in the opening game of the world championships in Buenos Aires.
Alonzo Mourning scored 29 points in less than 19 minutes to lead the United States, which shot 73 percent from the field and outrebounded the South Koreans, 54-17.(AP)


Home-Equity Loans Get Unfair Tax Break
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hurricane Sets Off Floods, Killing at Least 23 in Mexico
LEAD: A hurricane killed at least 23 people this week when raging torrents swept into a river valley in eastern Mexico, devastating homes, roads and farmland, the authorities said today.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 522 money market mutual funds increased by $6.03 billion, to $401.94 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 169 institutional funds increased by $1.39 billion, to $100.29 billion; 249 general-purpose funds were up by $3.7 billion, to $139.42 billion, and 104 broker-dealer funds increased by $946.9 million, to $162.24 billion, the institute said.


Sandinista Leadership Rethinking Its Ideology
LEAD: In the past, Sandinista leaders reserved terms like ''coercion,'' ''authoritarianism'' and ''abuse of power'' to describe mortal enemies like the deposed Somoza dictatorship and the Reagan White House.
Now, the Sandinistas have turned that language on a new target: themselves.


5,000 More Police Officers Are Needed, Panel Asserts
LEAD: Saying New York City's crime problems are not hopeless, a business-sponsored anti-crime group offered a formula yesterday that it said could turn back the clock a generation and restore the streets to forgotten levels of safety.


Some Oil Companies Cut Prices
LEAD: Several major oil companies cut or froze their wholesale gasoline prices yesterday.
Others said that any price increases would be reasonable.
And all the companies that made statements vigorously defended their pricing practices, which have come under strong criticism from consumers, who have faced sharp price rises at gasoline pumps in the last week.


Janet Nevins Young, Executive, 61
LEAD: Janet Nevins Young, the executive director of the Van Hornesville (N.Y.) Community Corporation and a former insurance industry executive, died on Tuesday at her home in Van Hornesville.
She was 61 years old.
She died of cancer, a nephew said.
Mrs.
Young was a personnel manager for the Equitable Life Assurance Society and for the Mutual of New York Insurance Company for 20 years.


Midway Airlines' St. Louis Routes
LEAD: The Chicago-based Midway Airlines, which offered service between Midway Airport in Chicago and Lambert Field here from 1980 through 1984, will re-enter the St.
Louis market starting on Oct. 1.
With five round-trip flights a day, Midway could fill a gap created by Trans World Airlines Inc., which is rumored to be planning to pull out of Midway at the end of September.


Dollar Is Mixed in the U.S., Lower Abroad; Gold Gains
LEAD: The dollar turned in a mixed performance in United States trading yesterday after moving mostly lower in earlier dealings abroad.
Gold prices gained.
Interest in the dollar as a safe investment haven waned in the absence of fresh Middle East hostility, currency dealers said.


Polaroid to Build $90 Million Plant
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation said it planned to build a $90 million plant in New Bedford, Mass., to make advanced films for its new electronic imaging system called Helios.
The plant is expected to be operating in late 1992, and it will create more than 100 jobs.
Polaroid's president and chief executive, I.


Review/Music;   Computing in the Dark
LEAD: Michael Robinson, a composer of electronic music who began his career in New York and moved to Hawaii last year, returned to present 11 of his works at St.
Peter's Church on Tuesday evening.


Ready, Set, Trade Those Barrels!
LEAD: Lately, the days in the oil trading room at Conoco Inc. here start with the intensity of a space shuttle launching combined with a horse race.
A voice over a loudspeaker counts down the seconds to the opening, and in staccato fashion reels off the buy and sell orders.


Apple Faces Challenge To Its Role as Innovator


Baby Bells' $2.4 Billion Deal Gains
LEAD: Federal District Judge Harold H. Greene today removed one of the lingering legal uncertainties in the proposed $2.4 billion acquisition of New Zealand's state-owned telephone company by the Bell Atlantic Corporation and the American Information Technologies Corporation, or Ameritech.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Sun Ra Celebrates


Ms. Wiener Weds Richard S. Biegen
LEAD: Deborah Ruth Wiener, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel H. Wiener of Teaneck, N.J., was married last evening to Richard Scott Biegen, a son of Dr.
Elaine Biegen of Whitestone, Queens, and Arnold Biegen of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi David Lincoln officiated at the Water's Edge at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City,


Kremlin Softens Its Threat to Armenia
LEAD: The Soviet Government has agreed not to send troops into the republic of Armenia to disarm militant groups that have refused to surrender their weapons, the newly elected nationalist President of the republic said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising-ADDENDA;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Ritz Carlton Hotel, Chicago, to Zwiren Collins Karo Trusk &amp; Ayer, Ayer's Chicago affiliate, with an estimated budget of $1 million.
The account had been with Haddon Advertising Inc., Chicago.


Eastchester Switch
LEAD: The shares of the Eastchester Financial Corporation fell yesterday after the North Fork Bancorporation said it was pulling out of an acquisition of Eastchester for $20 a share.
The stock fell $2.125 a share, to $9.75, in over-the-counter trading.
North Fork said it was not prepared to complete its offer to buy Eastchester based on Eastchester's financial condition as of June 30.


F.B.I. Settles Black Agent's Suit on Race Bias
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation has settled a lawsuit by a black agent who complained that he was a victim of racial discrimination.


Corrections
LEAD: The main front-page article yesterday about the dispatch of American troops to Saudi Arabia misidentified a Democratic Representative from Brooklyn.
He is Stephen J. Solarz.


As for New York City, the Stronger the Cable TV Bill, the Better
LEAD: To the Editor:


Police Stop Use of Chemical Spray After a Brooklyn Youth Is Burned
LEAD: The New York City police will no longer use one type of chemical spray to stun people, after a 14-year-old Brooklyn youth was seriously burned when officers used the chemical on him in conjunction with a stun device, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said last night.


What '9-Year-Old Shot in Head' Means
LEAD: To the Editor:


17 Con Ed Employees Charged in Briberies
LEAD: Seventeen employees of Con Edison were charged yesterday with extorting payoffs and obtaining bribes from customers and contractors to expedite service, improperly reduce rates and overlook safety hazards.


Actor's Equity Had to Fight Over 'Miss Saigon';   National Impact
LEAD: To the Editor:


Defending Champion Loses in Quarterfinal
LEAD: In a match that will be remembered as one of the most exciting in the history of the United States Women's Amateur Championship, Pat Hurst defeated Vicki Goetze, the 17-year-old defending champion, 1-up, in the quarterfinals today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JENNIFER CAPRIATI, the 14-year-old tennis player who turned professional only six months ago, is scheduled to play in the New York area for the first time since she charmed Wimbledon in July.
Jennifer lost there to STEFFI GRAF, but is ranked 13th among women players.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JAYNE TORVILL and CHRISTOPHER DEAN, the British Olympic ice-dancing champions, are engaged, but not to each other.


Profits Off at Shell and B. P.
LEAD: The Royal Dutch/Shell Group said today that its profit fell 44.3 percent in the second quarter and the British Petroleum Company reported a drop of 88.9 percent.


Emanuel Gets Chance As Giants Fullback
LEAD: When Aaron Emanuel was in high school, he was such a good running back that he seemed ready to skip college and the pros and head right for the Pro Football Hall of Fame.


Ballpark Dining
LEAD:
Yankee Stadium


Reeves Hospitalized
LEAD: Dan Reeves, the Denver Broncos' coach, was hospitalized after he suffered chest pains Wednesday night, his daughter Laura said yesterday.
She said Reeves was in good condition at North Colorado Medical Center in Greeley.
At a news conference at the Broncos' training camp yesterday, Dr.
Randall Marsh said


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


Military Takes Part in Drug Sweep And Reaps Criticism and a Lawsuit
LEAD: In the first use of active-duty troops to fight marijuana growing in the United States, a contingent of about 200 Army soldiers, National Guardsmen and Federal agents have spent the past two weeks raiding clandestine marijuana gardens in the rugged terrain of the King Range National Conservation Area.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: The Grolier Club is the latest of the cushy, homey semiprivate restaurants and nightspots to open in Manhattan - it also has some of the best food.
The magnificent Romanesque four-story stone building at 29 East 32d Street has a baronial dining room on the ground floor with mahogany walls, leather and wood booths, scattered palms and soft jazz.


Books of The Times;   Recalling Suburban Life in the 50's
LEAD:
Seventh Heaven
By Alice Hoffman
256 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


He Wants to Play
LEAD: Braxston Banks, a former Notre Dame running back, has sued the National Collegiate Athletic Association in Federal court in South Bend, Ind., in an effort to receive another year of college eligibility.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Expects Its Force To Be in Place in a Month
LEAD: Reporting that tens of thousands of Iraqi troops were moving south across Iraq toward Kuwait, Pentagon officials said today that it will take about a month to place the first major complement of American ground forces in Saudi Arabia.


A 68 Gives Wadkins In P.G.A. First Round
LEAD: While tensile-strength rough and Formica-firm greens made Shoal Creek an often infuriating test of composure today, a player who has been hardened by frustration emerged as the first-round leader of the 72d P.G.A.
Championship.


Review/Photography;   Focusing on Models Who Embodied Inspiration
LEAD: In a season of mostly humdrum group shows, the James Danziger Gallery has focused on an inspired theme: inspiration itself.
Specifically, the exhibition proposes that in the case of photography, inspiration can take corporal form.
The seven photographers represented in the show, titled ''Photographers'


Port Authority Seeking to Buy Aqueduct Track
LEAD: New York State is exploring the sale of Aqueduct Race Track in Queens to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which would close the track and use the land to expand Kennedy International Airport, state officials said today.


Summer Sales Helped Retailers Last Month
LEAD: Good weather and promotions to move out summer merchandise helped business at some big store chains in July, according to results released yesterday.
But modest industrywide sales growth failed to impress analysts, who predict possibly tighter times in retailing for the rest of the year.


How Sonic Youth Came to Make the Sound It Makes
LEAD: Once considered the heroes of New York's underground rock scene, the members of Sonic Youth are fast becoming the antiheroes of the mainstream.
After eight years recording for independent labels, the band recently released its major label debut, ''Goo,'' on DGC Records, and it is to perform tonight amid the kitschy grandeur of Roseland


Prices Jump in Peru, and the Protest Is Swift
LEAD: The 13-day-old Government of President Alberto Fujimori has announced a 3,000 percent increase in gasoline prices and huge food price increases as part of a drastic austerity plan.


Lorenzo, Head of Continental Air, Quits Industry in $30 Million Deal
LEAD: Frank Lorenzo, whose bitter fights with unions and appetite for acquisitions did much to reshape the airline industry, is leaving the business.
After receiving a surprisingly high offer for his holdings, he said yesterday that he is stepping down as chairman of Continental Airlines Holdings Inc., formerly the Texas Air Corporation, and selling his stock to the Scandinavian Airline


Restaurants
LEAD: Consistent fare from the north of India, with some scorchers from elsewhere thrown in.


Strike at 2 G.M. Plants Closes Ohio Operation
LEAD: A strike by about 3,000 hourly workers of the General Motors Corporation at two parts factories in Flint, Mich., has caused the shutdown of a truck assembly plant in Moraine, Ohio.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From King Fahd's Speech to Saudis
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a statement by King Fahd of Saudi Arabia today, broadcast by Saudi television and translated by the British Broadcasting Corporation:


Zoning Variances of the Rich and Famous
LEAD: In Hollywood, Alec Baldwin, the blue-eyed star of ''The Hunt for Red October,'' is a major celebrity, the kind of person who attracts gawkers and swooning teen-agers whenever he steps outside.
Here in East Hampton, he is just another homeowner who might not be allowed to build an addition to his house.


Cutback at Salomon Unit
LEAD: Salomon Inc., parent of the Salomon Brothers investment firm, said yesterday that it would scale down the commodities-trading operation of its Philipp Brothers unit.


Georgia Train Crash Kills 3
LEAD: Two freight trains collided near this northwest Georgia town early today, killing two conductors and an engineer and injuring four other railroad employees.
The authorities said one train was on the main Norfolk Southern track when it ran head-on into a train that had just moved off a side track shortly before 3:30 A.M.


Money (But Not The Lawyers', or The Nation's) Dominates Talk at The Bar Convention
LEAD: On the official docket of the American Bar Association's annual meeting here this week, item No. 1 was abortion rights.
But amid the tinkling piano bars in the hotel atriums, alongside the canapes and crudites at the receptions, another monomania prevailed: What in the Sam Hill happened to Stan Chauvin's cash?


Birmingham Journal;   Bitter Memories of Bias Accompany City's Gains
LEAD: From the days of Bull Connor's police dogs and fire hoses to the present, perhaps no American city has had to wrestle with the demons of race so conspicuously as Birmingham.


Trinidad Rebels to Be Charged
LEAD: Charges of treason and murder will be brought against 114 members of the Muslim group that sought to oust the Trinidad and Tobago Government, the police said today.
The Muslims, including a 14-year-old boy, face the death penalty if convicted.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraq-Bound Goods Seized at New York Ports
LEAD: More than $3 million worth of aircraft spare parts, computers, satellite equipment and other hardware bound for Iraq or Kuwait was stopped at New York-area ports, officials said yesterday.


Soviet Astronauts Return to Earth
LEAD: Two Soviet astronauts returned to Earth safely today, ending a six-month mission on which they grew crystals for industry and survived a nearly fatal space walk while repairing their damaged capsule.


Dow, Rising For 2d Day, Ends Up 24.01
LEAD: Stocks advanced yesterday for the second consecutive session, with the Dow Jones industrial average climbing 24.01 points to 2,758.91.
Favorable results of the Treasury's 30-year bond auction produced a late rally after stocks had drifted in light trading most of the day.


Bills Sign Holloway
LEAD: Brian Holloway, the former Pro Bowl offensive lineman, has come out of retirement and signed a contract with the Buffalo Bills, the team announced yesterday.


Review/Film;   If All's for the Worst
LEAD: ''Ariel'' was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 24, 1989.
The film, in Finnish with English subtitles, opens today at the Bleecker Street Cinema, at La Guardia Place.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising-ADDENDA;   Grey Profits Up 4.5%
LEAD: Grey Advertising Inc., the New York-based agency, said its second-quarter earnings rose 4.5 percent, to $5.2 million, or $3.96 a share, from $4.9 million, or $3.73 a share, in the comparable period in 1989.
Revenues rose 10.1 percent, to $117.6 million, from $106.8 million.


INSIDE
LEAD:
One Millimeter Off
A Federal panel has found what appears to be the cause of the flaw in the Hubble Space Telescope's mirror: a one-millimeter mistake.
Page A14.
Advance on Gene Disorder
Scientists have unraveled the workings of a gene that causes a disfiguring and potentially fatal disorder of the nervous system.


Actors' Equity Had to Fight Over 'Miss Saigon'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Board Shift At Intergroup
LEAD: National Intergroup Inc. said today that Centaur Partners L.P. had won the vote on July 25 to put three directors on its 10-member board.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Dominican Day Parade, Madison Avenue will be closed on Sunday from 37th to 56th Streets from noon to 4 P.M.


Corrections
LEAD: A diagram in Science Times on July 31 depicting an apparatus for testing the Hubble Space Telescope's main mirror incorrectly represented the arrangement of the sensor and reference mirror.
A diagram today on page A14, with an article on later developments, shows the correct arrangement.


Study Gives Auto Outlook
LEAD: Japanese automobile makers will continue to increase their market share in the United States in the 1990's at the expense of domestic manufacturers, but at a slower rate, according to a study released on Tuesday by the consulting firm Arthur D. Little.


In a Bruising Outing, the Mets Rally and Win
LEAD: There was blood, both bad and real.
There were bruises, to egos as well as to arms and legs.


Howard O. McMahon, 75, Dies; Former Head of Arthur D. Little
LEAD: Howard O. McMahon, a scientist, inventor and former president of Arthur D. Little Inc., the international management and technology consulting concern, died Sunday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 75 years old and lived in Cambridge.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising-ADDENDA;   Miscellany
LEAD: *
GGK Holding A.G., the Swiss holding company that is a joint owner of the New York advertising agency Lois/GGK, has formed a partnership with Trimedia Group A.G., a holding company in Zurich.
The new company will hold 100 percent of GGK and 65 percent of Trimedia.
The sale is not expected to cause any changes at Lois/G


IRAQ DETAINS FOREIGNERS, UPSETS SUMMIT;   50 SHIPS ASSEMBLE
LEAD: United States and allied naval forces in the Red Sea, Indian Ocean, Mediterranean Sea and Persian Gulf, which will soon constitute an armada of more than 50 major ships, will begin enforcing a blockade on Iraqi commerce within a few days, American officials said today.


Agent Orange Study Was Obstructed, Panel Says
LEAD: After 14 months of investigation, a House committee concluded today that the Reagan Administration had obstructed a $43 million Federal health study of Vietnam veterans exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange, causing the study's cancellation.


A Minor Player Gets Major Hit
LEAD: Kelvin Torve, a 10-year minor league veteran, made his first National League hit count - a game-winning, pinch-hit double.


NASA Shuffles Shuttles


Washington Talk;   Iraq Puts Election Truisms To Test
LEAD: All the uncertainty in the Persian Gulf has insured at least one thing at home: this fall's elections, which weeks ago seemed but a hodgepodge of races with little national focus, will now revolve heavily around the economy as it sags under the burden of rising oil prices.


Private Art Collection Is Stolen in Moscow
LEAD: Thieves made off with the largest private art collection in the Soviet Union Union after breaking into an apartment and tying up the owner, Izvestia reported this week.


New Incentives On Ford Models
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would offer four-year loans at 4.8 percent on selected car lines and $1,000 cash rebates on others.
The low financing and rebates end on Sept. 26, the date of the official introduction of Ford's 1991 models.
The 1991 Escort and the Ford Explorer are in showrooms and are exempt.


Toyota and GKN Pact
LEAD: GKN P.L.C. said this week that it had an exclusive order to supply constant-velocity driveshafts to the Toyota Motor Corporation for Toyota's new passenger car to be built in Britain.
The car will be built at Toyota's new plant in Derbyshire in central England.
Initial output is expected to be 100,000 vehicles annually, rising to 200,000 at full capacity.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Chiat/Day Management Is Shuffled
LEAD: After announcing last week that it was laying off 30 of its 150 employees in New York, Chiat/Day/Mojo said yesterday that it has reorganized the top management at the troubled office.


Dorothy Gillam Baker, Educator, 84
LEAD: Dorothy Gillam Baker, a scholar and educator who researched patterns of development in world history, died on Aug. 3 at Albert Einstein Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 84 years old and lived in the Bronx.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Says Turkey Plans To Cooperate on Iraq
LEAD: In a crucial strategic development further isolating Iraq, the United States and Turkey laid the basis today for expanded military and intelligence cooperation to counter President Saddam Hussein, a Bush Administration official said.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Baghdad Seals Off the Exit Of Foreigners Across Border
LEAD: Iraq informed the United States today that thousands of Americans and other foreigners stranded in Iraq and Kuwait since last week may not leave, the State Department said.


Barry Juror In Hospital; Deliberations Held Up
LEAD: Deliberations in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug and perjury trial were suspended today when one of the jurors was hospitalized for what her doctor called stress and depression.


Six Accused In $3.7 Million Insider Case
LEAD: Government lawyers in New York and Washington yesterday accused a former associate at a prominent New York law firm, his sister and four others of earning at least $3.75 million from illegal insider trading from 1984 to 1988.


IRAQ DETAINS FOREIGNERS, UPSETS SUMMIT;   ARAB ROLE UNCLEAR
LEAD: Just hours after worried Arab leaders arrived here today for emergency talks to ease the crisis caused by the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the meeting was postponed for a day when an unexpected Iraqi delegation showed up seeking to thwart Arab participation in a multinational military force.


Electronics Executive Surrenders on Charges
LEAD: The president of a Tampa electronics company surrendered to the Federal authorities here today on charges that he sold substandard electronic parts to the Government that wound up in missiles and the space shuttle program.


Bad Hop in 10th Helps Expos Trim Pirates
LEAD: Andres Galarraga scored from second base in the 10th inning on Mike Fitzgerald's bad-hop grounder when Don Slaught did not cover home plate to give the Montreal Expos a 7-6 victory tonight over the Pittsburgh Pirates.


Earl R. Zack, Pyschologist, 77
LEAD: Dr.
Earl R. Zack, a psychologist and an educator, died yesterday in Sarasota Memorial Hospital in Florida.
He was 77 years old and lived in Sarasota.


Hostages in Iraq? Their Families Think So


E.P.A. TO TIGHTEN DIESEL FUEL RULE
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency said today that it would require an 80 percent reduction of sulfur in diesel fuel sold for vehicles driven on the highway starting on Oct. 1, 1993.


More Airlines Raise Fares
LEAD: More airlines raised their fares today, and an industry spokesman attributed the increases to fuel prices that ''have gone through the roof.''


Prominent Speculator Is Indicted in Japanese Stock Case
LEAD: Prosecutors today indicted one of Japan's best-known and most politically influential stock speculators, Matsuhiro Kotani, today on charges that he manipulated a stock.
But the prosecutors left many disappointed when they indicated that the inquiry was now likely to end.


U.S. Files Suit Against Georgia, Charging Bias in Election Laws
LEAD: The Justice Department filed a lawsuit today challenging Georgia's election system, which requires candidates to participate in a runoff if none receive 50 percent of the vote in primary elections.


Amid the Antiques, a Zinc Woman and Fish Decoys
LEAD: Charles Miller and his 18th-, 19th- and 20th-century European and American furniture travel to some 30 antique shows every year, crossing the country from Maine and Florida to California.
This weekend, Mr.
Miller, whose firm, Miller Hamilton &amp; Company, is in Chapel Hill, N.C., is in Long Island for the third edition of the Southampton Antiques Show, to be held at the Southampton campus of Long Island


Quayle Warns Haiti to Hold Fair Election
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle warned Haitian leaders today that the United States would cut off economic aid to this Caribbean nation if general elections scheduled for November are not free and fair.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   No Saudi Request Yet, Pakistani Army Says
LEAD: A spokesman for the Pakistani armed forces said today that there had been no request so far from Saudi Arabia for Pakistani troops to augment an international force facing the Iraqis.


Donaldson To Head Big Board
LEAD: William H. Donaldson, one of the three founding partners of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc., was named chairman of the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
He will replace John J. Phelan Jr., who will retire in January.


English Eyes Mavericks
LEAD: Alex English has agreed to a contract with the Dallas Mavericks, but he won't sign until he has a chance to meet with the team's owner, Donald Carter, The Dallas Morning News reported yesterday. (AP)


Net Up 24.6% At Wal-Mart
LEAD: Wal-Mart Stores Inc. reported today that it had a 24.6 percent gain in its second-quarter profit as revenue also increased by the same rate.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MEL GIBSON, exhausted from playing the title role in FRANCO ZEFFIRELLI's film of ''Hamlet,'' says he is taking a break after working in four movies back to back.


Outdoors;   Contestants Set Creations Afloat
LEAD: YOU will have to scramble a bit - the deadline for submitting an entry form is Monday - if you wish to take part in the River Project's annual instant boat contest.
This year the contest will be Aug. 25-26, and even if you don't wish to participate, you might enjoy watching the zany event.


Equity Will Reconsider 'Miss Saigon' Decision
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he was ''reaching out to Actors' Equity'' to see if he could help in the dispute that has led to the cancellation of the planned Broadway production of the London hit musical ''Miss Saigon.''


Private Police Patrols Have Reduced Crime
LEAD: Private security patrols working with the police have cut crime in one midtown Manhattan district, new figures show.


Corrections
LEAD: A caption yesterday about the arrival of a Middle Eastern ambassador for a White House meeting misidentified him.
He was Ambassador Saud Nasir al-Sabah of Kuwait.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Betty Garrett Looks Back


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iran's Quandary: Yesterday's Foe Today's Friend?
LEAD: Ever since Iraq invaded Kuwait seven days ago, Iran has kept markedly quiet, assailing the Iraqi move but saying little else about the expanding crisis in the Persian Gulf, an area that Teheran has traditionally viewed as its sphere of prime concern and influence.
Now that the United


The Siege of Iraq
LEAD: President Bush has skillfully orchestrated a two-pronged response to Iraq's occupation of tiny Kuwait.
He has dispatched American military forces to prevent the Iraqi divisions from pushing on to occupy Saudi Arabia's oilfields.
And he has led the worldwide economic effort to choke off Saddam Hussein's oil exports and force him to withdraw from


Our Towns;   A Country Club Where Excuses Need Not Apply
LEAD: When Shoal Creek Country Club of Alabama burst into the headlines as a symbol of restricted all-white golf clubs, Robert F. Carroll wasn't too surprised. ''There are Shoal Creeks all over,'' he said. ''There are Shoal Creeks a couple of minutes from here.''


At the Movies
LEAD:
War and Romance


Hall of Fame Inducts 7, Led by John Henry
LEAD: With almost every living jockey and trainer enshrined in racing's Hall of Fame looking on, two trainers, a jockey and four horses were inducted into the Hall this morning at the national Museum of Racing on Union Avenue.


ON STAGE
LEAD:
Spider-Man Project


A Voyage to Italy, as Seen in Postwar Cinema
LEAD: A dank, sunless morning.
A distracted young woman with the features of a high-fashion model (Monica Vitti) walks along the bank of a ship canal.
She holds the hand of her small son, pulling him along as if he were a wooden duck on wheels.
She is distracted, but she looks terrific, her dark reddish-blond hair set off by the soft green of her cloth coat, which is, of course, couture.


TV Weekend;   2 Generations of Rusks On Vietnam and Its Toll
LEAD: Tonight's edition of ''20/20'' goes to Athens, Ga., for an account of the reconciliation of Dean Rusk, the former Secretary of State, and his son, Richard, after years of division over the elder Rusk's role in the Vietnam War.
The program, at 10 o'clock on ABC, does not go deeply into the reconciliation, which began in 1985; the occasion for dealing with it now seems to be the recent publication of ''As I Saw It,'' which Dean


Cantor Zvee Aroni, 65; Held First Pulpit at 18
LEAD: Zvee Aroni, a prominent cantor for Conservative Jewish congregations, died Tuesday at his daughter's home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 65 years old and lived in North Miami Beach.


Jewel H. Bell, 58, Dies; African Center Leader
LEAD: Jewel Hairston Bell, director of Tufts University's African-American Center, died last Saturday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
She was 58 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.


Mets Take First as Fernandez Regains Form
LEAD: The Mets may not exactly have solved the mystery of Sid Fernandez last night, but they absolutely unraveled part of it when the laid-back left-hander rose from the ruins of two short and brutal losses and pitched a classic three-hitter over the Chicago Cubs.


Long Lines for Food as Peru Forces Some Stores to Open


Where Soviet Emigres Finally Let Loose
LEAD: In an upstairs corner of the National nightclub, Mikhail Stern, a 35-year-old factory worker from the Soviet Union, sat looking at the spectacle below.


Fuel Trading Calmer as Hectic Week Ends
LEAD: The prices dealers are paying for gasoline fluctuated modestly yesterday, according to oil company officials, but the price of crude oil and gasoline edged up in the futures markets on bellicose statements from the Middle East.


Elco Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elco Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
40,801,000
39,367,000
Net inc
1,429,000
2,033,000
Share earns
.30
.43
Yr sales
150,706,000
155,390,000
Net inc
b4,819,000
7,843,000
Share earns
1.01
1.65
b-Included a gain of $1,224,000 from cumulative effect of change in acounting.


Kimball International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimball International (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
152,344,000
156,933,000
Net inc
11,765,000
10,150,000
Share earns
.55
.48
Yr sales
612,956,000
595,005,000
Net inc
43,475,000
34,299,000
Share earns
2.05
1.62


Motor Club of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motor Club of America (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,888,000
17,473,000
Net inc
360,000
812,000
Share earns
.18
.39
6mo rev
37,536,000
33,973,000
Net inc
1,406,000
1,049,000
Share earns
.69
.51
A change in the calculation of the unsatisfied claim and judgment fund expense resulted in gains of $1,403,000 for the second quarter and $3,364,000 for the 6 months.


Telematics International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telematics International (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
17,451,000
15,419,000
Net inc
767,000
bc4,448,000
Share earns
.05
-
6mo sales
32,672,000
26,666,000
Net loss
444,000
b8,994,000
b-Included for both periods a $3,518,000 unusual charge related to the company's write-off of its minority equity investment in Globenet Inc., and the 6 months also included a loss from equity investments of $1,260,000.


Horsehead Resource DevelopFment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horsehead Resource DevelopFment Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,483,000
11,399,000
Net inc
4,490,000
b6,111,000
Share earns
.14
.19
6mo rev
24,133,000
22,162,000
Net inc
8,343,000
b8,375,000
Share earns
.26
.26


Long-Term Bond Prices Off Sharply
LEAD: Prices of long-term Treasury bonds were battered yesterday as traders and investment managers sought to hedge their portfolios for the weekend.


Giants Sign Carthon To 3-Year Contract
LEAD: The Giants corraled one of their many missing bodies today.
Maurice Carthon, their starting fullback for most of the last five years, signed a three-year contract worth an estimated $1.575 million, including a signing bonus.


Verdict Called Rebuke To Federal Prosecutors
LEAD: Lawyers said tonight that the outcome of the trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. vindicated the decision by his attorney to put the Government on the defensive and to challenge the tactics used by Federal investigators.


Bloc Development reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bloc Development
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,130,000
2,160,000
Net inc
808,000
193,000
Share earns
.04
.01
Shares outst
19,800,000
15,800,000
6mo rev
12,600,000
3,680,000
Net inc
1,480,000
199,000
Share earns
.08
.01
Shares outst
19,300,000
15,300,000


Modtech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modtech Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,923,000
10,154,000
Net inc
844,000
584,000
Share earns
.29
.20
Shares outst
2,946,000
2,877,000
6mo rev
23,077,000
18,447,000
Net inc
1,268,000
504,000
Share earns
.43
.18


U.A.W. Turns Down 2 Chrysler Proposals
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers union has rejected proposals that would give workers a stake in the financially struggling Chrysler Corporation and would establish a new way to figure profit sharing, a U.A.W. official said today.


Telemundo Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telemundo Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
33,068,000
29,782,000
Net loss
9,216,000
10,565,000
Shares outst
31,141,000
16,843,000
6mo rev
57,879,000
52,257,000
Net loss
23,963,000
27,791,000
Shares outst
31,042,000
16,843,000


Commodore International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commodore International (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
198,100,000
180,300,000
Net loss
3,500,000
b8,900,000
Shares outst
32,405,000
31,732,000
Yr sales
887,300,000
939,700,000
Net inc
1,500,000
b51,300,000
Share earns
.05
1.59


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Using sign language, THE PRINCESS OF WALES addressed 800 delegates to a conference of the British Deaf Association, at Brighton, England.
She has been learning the language since she became patron of the association in 1983.


Hold Tenants Liable for Illegal Window Locks
LEAD: To the Editor:


About New York;   Miracles at Work When Children Are Near Death
LEAD: ''These are the days of miracle and wonder.'' - Paul Simon.


Kinnard Investments reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kinnard Investments
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,054,158
5,409,944
Net inc
658,663
117,559
Share earns
.28
.06
6mo rev
10,420,326
9,677,159
Net inc
510,761
25,809
Share earns
.23
.01


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Dominican Day Parade, Madison Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 37th to 56th Streets from noon to 4 P.M.


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crawford &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,188,000
7,302,000
Share earns
.46
.41
6mo net inc
15,717,000
13,420,000
Share earns
.89
.76


Cold War's End Leaves Austria Seeking a Role in the New Europe
LEAD: To the thousands of Austrians who came here this week for his funeral, Bruno Kreisky, who died last month, was more than the country's longest-serving postwar Chancellor.
As an architect of the country's neutrality who helped make Vienna the third capital of the United Nations, the former Chancellor led


Coleman Turns slugger As Cards Topple Pirates
LEAD: Vince Coleman had four hits, including a home run, and drove in three runs tonight as the St.
Louis Cardinals withstood an injury to their starter, John Tudor, to defeat Pittsburgh by 8-3 and knock the Pirates out of first place in the National League East.


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF    ARAB VOTE TO SEND TROOPS TO HELP SAUDIS; BOYCOTT OF IRAQI OIL IS REPORTED NEAR 100%;   Baghdad Isolated
LEAD: Arab countries moved tonight to confront Iraq's thrust into Kuwait by voting to send troops to Saudi Arabia, with only Libya and the Palestine Liberation Organization openly backing the isolated Iraqis in the crucial decision.


McCaw Cellular Communicaions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McCaw Cellular Communicaions Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
242,400,000
120,100,000
Net loss
60,700,000
87,500,000
Shares outst
177,996,000
134,534,000
6mo rev
422,400,000
222,200,000
Net inc
b791,100,000
c185,200,000
Share earns
4.43
-
Shares outst
178,690,000
134,124,000


2 U.S. Premieres in Merkin Hall Season
LEAD: The American premieres of Sir Harrison Birtwistle's ''Ritual Fragment'' and Handel's opera ''Siroe,'' a concert performance of Rameau's ''Castor et Pollux'' and a four-concert ''American Folk'' series are to be part of the Merkin Concert Hall 1990-91 season.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 2 about the social season in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., incorrectly described the criminal conviction of Peter M. Brant, a Greenwich, Conn., polo player and racehorse owner.
He was convicted of willful failure to maintain tax records, a misdemeanor, not tax evasion, a felony.
Two corporations of which he was president, the BATO Company and Riviere du Loup Newsprint Ltd., pleaded guilty to willfully filing false tax returns, a felony.


Unico American Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unico American Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,094,876
8,092,871
Net inc
891,207
970,756
Share earns
.16
.17
Shares outst
5,436,743
4,891,275


Lin Broadcasting Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lin Broadcasting Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
72,546,000
66,236,000
Net inc
18,122,000
27,559,000
Share earns
.35
.52
Shares outst
51,444,000
53,430,000
6mo rev
134,220,000
119,133,000
Net loss
162,628,000
b47,780,000
Share earns
-
.90
Shares outst
51,533,000
53,374,000


Diversicare Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversicare Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
18,978,000
17,165,000
Net inc
599,000
b543,000
Share earns
.05
.05
6mo rev
36,684,000
33,731,000
Net inc
766,000
b1,611,000
Share earns
.07
.15
b-Included an extraordinary credit from early extinguishment of debt of $150,000, or 1 cent a share, for both the quarter and 6 months, and the 6 months also included a gain from an accounting adjustment of $700,000, or 6 cents a share, and a loss from minority interest of $55,000.


Margaret Pruden, Teacher, Is Wed
LEAD: Margaret DeWitt Pruden, a daughter of Dorothy Davis Pruden of Ridgewood, N.J., and the late Dr.
William Heston Pruden 2d, was married yesterday to Thomas Lee Kirkpatrick, the son of Mrs.
Paul Nelson of Chanute, Kan., and the late Elton Kirkpatrick.
The Rev.
Robert Beverley, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the Pruden family's summer home on Martha's Vineyard,


Lois Korey, 56, Partner In Advertising Agency
LEAD: Lois Korey, president of Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, a Manhattan advertising agency, died on Thursday at a Manhattan restaurant.
She was 56 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Grady Takes One-Shot Lead After 2d Round of P.G.A.
LEAD: The frustration level rose in the second round of the P.G.A.
Championship today as the world's best golfers couldn't keep the ensnaring rough of the Shoal Creek Country Club course from getting under their skin.


E.G&amp;G. Sets Deal With TI Group
LEAD: E.G.&amp;G.
Inc. said it had agreed to sell its fluid components technology group to TI Group P.L.C. for $240 million in cash, subject to regulatory clearances.
The business had revenues of $180 million in 1989.


CONFRONTATION THE GULF    Security Council's Rare Unity May Be Threatened Over U.S. Warships in the Gulf;   NATO Supports Turkey
LEAD: NATO foreign ministers agreed today that the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait threatened the collective and national security of all its members and vowed that they would treat any Iraqi onslaught against Turkey, a NATO member, as an attack on the alliance as a whole.


Laser Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laser Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,725,000
8,028,000
Net loss
b66,000
1,551,000
6mo rev
16,253,000
15,385,000
Net loss
b1,081,000
3,050,000
Shares outst
4,702,600
4,682,600
b-After an extraordinary credit of $699,000, or 15 cents a share, for both periods.


Forum Retirement Partners reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forum Retirement Partners (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,218,000
8,945,000
Net loss
539,000
b1,165,000
Share earns
-
.14
6mo rev
14,269,000
15,554,000
Net loss
1,366,000
b375,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Sungard Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sungard Data Systems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
63,771,000
48,860,000
Net inc
5,353,000
4,357,000
Share earns
.37
.31
6mo rev
119,473,000
95,730,000
Net inc
9,709,000
8,185,000
Share earns
.68
.59


Datron Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datron Systems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,391,000
10,595,000
Net inc
170,000
866,000
Share earns
.06
.28
Shares outst
2,819,000
3,103,000


Girard Halting Pic 'N' Save Bid
LEAD: The Pic 'N' Save Corporation said it had settled differences with an investment group, Girard Partners, which will drop efforts to gain control of the company through a proxy fight.


Chief Consolidated Mining reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chief Consolidated Mining
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
84,622
123,979
Net loss
92,064
100,442
6mo rev
168,430
259,664
Net loss
174,635
85,958
The company is listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange.


Del Taco Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Del Taco Restaurants Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 27
1990
1989
Revenue
13,025,000
13,639,000
Net inc
115,000
100,000
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo rev
25,368,000
25,624,000
Net loss
387,000
407,000


US Facilities Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Facilities Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b846,000
c605,000
Per share
.22
.16
6mo net inc
b1,660,000
c1,006,000
Per share
.43
.27
b-Included a tax credit of $250,000 and $512,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Seattle Filmworks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seattle Filmworks (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,668,000
7,882,000
Net inc
577,000
501,000
Share earns
.30
.26
9mo rev
22,764,000
21,055,000
Net inc
957,000
b998,000
Share earns
.49
.51
b-Reflected after-tax gain of about $264,000, or 14 cents a share, from settlement of lawsuit in the second quarter of fiscal 1989.


Gitano Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gitano Group (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
180,350,000
132,021,000
Net inc
6,649,000
4,913,000
Share earns
.47
.35
Shares outst
14,289,752
13,920,655
6mo sales
404,240,000
290,777,000
Net inc
20,824,000
16,677,000
Share earns
1.47
1.20
Shares outst
14,119,617
13,920,655


Dollar Off in Light Trading; Economy and Rates Cited
LEAD: The dollar finished lower against most major currencies yesterday despite the possibility of an escalation of Middle East hostilities that could disrupt oil flows from that region and damage economies.


Questa Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Questa Oil &amp; Gas Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
473,045
397,865
Net inc
66,843
10,879
Share earns
.06
.01
6mo rev
952,222
852,788
Net inc
133,203
94,114
Share earns
.12
.08


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF    ARABS VOTE TO SEND TROOPS TO HELP SAUDIS; BOYCOTT OF IRAQI OIL IS REPORTED NEAR 100%;   No Shipments Seen
LEAD: The international embargo of oil shipments from Iraq and Kuwait has choked off nearly all petroleum exports from those two countries, oil company executives and industry analysts said today.


Russ Berrie &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Russ Berrie &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
47,703,000
45,856,000
Net loss
1,363,000
2,975,000
Shares outst
15,061,000
15,060,000
6mo sales
107,070,000
112,391,000
Net inc
1,795,000
b5,156,000
Share earns
.12
-
Shares outst
15,073,000
15,060,000


Re Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Re Capital Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
26,476,000
23,028,000
Net inc
2,487,000
2,235,000
Share earns
.36
.33
6mo rev
46,597,000
42,706,000
Net inc
4,783,000
4,263,000
Share earns
.70
.62


Cyanotech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyanotech Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
524,754
219,045
Net inc
24,813
b416,490
6mo rev
942,062
744,047
Net loss
149,830
774,754
b-Net loss


Northwest Airlines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwest Airlines Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,799,000,000
1,635,000,000
Net inc
60,000,000
89,000,000
6mo rev
3,430,000,000
3,080,000,000
Net inc
20,300,000
106,100,000
Revenue represents operating revenue.


Chain-Snatcher Killed by Police Had Jail Record
LEAD: The 24-year-old Bronx man who was killed by a transit police officer on Thursday was a small-time marijuana dealer who had a history of snatching gold chains on the subway and fighting with police officers when they tried to arrest him, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.


Review/Music;   Five Decades Old but Up to Date
LEAD: It would be foolish to venture grandiose conclusions about the state of new Western classical music from the offerings of any of the annual Tanglewood Festivals of Contemporary Music.
This is just one festival, after all, with one set of calculations - esthetic, historical, cultural and political - about how to make up representative programs.


Home Intensive Care reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Intensive Care (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,807,000
15,180,000
Net loss
1,502,000
b1,318,000
Share earns
-
.14
Shares outst
9,155,000
9,738,000
9mo rev
23,692,000
39,923,000
Net loss
2,975,000
b4,586,000
Share earns
-
.49


Cade Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cade Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,720,000
8,173,000
Net inc
636,000
179,000
Share earns
.04
.01
6mo sales
13,528,000
21,136,000
Net inc
1,194,000
517,000
Share earns
.07
.03


Bando McGlocklin Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bando McGlocklin Capital
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
440,032
269,856
Share earns
.20
.13
Yr net inc
1,513,324
1,280,199
Share earns
.74
.63


Florida Employers Insur reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Employers Insur
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
943,616
963,163
Share earns
.42
.43
6mo net inc
1,759,586
1,958,949
Share earns
.78
.87


Flood of Foreigners Seeking Asylum Angers West Germans
LEAD: With the 1990 figure for foreigners applying for asylum in West Germany passing the 100,000 mark this week, and hundreds of thousands of East Germans and ethnic Germans from farther east in Europe jamming into the country, feelings against non-Germans and non-West Germans are rising.


Bridge
LEAD: For players brought up to believe that 26 points makes a game, it is tempting to suppose that three no-trump must necessarily be easy when the combined hands have 29 points and all suits are stopped at least twice.
But consider the diagramed deal played early this year at the Cavendish Club in New York City and reported by the East player, Sid Rosen.


The Transit Cops' Dum-Dum Arms Race
LEAD: For years, New York City's Transit Police have muddled along under confused management: the head of the Transit Authority is responsible for policy, and the city's Police Commissioner is responsible for operations.
Now the confusion has turned dangerous.


Greyvest Financial Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greyvest Financial Services Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,758,000
9,239,000
Net inc
1,034,000
954,000
Share earns
.07
.07
6mo rev
21,184,000
18,375,000
Net inc
1,913,000
1,721,000
Share earns
.13
.12


Fitchburg Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fitchburg Gas &amp; Electric (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,110,832
12,747,257
Net inc
175,860
b468,319
Share earns
.10
-
6mo rev
29,944,311
29,714,381
Net inc
1,973,792
c2,075,775
Share earns
1.50
1.58
b-Net loss


Religion Notes
LEAD:
Uniting to Help Children


Aides Worry About How Bush's Vacation Looks in a Crisis
LEAD: Noting that he keeps a telephone in his golf cart and in his Cigarette boat, President Bush today defended his decision to go on vacation only three days after sending American troops to the Middle East.


NYTest Environmental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NYTest Environmental Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,624,394
1,353,912
Net inc
189,715
151,913
Share earns
.03
.03
6mo rev
2,956,361
2,557,739
Net inc
213,853
237,272
Share earns
.04
.04


Patents;   Preventing Facial Rash From Shaves
LEAD: A dermatologist and pharmacist in Houston, Milton D. Moore, has patented a treatment to prevent the painful facial rashes that afflict men who shave coarse or curly hair.


Coslet Takes the Offensive in Jets Debut
LEAD: Ready or not, Bruce Coslet will bring a new style to the Jets' sideline Saturday night when they open their exhibition season in Philadelphia.


In Multinational Force, Pride Can Get in the Way
LEAD: As the United States prepares for the active participation of military allies in its confrontation with Iraq, experts predict that the command and control of multinational forces will pose staggering problems.


Ex-Aide to Thornburgh Indicted on Drug Charges
LEAD: A former top aide to Attorney General Dick Thornburgh was indicted by a Federal grand jury here today on charges of using cocaine while employed by the Justice Department and of lying to the Government about earlier drug use.


Norman Marcus, Architect, 53
LEAD: Norman Marcus, an architect and a vice president of Citicorp, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53 years old.


RESULTS PLUS;


Halsey Drug Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Halsey Drug Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,514,000
5,446,000
Net inc
293,000
483,000
Share earns
.04
.08
6mo sales
12,176,000
10,765,000
Net inc
458,000
969,000
Share earns
.07
.16


Transmedia Network reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transmedia Network (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,045,270
1,337,323
Net inc
139,432
41,752
Share earns
.07
.02
9mo rev
5,386,590
3,503,255
Net inc
115,920
167,549
Share earns
.06
.09


Judge Cites Doubts On Panel Examining Talks at Daily News
LEAD: The Federal judge hearing arguments yesterday on whether a New York State panel should investigate the protracted labor dispute between the Daily News and its unions suggested that the panel could not impartially mediate the negotiations.


Equity Plans to Meet on Thursday
LEAD: Actors' Equity announced yesterday that it would meet on Thursday to re-evaluate its decision not to let the English actor Jonathan Pryce appear on Broadway in ''Miss Saigon,'' the hit musical in which he is starring in London.
In rejecting Mr.
Pryce, Equity had said it could not ''appear to condone the casting of a Caucasian in the role of a Eurasian.


Mortgage Rates Jump
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages jumped into the double digits for the first time in a month and averaged 10.08 percent this week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
The rate was up from 9.84 percent last week and was the highest since mortgage costs averaged 10.11 percent for the week that ended on July 13.


Cross (A.T.) Co.  (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cross (A.T.) Co.  (A)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
53,222,000
54,444,000
Net inc
6,471,000
7,278,000
Share earns
.38
.44
6mo sales
101,953,000
107,546,000
Net inc
10,151,000
13,326,000
Share earns
.60
.80


Uniforce Temporary PersonFnel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Uniforce Temporary PersonFnel
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
28,136,115
27,589,457
Net inc
887,912
889,907
Share earns
.19
.19
Shares outst
4,555,410
4,641,754
6mo rev
56,114,945
54,553,534
Net inc
1,710,551
b1,697,916
Share earns
.37
.46
Shares outst
4,585,521
4,613,946


Lee Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Pharmaceuticals (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,222,000
8,339,000
Net inc
b27,000
160,000
Share earns
.01
.04
9mo rev
15,729,000
23,053,000
Net loss
b307,000
c229,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Included a gain of $646,000 on sale of land and building.


Diversified Human Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Human Resources
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,880,608
7,923,330
Net inc
b19,245
c196,121
Share earns
.01
.10
6mo rev
17,919,078
15,116,016
Net inc
b423,088
c356,006
Share earns
.22
.19
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $7,842 for the quarter and $169,235, or 9 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Leucadia National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leucadia National (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b33,115,000
c5,691,000
Share earns
2.69
.42
Shares outst
12,329,000
13,608,000
6mo net inc
b36,865,000
c10,496,000
Share earns
2.96
.78
Shares outst
12,467,000
13,464,000


Foundation Health Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foundation Health Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
247,800,000
200,900,000
Net inc
2,700,000
899,000
Share earns
.32
.09
Yr rev
895,200,000
762,300,000
Net inc
11,100,000
b2,800,000
Share earns
1.37
-
Shares outst
7,200,000
6,900,000


Suave Shoe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suave Shoe Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
18,026,000
16,594,000
Net inc
1,075,000
cd8,000
Share earns
.62
-
9mo sales
51,516,000
45,868,000
Net inc
b1,028,000
c474,000
Share earns
.57
.25
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $103,000, or 6 cents a share, and a net loss on disposal of discontinued operations of $1,351,000.


Edberg Defeats Chang to Gain Semifinal and No. 1 Ranking
LEAD: In the summer of 1988, Stefan Edberg of Sweden received a false alarm in the ranking department.


Pretoria Sends Troops to Aid In Fighting Unrest in South
LEAD: The South African Army has sent troops to reinforce police battling protesters and rioters in clashes that have claimed at least 42 lives in three days of upheaval, arson and looting in the Indian Ocean city of Port Elizabeth.


One Liberty Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Liberty Properties (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,065,283
894,368
Net inc
540,243
b331,161
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
1,338,619
2,203,334
6mo rev
2,190,223
1,814,003
Net inc
1,200,099
b30,596
Share earns
.32
-
Shares outst
1,338,619
2,203,334


McDermott International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDermott International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
684,525,000
658,774,000
Net loss
44,327,000
b19,670,000
Shares outst
43,846,724
37,328,167
b-Included a loss of $318,000 from discontinued operations.


F.B.I. Clarifies Comment on Files
LEAD: The spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation who speculated on Thursday that abuse of the bureau's computerized crime files was quite common clarified his assessment yesterday after checking with officials in charge of the files, known as the National Crime Information Center.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Science Times on Tuesday about links between explosive anger and brain injury or disease misidentified a drug that shows promise in treating the problem.
It is propranolol.


Offer Is Delayed By Venture Stores
LEAD: The May Department Stores Company and its Venture Stores unit said that because of current market conditions they had postponed the initial public offering of Venture common stock.
The companies said they intend to complete the offering as soon as market conditions allow.


Rule Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rule Industries (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
15,478,000
15,256,000
Net inc
411,000
945,000
Share earns
.19
.41
9mo rev
39,970,000
37,090,000
Net inc
887,000
1,512,000
Share earns
.39
.65


Brenda Mines Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brenda Mines Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,570,000
13,419,000
Net loss
3,243,000
735,000
6mo rev
19,166,000
25,739,000
Net loss
5,386,000
3,722,000
Year-ago results are restated.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Mentor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mentor Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,294,000
12,043,000
Net inc
2,172,000
b2,030,000
Share earns
.20
.19
Shares outst
10,956,000
10,717,000
b-Included a one-time after-tax gain of $90,000 for an accounting adjustment.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater went to the Soviet Union 20 years ago, it was the first visit of an American modern dance company there since Isadora Duncan visited in 1905.
JUDITH JAMISON, the company's star, danced to generous applause.


At Nursing Homes, They're for Patients
LEAD: To the Editor:


Judge Tells U.S. to Free Mexican Abducted in Drug Agent's Death
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled today that the United States had violated its extradition treaty with Mexico by abducting a Mexican doctor accused of involvement in the torture slaying of an American drug agent.
The judge ordered that the doctor be returned to Mexico.


Kings Road Entertainment reports earnings for Year April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kings Road Entertainment (OTC)
Year April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
30,943,773
20,522,154
Net loss
b687,833
4,767,213
b-After an extraordinary gain of $365,211, or 7 cents a share, on debt restructuring.


INSIDE
LEAD:
An Eye on Venus


AIDS Patient Kills His Mother In Manhattan
LEAD: A word processing supervisor who was suffering from AIDS killed his mother, who had moved from California to care for him in his Manhattan apartment, and briefly set himself on fire, the police said yesterday.


Fabri-Centers of Amercia reports earnings for 13wks to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fabri-Centers of Amercia (NYSE)
13wks to July 28
1990
1989
Sales
75,857,000
67,320,000
Net loss
1,158,000
1,251,000
26wk sales
155,995,000
141,458,000
Net loss
530,000
727,000


Rexworks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rexworks Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,536,000
17,694,000
Net inc
322,000
416,000
Share earns
.18
.23
6mo sales
31,820,000
32,740,000
Net inc
625,000
937,000
Share earns
.34
.52


Moore Products Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moore Products Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
26,292,000
26,880,000
Net inc
756,000
1,649,000
Share earns
.36
.79
6mo sales
51,053,000
49,807,000
Net inc
1,283,000
2,377,000
Share earns
.61
1.14


Energy Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energy Service Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
41,576,000
38,898,000
Net loss
2,974,000
b426,000
6mo rev
85,560,000
75,549,000
Net loss
1,961,000
481,000
b-Net income


Ingles Markets reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ingles Markets (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
258,123,000
226,568,000
Net inc
3,463,000
4,289,000
Share earns
.19
.24
9mo sales
746,298,000
650,649,000
Net inc
6,487,000
10,310,000
Share earns
.36
.58
The company said the earnings fell in the third quarter and 9 months due to losses of $1 million and $5.8 million, respectively, from the sale of marketable equity securities.


James L. Howard, 71, Lawyer and Executive
LEAD: James L. Howard, a lawyer, certified public accountant and former insurance executive, died on July 29 at Engelwood Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 71 years old and lived in Teaneck, N.J.


Stewart Wins 16th, Shutting Out Yanks
LEAD: The Yankees' modest little winning streak died tonight, even if their hope of climbing out of last place didn't.


Producer Prices Show Decline of 0.1% for July
LEAD: Prices at the producer level fell by a tenth of a percent in July, the Labor Department said today in a report that economists said showed a weakening economy even before the current oil-price shock.


NuVision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NuVision Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
15,091,000
14,781,000
Net loss
286,000
b228,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
2,716,000
2,778,000
6mo sales
31,420,000
29,402,000
Net loss
351,000
b429,000
Share earns
-
.15
Shares outst
2,730,000
2,778,000


Chase Program To Cut Payroll
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation has embarked on its previously announced cost-cutting program by offering employees with more than 10 years' experience a package of benefits for early retirement.


Environmental Doubts on 'Green' Ads
LEAD: As big manufacturers start to pay environmental groups to help promote products like toilet paper and beer, the new marketing strategy is dividing environmental advocates.


5 NATIONS MOVING TROOPS TO LIBERIA
LEAD: Five West African countries began moving army troops toward Liberia today in an effort to end the seven-month-old civil war there.


Warsaw Journal;   Winning Shoppers' Hearts and Minds
LEAD: As the crowds of shoppers promenade up and down Malczewskiego Street clutching brown bags bulging with produce, Adam Smith's invisible hand is meting out some rough supply-and-demand economic justice.


Police Group Sponsors Children's Talent Contest in the Bronx


Tacoma Boatbuilding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tacoma Boatbuilding Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
20,327,000
13,749,000
Net loss
2,173,000
b287,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
43,248,000
22,465,000
Net loss
3,300 000
b342,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


Keltic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keltic Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
1,893
b305,358
Share earns
-
.32
6mo rev
2,118,168
1,911,506
Net inc
36,895
391,853
Share earns
.04
.41
b-Net income
Results are in Canadian funds.


CF Income Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CF Income Partners LP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
862,000
2,000,000
6mo net loss
1,977,000
3,352,000
The partnership said decreased net losses for the second quarter reflect a gain of $1.4 million realized from sales activity in the resale portfolio acquired at year end.


William R. Moseley Dies at 75; Led a Major Munitions Supplier
LEAD: William R. Moseley, retired chief executive of Day &amp; Zimmermann Inc., a major Government munitions supplier, died last Sunday at a nursing home in Springfield Township, Pa.
He was 75 years old and lived in Philadelphia.


Steven M. Rundle, Executive, 44
LEAD: Steven Merriman Rundle, manager of creative services for MBI Inc., a direct marketing company in Norwalk, Conn., died on Tuesday at Norwalk Hospital.
He was 44 years old and lived in Weston, Conn.


Resorts International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Resorts International Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
109,103,000
110,192,000
Net inc
803,000
b27,896,000
6mo rev
216,647,000
223,661,000
Net loss
2,305,000
46,579,000
b-Net loss
Revenue represents operating revenue.


Hana Biologics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hana Biologics (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
998,000
1,595,000
Net loss
1,643,000
1,685,000
Yr rev
4,280,000
5,746,000
Net inc
5,315,000
b6,869,000
Share earns
.48
-
Shares outst
11,098,472
6,634,161
b-Net loss


Fairmount Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairmount Chemical Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,074,400
2,093,000
Net loss
273,200
274,900
Shares outst
5,419,240
3,792,866
6mo sales
4,669,300
4,373,500
Net loss
548,300
446,900
Shares outst
5,107,783
3,792,866


Electrician Gets 5 Years in Wiring-Fire Death
LEAD: An electrician convicted of manslaughter in a fatal fire caused by his faulty wiring was sentenced today to five years in prison in what was described as the first case of its kind.


Velobind Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Velobind Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
11,038,000
10,092,000
Net inc
279,000
86,000
Share earns
.06
.02
6mo sales
21,646,000
20,523,000
Net inc
694,000
472,000
Share earns
.15
.10


Triton Canada Resources reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triton Canada Resources
Year to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
47,582,000
45,010,000
Net inc
b4,417,000
c2,265,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
9,665,000
10,660,000
b-Included an after-tax gain of $5.5 million from sale of gas-gathering assets to Transwest Gas Systems Ltd.


Joseph M. Jones, 81, Economist and Author
LEAD: Joseph Marion Jones, an economist and former Government official, died Thursday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 81 years old.
His family said he died of cardio-pulmonary arrest.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, AUGUST 11, 1990
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


Bradley Real Estate Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bradley Real Estate Trust (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
288,024
182,402
Share earns
.07
.05
6mo net inc
248,088
233,085
Share earns
.06
.07


Coca-Cola in Pact With Cadbury
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company and Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C. have decided in principle to build a new soft-drinks factory in England.
The investment in the joint project will be around $:100 million, equivalent to about $187 million, over a three-year period and completion is expected in April 1992.


Columbia Hospital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia Hospital Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
58,042,000
33,854,000
Net inc
2,308,000
815,000
Share earns
.04
.02
6mo rev
106,878,000
66,427,000
Net inc
4,128,000
2,320,000
Share earns
.07
.04
The company said figures for the latest quarter included results of Smith Laboratories Inc.


Turbo Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Turbo Resources
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
168,716,000
163,350,000
Net inc
b3,400,000
c3,926,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
319,217,000
290,968,000
Net inc
b66,000
c4,864,000
b-Included unusual charges of $700,000 for the quarter and $1.5 million for the 6 months, stemming from previously-announced cost-cutting program, including staff reductions.


A Few More Refugees Reach the Saudi Border
LEAD: Braving scorching August heat and other risks of the open desert in rugged all-terrain vehicles, a trickle of Americans and other foreign nationals continued yesterday to reach the relative calm of Saudi Arabia in a series of daring escapes from war-torn Kuwait.


They Had Ice Cream Every Friday
LEAD: Jerry Holtzman - Jerome Holtzman to the readers of his baseball column in The Chicago Tribune - grew up, like many of us, in a house with kids.
Unlike the homes of many of us, the house contained 300 kids, about 150 boys and 150 girls.
It was on the West Side of Chicago, and called the Marks Nathan Jewish Orphan


Getting Behind 'Desert Shield'
LEAD: In a wise change of course, the Bush Administration has prevailed upon Saudi Arabia to permit firsthand coverage of the U.S. troop deployment by American journalists.
Beginning this weekend, a pool of representative reporters will be admitted.


British Star Talks of Racial Harmony And Disillusionment With Equity
LEAD: Jonathan Pryce seemed remarkably calm for someone at the center of an international theatrical incident.
But over breakfast Thursday he discussed his disillusionment about American Equity's decision not to let him recreate his London role of a Eurasian pimp in ''Miss Saigon'' on Broadway.


Homeplex Mortgage InvestFments reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homeplex Mortgage InvestFments
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,609,000
1,070,000
Share earns
.27
.12
6mo net inc
4,899,000
3,175,000
Share earns
.51
.36
Shares outst
9,675,100
8,750,100


Phoenix Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phoenix Re Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,052,000
10,134,000
Net inc
655,000
1,458,000
Share earns
.16
.36
Shares outst
4,081,000
4,070,000
6mo rev
18,374,000
19,891,000
Net loss
1,294,000
b2,958,000
Share earns
-
.73
Shares outst
4,088,000
4,075,000


Mott's Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mott's Holdings (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
715,102
675,343
Net loss
153,521
255,384
6mo sales
1,311,149
1,281,125
Net loss
558,960
454,793


Last Stand for the Adirondacks?
LEAD: Any map of the Eastern United States shows it laced with roads -parks and wild lands appear as lonely green islands.
Just about the only exception is in northern New York, where the Adirondack Park covers an area the size of Yosemite, Yellowstone, Glacier and Grand Canyon National Parks combined.
The Adirondacks are not green by accident.


Bankruptcy Ends At Southmark
LEAD: The Southmark Corporation has emerged from bankruptcy, a little more than a year after it filed for protection from creditors because of problems with bonds it had issued.
The troubled real estate and financial-services company said it transferred $76 million in cash and new securities to agents of its creditors and shareholders pursuant to its reorganization plan announced in


New York Told To Repay Westway Fund
LEAD: Federal highway officials have instructed New York State and New York City to reimburse Washington for the $81 million that they were granted for the ill-fated Westway project almost 10 years ago.


A Million Strong? Some Experts Question Iraq's Military Strength
LEAD: Iraq, with 17 million people, boasts of having a million-strong army, but some experts in the United States and abroad who have studied Iraqi demographics and intelligence reports estimated yesterday that the number of active forces may be half that amount.


CSM Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSM Systems Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,937,743
1,441,528
Net inc
51,343
39,096
Share earns
.06
.05
6mo rev
4,278,007
3,009,287
Net inc
168,329
79,906
Share earns
.19
.09


Lewis Iselin, 77, Dies; Sculptor of Portraits
LEAD: Lewis Iselin, a sculptor known for his portraits and other figurative works, died Friday at his home in Camden, Me.
His wife, the former Sally Cary Curtis, said he died of cancer.
Mr.
Iselin was 77 years old.


Decorator Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Decorator Industries Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,379,236
6,588,582
Net inc
99,545
b141,783
Share earns
.10
.14
6mo sales
11,285,758
11,997,521
Net inc
132,688
b227,606
Share earns
.13
.22
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $129,770 and $154,854 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


UNR Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UNR Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
105,277,565
96,015,955
Net inc
6,578,459
b81,351,342
Share earns
.15
-
6mo sales
204,276,133
185,729,348
Net inc
11,470,492
b78,557,041
Share earns
.25
-
b-Net loss and included a loss from discontinued operations of $2,681,665 and $2,675,235 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, and an extraordinary loss of $109,619,174 for both periods.


Political Rivals Jockey in Phnom Penh
LEAD: Asked several months ago about the position of Hun Sen, the young and highly visible Cambodian Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, a Cambodian official smiled broadly. ''Don't forget Hun Sen is only No. 3 in the party,'' he said. ''Chea Sim is No. 2.''


CMI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMI Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
24,385,000
30,278,000
Net loss
300,000
b1,326,000
Share earns
-
.08
6mo rev
44,576,000
53,329,000
Net loss
766,000
b355,000
Share earns
.07
.01
b-Net income


St. Joe Paper Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Joe Paper Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
148,241,000
161,214,000
Net inc
10,401,000
16,846,000
Share earns
.34
.55
6mo rev
309,283,000
321,846,000
Net inc
22,811,000
33,750,000
Share earns
.75
1.11


Bio-Technology General reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Technology General
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
958,000
863,000
Net loss
1,554,000
2,895,000
Shares outst
14,076,000
5,856,000
6mo rev
1,746,000
1,671,000
Net loss
3,081,000
5,506,000
Shares outst
13,407,000
5,838,000


Indians in Kashmir Shoot 12 Who Entered From Pakistan
LEAD: Indian border guards shot and killed 12 Muslim separatists today who had crossed over from neighboring Pakistan to campaign for independence of the disputed territory of Kashmir, the police reported.


Shaw Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaw Industries Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
47,892,000
47,845,000
Net inc
3,831,000
3,531,000
Share earns
.56
.51
6mo sales
97,167,000
83,034,000
Net inc
8,133,000
6,300,000
Share earns
1.19
.92
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Goldfield Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldfield Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,621,863
4,826,329
Net inc
174,739
330,737
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
30,183,110
26,877,270
6mo rev
8,824,106
9,356,616
Net inc
985,685
1,380,359
Share earns
.03
.05
Shares outst
30,183,110
26,876,775


Griffin Resorts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Griffin Resorts Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
43,134,000
38,516,000
Net loss
77,000
1,276,000
6mo rev
93,184,000
88,991,000
Net inc
2,022,000
3,877,000
The company said share earnings for the 6 months were not available.


First World Cheese Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First World Cheese Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
37,769,000
27,567,000
Net inc
809,000
790,000
Share earns
.16
.16
6mo sales
74,435,000
50,833,000
Net inc
1,696,000
1,630,000
Share earns
.34
.32


Patents;   Getting the Smoke Out Of a Building on Fire
LEAD: A retired engineer who supervised much of the design and construction of San Francisco's subway system during the 1970's has drawn on that experience to invent an emergency ventilation system to remove smoke from burning buildings.


Wildfires Force Closing of Yosemite Park; 10,000 Evacuated
LEAD: A siege of hot weather and electrical storms have produced the worst wildfires of the year in the West, leading to the closing of Yosemite National Park and the evacuation of many small communities.


Amid Turmoil, Tankers Are Sent to Iran for Oil
LEAD: The international embargo on oil shipments from Iraq and Kuwait has the shipping industry in turmoil.
No longer calling on Kuwaiti or Iraqi ports in the Persian Gulf, tankers have been frantically trying to secure Iranian oil instead, experts who track shipping patterns said today.


UConn's Henefeld Signs With Israeli Pro Team
LEAD: Nadav Henefeld, the Israeli-born freshman who helped the University of Connecticut reach the regional finals of the 1990 National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, won't be repeating the feat as a sophomore in 1991.
The 21-year-old Henefeld announced yesterday in Jerusalem that he was dropping out of college to play in the


Healthco Holding Raised by Group
LEAD: An investment group that includes members of the Bass family of Fort Worth has raised its stake in Healthco International Inc., a Boston-based distributor of dental equipment, to 7.2 percent from 5.3 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Bass group did not amend its previous statement that it supports


Top Contest in Florida Gets Personal
LEAD: With less than a month to go in the party primary campaigns, the race for governor of Florida is tilting toward the jugular as the contest between the two leading Democratic contenders narrows.


Pogo Producing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pogo Producing Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
25,660,000
30,139,000
Net loss
3,146,000
1,067,000
6mo rev
59,517,000
63,007,000
Net loss
2,208,000
1,635,000


Making Hardball Softer
LEAD: Baseballs, bats and gloves take to the streets and parks in the summertime.
But for youngsters just learning the sport, baseball poses some risks.
Fractures, dislocations and injuries to the chest caused by hard-hit balls are the most common among 5- to 14-year-olds.


National Healthcorp L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Healthcorp L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
39,518,000
32,485,000
Net inc
b5,413,000
3,505,000
Share earns
.78
.51
6mo rev
77,240,000
64,746,000
Net inc
8,870,000
6,752,000
Share earns
1.27
.98


West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
82,094,000
79,468,000
Net inc
2,896,000
6,811,000
Share earns
.18
.42
Shares outst
15,893,000
16,296,000
6mo sales
165,895,000
159,547,000
Net inc
8,497,000
12,831,000
Share earns
.53
.79
Shares outst
15,996,000
16,300,000


Trans World Airlines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans World Airlines Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,229,725,000
1,204,641,000
Net inc
b103,382,000
c4,354,000
6mo rev
2,244,523,000
2,194,381,000
Net loss
b39,639,000
87,415,000
b-Included an extraordinary credits of $17,643,000 and $19,770,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Review/Pop;   The Unpredictable Aretha Franklin
LEAD: Near the end of her concert Thursday night at Radio City Music Hall, Aretha Franklin sat down at the piano and riffled up and down in surging gospel arpeggios.
She eased the style toward the blues and began to sing in a husky voice, toying with phrases and answering her voice with piano filigree, building toward the importunate, lusty climax of ''Dr.


Baby Dismembered; Then Dog Ate Body, Medical Office Says
LEAD: A teen-age couple in Queens told the police yesterday that their 6-day-old son had been eaten by their German shepherd, but the Medical Examiner's office said the child had been dismembered before being eaten by the dog.


New Rule on Medicare Paper Work
LEAD: Starting Sept. 1, Medicare patients will no longer be able to file their own claims.
Doctors and medical suppliers will have to do it for them.


PC Etcetera Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PC Etcetera Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,915,507
1,393,369
Net inc
119,737
91,952
Share earns
.02
.02
6mo rev
3,567,428
2,264,175
Net inc
121,516
137,003
Share earns
.02
.02


In Poll, French Favor Gulf Role
LEAD: By a slight margin, the people of France want their armed forces to fight alongside the United States in the event of war involving Iraq, according to a poll made public on Friday.
Of 800 people surveyed for Le Point magazine, 47 percent said they favored French participation in an international force and 43 percent were opposed.


BT Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BT Financial
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,775,000
1,128,000
Share earns
.59
.37
6mo net inc
3,496,000
2,488,000
Share earns
1.15
.81


Argentine Deaths Bring Focus on Health Care
LEAD: The recent deaths of about 30 patients in a state-run women's psychiatric hospital - from malnutrition, the hospital union says - has focused attention on the virtual collapse of Argentina's health-care system.


No Vacancy in Eden
LEAD: The Seychelles, 115 islands in the Indian Ocean, has glorious birds, glorious fish, glorious scenery and only one building taller than a coconut palm.
Its economy is built on beauty, and the islanders don't want to see it lost to the tramp, tramp, tramp of tourists' feet.


Marilyn Quayle 'Looking Well'
LEAD: Marilyn Quayle today made her first public appearance since her hysterectomy, joining a White House ceremony where President Bush signed legislation she promoted to help detect breast and cervical cancer. ''You're looking so well,'' Mr.
Bush told the Vice President's wife, who underwent the operation three weeks ago after doctors had detected pre-cancerous cells during a routine checkup.


Rain Delays U.S. Amateur
LEAD: The semifinals of the United States Women's Amateur Championship were washed out today because heavy rains made the Canoe Brook Country Club course unplayable.
Pat Hurst of San Leandro, Calif., who on Thursday eliminated the defending champion, Vicki Goetze of Hull, Ga., will oppose Delphine Bourson of France in the first semifinal Saturday beginning at 10 A


Excerpts From Hussein's Statement Declaring a Holy War
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a statement by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq as read by an announcer today on Baghdad television and radio.
The statement was carried by the Iraqi press agency I.N.A. and translated from Arabic by Reuters.


Sahara Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sahara Resorts (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
41,577,320
42,464,169
Net inc
34,307
374,326
Share earns
.01
.11
Shares outst
3,405,600
3,405,467
9mo rev
123,870,605
115,671,895
Net inc
396,656
1,606,330
Share earns
.12
.47
Shares outst
3,405,933
3,404,689


Audubon Ballroom And Lab Can Coexist
LEAD: To the Editor:


Devon Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Devon Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
45,255,000
47,636,000
Net inc
1,092,000
3,845,000
Share earns
.15
.37
Shares outst
7,126,000
10,425,000


Vallen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vallen Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
37,662,000
27,535,000
Net inc
1,977,000
1,421,000
Share earns
.45
.33
Yr sales
125,031,000
97,739,000
Net inc
6,260,000
4,487,000
Share earns
1.43
1.03


Madison Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Madison Gas &amp; Electric (OTC)
12mo June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
216,625,000
215,927,000
Net inc
20,849,000
20,287,000
Share earns
2.93
2.91


Gasoline Costs: A Psychological Toll
LEAD: Motorists - which is to say, almost everyone - are howling over the recent increases in gasoline prices.
But with shifts in energy use in the time since the last oil shock, the public is focusing on what is most visible, but not most damaging.


G.M. Announces Price Increases
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said pre-introductory prices of 1991 model-year passenger cars will reflect price increases averaging 1.9 percent over comparably equipped 1990 models.
It said the increase will provide for partial recovery of higher costs related to health-care and production costs.


Ciprico Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ciprico Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,366,000
2,608,646
Net loss
117,000
48,102
9mo sales
7,224,000
8,152,953
Net loss
255,000
b156,603
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


Detection Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detection Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,479,000
5,019,000
Net inc
454,000
437,000
Share earns
.17
.16


USMX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USMX Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,905,000
4,102,000
Net inc
176,000
609,000
Share earns
.01
.04
6mo rev
5,309,000
7,147,000
Net inc
388,000
751,000
Share earns
.03
.05


Marcor Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marcor Resorts (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
17,985,639
1,177,582
Net loss
213,828
b302,351
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
7,572,152
6,655,813
6mo rev
32,511,796
2,934,762
Net loss
228,341
b592,899
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
7,607,438
6,624,163


Schult Homes Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schult Homes Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
44,051,000
39,175,000
Net inc
1,311,000
836,000
Share earns
.40
.25
Yr sales
157,198,000
125,400,000
Net inc
2,813,000
1,524,000
Share earns
.85
.46


Geraghty &amp; Miller reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geraghty &amp; Miller (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
25,827,000
19,747,000
Net inc
804,000
806,000
Share earns
.14
.14
6mo rev
51,828,000
35,172,000
Net inc
1,634,000
1,315,000
Share earns
.28
.23


Paris Business Forms reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paris Business Forms (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
12,801,000
11,805,000
Net inc
711,000
729,000
Share earns
.19
.19
Shares outst
3,788,978
3,835,565
6mo sales
37,983,000
35,851,000
Net inc
2,120,000
1,997,000
Share earns
.56
.52
Shares outst
3,805,464
3,833,238


House of Saud: From Mud Fort to Oil Billions
LEAD: Once again, soldiers and weapons are astir on the enormous landscape of Saudi Arabia at the behest of a single family, the House of Saud.


Quality Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quality Systems
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,648,100
2,559,200
Net inc
132,900
112,700
Share earns
.03
.03


Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
124,084,684
122,815,210
Net inc
7,030,356
7,530,781
Share earns
.47
.51
6mo rev
276,959,057
268,521,802
Net inc
16,898,394
17,838,330
Share earns
1.16
1.25


Ultimate Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ultimate Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
52,420,000
49,020,000
Net loss
845,000
b1,007,000
Share earns
-
.10
Shares outst
9,286,000
9,783,000
b-Net income
Figures for 1989 have been reclassified to conform with fiscal 1991 results.


Dillard Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dillard Department Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Sales
774,564,000
629,203,000
Net inc
28,722,000
18,752,000
Share earns
.80
.57
6mo sales
1,516,946,000
1,227,268,000
Net inc
58,122,000
38,334,000
Share earns
1.62
1.17


Biopharmaceutics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biopharmaceutics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,205,607
1,841,046
Net loss
b587,542
c170,881
9mo sales
4,626,339
6,157,680
Net loss
b807,871
c103,148
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $274,082 for the quarter and $275,758 for the 9 months.


Sunshine Mining Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunshine Mining Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
18,778,000
22,501,000
Net loss
10,409,000
9,033,000
Shares outst
95,740,000
90,451,000
6mo rev
40,146,000
45,552,000
Net loss
19,557,000
19,673,000
Shares outst
94,805,000
90,014,000


In Just 2 Days, a Doubling of U.S. Troop Estimates
LEAD: By saying today that as many as 100,000 United States troops would be committed for duty in Saudi Arabia, Administration officials doubled the estimates provided two days earlier.


U.S. Says Its Troops in the Gulf Could Reach 100,000 in Months
LEAD: Pentagon officials said today that the American force mobilized to defend Saudi Arabia against possible Iraqi attack could reach 100,000 in a matter of months, and President Bush warned Baghdad not to try to ship oil through an undeclared allied naval blockade.


Donald R. Heiges, 80, A Lutheran Educator
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
Donald R. Heiges, a former president of two Lutheran seminaries, died yesterday at the Lutheran Retirement Village in Gettysburg, Pa.
He was 80 years old.
A funeral home spokesman said Dr.
Heiges died of cardiomyopathy, a disease of the muscular tissue of the heart.


National Sea Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Sea Products
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
143,298,000
152,618,000
Net loss
1,575,000
b287,000
6mo sales
322,865,000
317,353,000
Net inc
936,000
bc1,302,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $6.6 million.


Ex-Official Chosen President Of the Legal Services Corp.
LEAD: David H. Martin, who led the Office of Government Ethics during the Reagan Administration, has been appointed president of the Legal Services Corporation, a spokesman for the corporation said today.


Unitil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unitil Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,065,863
18,665,496
Net inc
417,664
282,898
Share earns
.55
.36
6mo rev
44,488,757
40,487,740
Net inc
1,195,040
b1,897,474
Share earns
1.61
2.62
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $826,188, or $1.18 a share.


3 in Baghdad Tightly Knit In Iron Rule
LEAD: The reins of power in Iraq are in the grip of three men in their mid-50's who in 22 years in office have turned their country into a force of formidable military might in the Middle East.


C.I.S. Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C.I.S. Technologies Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,174,000
918,000
Net loss
640,000
1,126,000
6mo rev
4,407,000
1,604,000
Net loss
688,000
2,365,000


Great American CommunicaFtions reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great American CommunicaFtions (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
78,885,000
74,053,000
Net inc
21,108,000
bc23,641,000
Share earns
.60
-
6mo rev
140,351,000
135,481,000
Net loss
14,044,000
c47,655,000
b-Net loss


Fear for Two Stranded Children Unites Fathers
LEAD: Strangers until this week, a California anthropologist and a Pennsylvania cardiologist have become fast friends, joined by the terror of knowing that their children were alone and stranded by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Chevron Corp., San Francisco, put up for sale its four asphalt terminals in Ohio, Pennsylvania and Kentucky.


Finevest Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Finevest Foods Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
177,207,000
177,097,000
Net inc
764,000
179,000
Share earns
.07
.02
6mo sales
354,991,000
349,975,000
Net loss
1,509,000
1,454,000


Church Hopes Grave Will Yield a Black Saint
LEAD: The remains of a former slave may be exhumed later this month by the New York Archdiocese as one of the initial steps toward the possible canonization of the man as the first black American saint, church officials said yesterday.


Cardis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cardis Corp.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
21,189,000
21,596,000
Net loss
1,052,000
d13,810,000
Yr sales
84,825,000
93,733,000
Net inc
b64,901,000
cd25,310,000
Share earns
5.92
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $67,887,000, or $6.20 a share, related to debt restructuring and reorganization.


Mercantile Stores Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Stores Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
515,345,000
505,011,000
Net inc
16,971,000
16,546,000
Share earns
.46
.45
6mo sales
1,009,406,000
983,574,000
Net inc
45,372,000
43,577,000
Share earns
1.23
1.18


Lancer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lancer Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,033,000
8,362,000
Net inc
543,000
214,000
Share earns
.23
.09
6mo rev
21,190,000
16,230,000
Net inc
708,000
455,000
Share earns
.30
.20
Shares outst
2,327,000
2,328,000


Copley Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Copley Properties (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,148,000
605,000
Share earns
.30
.15
6mo net inc
1,803,000
1,379,000
Share earns
.46
.34


General Homes Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Homes Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
51,646,000
65,465,000
Net loss
8,233,000
6,703,000
9mo rev
156,481,000
187,450,000
Net loss
b33,607,000
c146,880,000
b-Included an extraordinary pretax charge of $8.2 million to write off costs related to the company's offers to exchange equity securities for its outstanding publicly traded notes, which expired March 2, 1990.


Mr. Gasket Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mr. Gasket Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
31,531,000
33,909,000
Net inc
1,358,000
952,000
Share earns
.13
.09
6mo sales
58,155,000
60,983,000
Net inc
1,745,000
321,000
Share earns
.17
.03


Review/Jazz;   Alto Saxophonist Leads Improvisation
LEAD: It usually takes a jazz group the first few days of a weeklong stand to loosen up, to find the sort of improvisational empathy that defines a good performance.
Not so with the alto saxophonist Arthur Blythe's group, which came out fighting at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night, and on Thursday was playing with the excitement and spontaneity that's normally heard only toward the end of an engagement.


ISS International Service Sysem reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ISS International Service Sysem (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
123,592,000
121,119,000
Net inc
472,000
1,090,000
Share earns
.06
.15
6mo rev
245,836,000
240,533,000
Net inc
1,302,000
1,871,000
Share earns
.18
.26


Revere Fund reports earnings for As of July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Revere Fund (OTC)
As of July 31
1990
1989
Assets
22,766,967
27,471,218
Per share
9.20
10.50
Shares outst
2,475,151
2,615,498
Assets represented total assets.


De Rose Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* De Rose Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,598,000
4,842,000
Net inc
74,000
17,000
Share earns
.03
.01
9mo sales
16,069,000
13,159,000
Net inc
225,000
b48,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


Prudential Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prudential Realty Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
872,581
1,026,596
Per share
.08
.09
6mo net inc
1,689,162
2,101,635
Per share
.15
.19


Southwall Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwall Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
4,211,000
3,763,000
Net inc
b195,000
c132,000
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
7,065,000
6,637,000
6mo rev
7,786,000
7,329,000
Net inc
b248,000
c168,000
Share earns
.04
.03
Shares outst
7,072,000
6,421,000


Among Salvadoran Rebels, A Split Over Rights Accord
LEAD: Rebel fighters here and around the country are sharply criticizing a human rights accord recently reached with the Government and are pressing their commanders to take a harder line in coming talks in San Jose, Costa Rica.


Barry Guilty on One Drug Count; Mistral is Declared on Felonies
LEAD: The jury in the trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. convicted him today of one misdemeanor count of drug possession and acquitted him of another misdemeanor drug charge.
But it failed to reach a verdict on the 12 remaining charges, including the most serious ones.


Bryan Holme, Author And Publisher, 78
LEAD: Bryan Holme, an author and retired publisher of photographic and art books, died Wednesday at his summer home in Round Pond, Me.
He was 78 years old and also lived in Vero Beach, Fla.
His son, Christopher, said his father had died of kidney failure.
Mr.
Holme had been the head of Studio Books, a subsidiary of Viking Press based in Manhattan.


New Continental Chief Plans To Transform Line's Image
LEAD: When Hollis L. Harris takes over as the president of Continental Airlines Holdings next month, he will be inheriting a company that has weathered two strikes, two bankruptcies, three aquisitions and seen seven presidents in as many years.
Mr.
Harris's mandate, not surprisingly, is to lend stability to the company.


Electro-Sensors Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro-Sensors Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,172,785
1,238,796
Net inc
85,364
146,144
Share earns
.04
.08
6mo sales
2,351,809
2,495,180
Net inc
169,681
245,630
Share earns
.09
.13


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We have decided to respond to the request by Saudi Arabia and other gulf states to deploy Arab forces to support the armed forces there to defend its lands and its regional security against any foreign attack.''
- Resolution adopted by the Arab League. [1:6.]


Cambridge Bioscience reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cambridge Bioscience (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,537,000
2,939,000
Net loss
b3,570,000
897,000
6mo rev
4,580,000
4,940,000
Net loss
b6,056,000
2,182,000
b-Included estimated $1.5 million expense associated with proposed merger with Biotech Research Laboratories Inc.


Red Lion Inns L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Red Lion Inns L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
25,167,000
23,957,000
Net inc
2,521,000
2,010,000
Share earns
.58
.45
6mo rev
46,605,000
45,016,000
Net inc
1,782,000
1,777,000
Share earns
.41
.40
Share earnings are in units.


Mid-American Waste Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-American Waste Systems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
20,071,000
11,554,000
Net inc
1,916,000
520,000
Share earns
.21
.07
Shares outst
9,198,630
7,310,906
6mo rev
35,714,000
21,812,000
Net inc
2,880,000
669,000
Share earns
.35
.09
Shares outst
8,310,974
7,310,906


Maxco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxco Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,810,000
21,951,000
Net inc
606,000
305,000
Share earns
.12
.06


Chavez on Tyson Card
LEAD: Julio Cesar Chavez, the World Boxing Council-International Boxing Federation junior welterweight champion, will defend his titles against Kyungduk Ahn of South Korea on Sept. 22 in Atlantic City.
The bout will be a co-feature on a card headlined by the heavyweight bout between Mike Tyson and Alex Stewart.


Players International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Players International Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,304,900
3,786,400
Net inc
303,400
b2,875,500
Share earns
.04
.37
Shares outst
8,529,000
7,821,000
b-Included pre-tax gain of $3,500,000 from a contract settlement.


Adult Swimming Can Train Champions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Inrad Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inrad Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,452,415
1,095,918
Net inc
1,000
b50,624
6mo rev
2,636,682
2,145,672
Net loss
51,857
111,046
b-Net loss


Letter: On Missiles;   NATO Has to Move Beyond Cold War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mexico Doesn't Need Lectures on Democracy;   No Iran Parallel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Weicker Balks At Ruling Out An Income Tax
LEAD: Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the Republican campaigning for governor as an independent, today released a detailed proposal for dealing with Connecticut's fiscal problems but continued to refuse to say whether he would seek a state income tax.


Trion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trion Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,953,000
9,077,000
Net loss
638,000
b472,000
Share earns
-
.08
6mo sales
20,706,000
21,975,000
Net loss
406,000
b1,244,000
Share earns
-
.20
b-Net income
Results for latest periods included an inventory adjustment of $350,000, or 6 cents a share.


Dakota Town Shaken by 250,000-Biker Rally
LEAD: In a few days, when the thunder fades and the earth stops shaking, the people of this small town in the Black Hills will raise the window shades and peek outside their doors again.


Tourist Cancellations Are Reported in Israel
LEAD: Travel agents said today they had received cancellations and were being swamped by phone calls from anxious tourists worried about an Iraqi chemical attack on Israel.


Gold Highest Since March As Fears on Mideast Rise
LEAD: Prices of gold futures reached their highest levels in nearly five months yesterday as fiery rhetoric from President Saddam Hussein of Iraq reignited fears that a Middle East war would wreak economic havoc on the West.


Tandon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
96,826,000
97,698,000
Net inc
6,317,000
b1,990,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
66,478,000
62,281,000
6mo rev
201,905,000
190,385,000
Net inc
13,324,000
b11,853,000
Share earns
.20
-
Shares outst
65,753,000
62,281,000


Craft Poised to Start Mapping Venus
LEAD: With the precise firing of its braking rocket, the Magellan spacecraft swung into an orbit of Venus yesterday to get in position to map completely for the first time the craters, rugged plateaus and towering mountains of the hot, mysterious cloud-shrouded planet.


U.S. Will Allow Press To Go With Troops
LEAD: The Defense Department said today that it would allow a group of journalists to accompany American troops to Saudi Arabia.
The first group of 12 to 15 reporters and photographers is scheduled to leave for Saudi Arabia this weekend.


United Artists Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Artists Entertainment (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
355,100,000
-
Net loss
9,700,000
-
6mo rev
689,600,000
-
Net loss
46,100,000
-
Year-earlier periods results are unavailable as the merger between United Cable Television Corp.


Ducommun Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ducommun Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,706,000
17,828,000
Net inc
620,000
77,000
Share earns
.19
.02
6mo sales
37,899,000
34,319,000
Net inc
896,000
437,000
Share earns
.27
.13


Brite Voice Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brite Voice Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,886,000
5,009,000
Net inc
284,000
763,000
Share earns
.07
.22
Shares outst
4,192,000
3,462,000
6mo rev
5,415,000
8,677,000
Net inc
564,000
1,400,000
Share earns
.13
.40
Shares outst
4,392,000
3,464,000


Stanley Interiors reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanley Interiors
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
42,300,000
39,878,000
Net loss
321,000
b139,000
6mo sales
83,400,000
78,567,000
Net loss
511,000
b168,000
b-Net income
The company said it does not release earnings per share figures.


Nobel Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nobel Insurance
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,173,000
b6,034,000
Per share
.20
-
Shares outst
5,821,654
5,277,739
6mo net inc
1,897,000
b6,896,000
Per share
.33
-
Shares outst
5,821,654
5,288,989
b-Net loss


Liz Murray Wed To Dr. Tod Miller
LEAD: Lisbeth Ann Murray, a psychology student, and Dr.
Theodore Max Miller, a psychiatrist, were married yesterday at the Bedford Village Inn in Bedford, N.H.
The Rev.
Ann Chamberlain, a minister of the Universal Life Church, officiated at the nondenominational ceremony.


Mixed Moves On Air Fares
LEAD: Eastern Airlines announced yesterday that it was raising fares by 5.3 percent because of increased fuel prices, while two other carriers scaled back previously announced increases.


Markel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Markel Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
31,227,000
21,623,000
Net inc
2,733,000
3,172,000
Share earns
.50
.60
6mo rev
60,252,000
41,988,000
Net inc
5,446,000
5,793,000
Share earns
1.00
1.10
Shares outst
5,402,000
5,220,000


10 Federal Judges Agree on Plan To Consolidate Asbestos Lawsuits
LEAD: Frustrated by the wave of costly and slowly resolved asbestos cases, 10 Federal district judges with the heaviest caseloads agreed today on how to consolidate tens of thousands of cases clogging dockets around the nation.


British Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* British Telecom (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,614,000,000
4,538,400,000
Net inc
852,000,000
640,150,000
Share earns
1.40
1.05
Share earnings represent American Depositary Receipts (ADR); each ADR represents 10 shares of British Telecom ordinary stock.


Dow Falls 42.33 Points, To 2,716.58
LEAD: Stocks, still under pressure from Middle Eastern developments, ended sharply lower yesterday in moderately heavy trading as investors sold off ahead of the weekend, nearly erasing the gains of the last two days.


Review/Opera;   A Carmen Set in the Seville of 1936
LEAD: The New York City Opera's ''Carmen,'' which transports the action forward more than a century to the early days of the Spanish Civil War, once seemed a particularly bizarre example of opera revisionism.
Now, may the ghost of Georges Bizet forgive us, the Frank Corsaro production has come to seem almost conservative compared with the more flagrant directorial ego trips of recent years.


Patents;   Removing the Aches From Bicycle Riding
LEAD: For bicyclists who become stiff and sore from riding, Nathaniel Calvert of Rochester, Minn., obtained a patent this week for liquid-cushioned seat covers, bicycling pants and gloves.


Results Differ at 2 Airlines
LEAD: Northwest Airlines Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings fell 32.6 percent from a year earlier, partly because of rising expenses, while Trans World Airlines Inc. said second-quarter earnings rose sharply on gains recorded from asset sales.


Campeau Ousted From Top Posts
LEAD: Robert Campeau was ousted today as chairman and chief executive of the Campeau Corporation.


Dutch Cancel Sponsorship Of Art Show
LEAD: Anti-apartheid protests have forced the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company to drop its sponsorship of an exhibition of 17th-century Dutch Old Master paintings, officials of the M. H. de Young Memorial Museum said on Thursday.


Placer Dome Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Placer Dome Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
253,100,000
204,800,000
Net inc
b80,800,000
c31,500,000
Share earns
.34
.14
6mo sales
518,600,000
408,700,000
Net inc
b115,900,000
c69,300,000
Share earns
.49
.30


RMS International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RMS International Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,018,018
3,242,407
Net inc
52,842
b235,802
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
5,695,498
6,763,027
Net inc
53,999
b449,747
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Larizza Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Larizza Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
38,175,000
52,513,000
Net loss
763,000
1,548,000
6mo sales
79,426,000
101,846,000
Net loss
5,009,000
1,687,000


Marilyn Horne Cancels Mostly Mozart Concert
LEAD: The soprano Arleen Auger and the violinist Shlomo Mintz are to be the soloists in the Mostly Mozart concerts on Tuesday and Wednesday, replacing Marilyn Horne, who has canceled her scheduled appearances.
A spokesman for Lincoln Center said Miss Horne was suffering from exhaustion.


Galileo ELectro-Optics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galileo ELectro-Optics (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,585,000
9,770,000
Net loss
1,467,000
b601,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo sales
30,449,000
28,129,000
Net loss
721,000
b1,441,000
Share earns
-
.23
b-Net income


Swank Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Swank Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
25,214,000
24,362,000
Net loss
2,210,000
1,751,000
6mo sales
49,035,000
50,444,000
Net loss
2,927,000
1,071,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about problems in raising funds to fight AIDS misidentified an administrator at the Whitman Walker Clinic in Washington.
He is Jim Graham.
The article also misidentified a vice president of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
She is Dr.
Ruby Hearn.


Child World Sale
LEAD: Child World Inc., the chain of toystores, said its directors had approved the sale of Child World's two million shares outstanding at $14 each.
The company will be acquired by a unit of Trefoil Capital Investors L.P.
Child World said completion of the merger is subject to Trefoil's acquisition of the 82 percent stake in Child World held by the CNC Holding Corporation.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The 10th annual New York City Triathlon tomorrow is being sponsored by a man who will compete himself in the 25-mile swimming, bicycling and running race.
The sponsor, ROBERT F. X. SILLERMAN, has raised nearly $200,000 from individuals and businesses for his own participation; he says he is donating the money to a program to help for


Red Cross Increases Supervision of Blood Services
LEAD: The American Red Cross announced today that it was reorganizing its regional operations and appointing a new senior vice president to oversee blood services.


Electro Scientific Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro Scientific Industries (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
16,156,000
22,978,000
Net loss
b2,285,000
c2,219,000
Share earns
-
.42
Yr rev
73,881,000
82,061,000
Net loss
b5,426,000
c6,338,000
Share earns
-
1.05


Sico Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sico Inc.
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
65,520,000
73,129,000
Net inc
4,289,000
4,735,000
Share earns
.85
.95
6mo sales
106,151,000
116,525,000
Net inc
3,449,000
5,085,000
Share earns
.67
1.00
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Homosexuality Study
LEAD: To the Editor:


Greenery Rehabilitation Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greenery Rehabilitation Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,744,000
20,224,000
Net inc
1,692,000
1,496,000
Share earns
.19
.17
9mo rev
69,365,000
57,616,000
Net inc
5,183,000
3,710,000
Share earns
.58
.42


Eva Sully Block, Vaudevillian, 88
LEAD: Eva Sully Block, who in the 1930's was a headline vaudeville performer at the Palace Theater and other stages, died on Tuesday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Banyan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banyan Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Revenue
4,101,000
12,326,000
Net loss
6,156,000
3,026,000
Yr rev
65,571,000
105,740,000
Net loss
b31,575,000
2,941,000
b-Included a loss of $24,232,000 on the disposition of the company's retail fur business.


Farley Cuts Stake In Fruit of Loom
LEAD: William Farley, the chairman of Fruit of the Loom Inc., has sold more than $4.3 million worth of the company's class A common stock.
The sale of the shares reduces Mr.
Farley's holding in Fruit of the Loom voting stock to 62.5 percent from 63.4 percent, according to his filings with the Securities and Exchange


Inter-City Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter-City Products
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
206,900,000
231,000,000
Net inc
b216,100,000
10,600,000
Share earns
29.73
1.35
6mo rev
394,400,000
423,400,000
Net inc
b218,900,000
c51,500,000
Share earns
29.95
7.93
Shares outst
7,200,000
5,800,000


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.93
8.00
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.40
7.41
7.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.29
7.29
7.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.54
8.52
8.06
30-YR.


Philippines Uses Foreign Assistance Well
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mariners' Jones Out
LEAD: For Tracy Jones of the Seattle Mariners, the days of driving runners home are over because of a drive home.


Maynard Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maynard Oil Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,337,970
4,395,617
Net inc
470,779
391,207
Share earns
.09
.07
Shares outst
5,354,849
5,353,860
6mo rev
11,161,878
8,498,086
Net inc
1,150,528
921,758
Share earns
.21
.17
Shares outst
5,354,357
5,353,860


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about a report by the New York Public Service Commission on Con Edison's role in a steam-pipe explosion in Gramercy Park misstated the utility's action on a $59,000 fine levied by the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Con Edison is appealing the fine, imposed for violations of health and safety standards stemming from the blast; it has not paid it.


Your Money
LEAD: For people who are afraid of the risk that investing in stocks entails - as are many, given the events of the last week and a half - but who want to share in the market's potential for appreciation, zero-coupon convertible bonds offer an answer.


Mid-South Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-South Insurance
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,513,000
b818,000
Share earns
.58
-
6mo net inc
1,825,000
b1,468,000
Share earns
.70
-
b-Net loss


Tornado Hits Staten Island, Uprooting Trees
LEAD: A tornado born of a waterspout swirling in lower New York Harbor spun ashore in southeastern Staten Island yesterday afternoon, toppling dozens of trees, popping out windows and dispatching debris through the air and garbage pails down the streets.


Deliberations Were Earnest and Cordial, Jury Says
LEAD: Jurors in the drug and perjury trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. said tonight that despite their inability to reach a verdict on 12 of 14 charges, their deliberations were cordial, earnest and apparently free of racial strife.


2 Cereal Giants Fight Over Shredded Wheat
LEAD: To the nation's biggest cereal makers, shredded wheat is worth fighting for.
And their arena is the courtroom, as well as supermarket shelves.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-9
Arab states voted to send troops to join American forces in Saudi Arabia, leaving Iraq isolated with only Libya and the Palestine Liberation Organization openly backing the isolated Iraqis in the crucial decision.
Page 1
American forces in the Middle East to defend Saudi Arabia against a possible Iraqi attack could reach 100,000 in a matter of months, Pentagon officials said.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Electronics in Summer
LEAD: Sun, sand and water do not always lead to summer fun.
They can bring disaster to portable electronic equipment and tapes.
And not all the hazards are obvious.


National Convenience Stores reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Convenience Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
275,666,000
287,288,000
Net loss
2,159,000
681,000
Shares outst
22,330,000
22,393,000
Yr sales
1,062,183,000
1,077,150,000
Net inc
b4,963,000
c8,858,000
Share earns
.18
-
Shares outst
22,394,000
22,381,000


Guidepost;   Plugging In, Paying Out
LEAD: Every time you flip on a light or an appliance, you're buying electricity.
Each customer's use varies, of course, but on May 1, the average monthly bill for a Long Island Lighting Company residential customer was $83 for 600 kilowatt hours of electricity.
Lilco's and Con Edison's rates are among the highest in the country, so the averages for other areas would have been lower.


The Scorecard: Bumps, Bruises and Hot Heads
LEAD: On the day after their free-for-all with the Philadelphia Phillies in Shea Stadium, the Mets had bumps, bruises, claw marks, one lineup casualty and hostile feelings.
But so far they had no fines or suspensions from the National League office, which said no punishment for either team was likely until Monday.


Bayou Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bayou Steel Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
48,060,000
56,044,000
Net loss
885,000
b2,808,000
Share earns
-
.22
9mo sales
143,363,000
147,557,000
Net inc
112,000
7,918,000
Share earns
.01
.61
b-Net income


A Threadbare Men's Wear Industry
LEAD: Sales of men's clothing, which some economists view as an unorthodox indication of the nation's economic health, are in their longest and deepest slump in a decade.


Tube's Expert Gap
LEAD: A writer friend, Caxton, was in Washington Wednesday to sell his book. ''No Moss in My Sheets'' it's called.
His last was ''Steamy Armpits.'' I mention this only to emphasize that Caxton had picked the wrong day to sell books in Washington.


Milwaukee Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Milwaukee Insurance Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
480,000
1,450,000
Share earns
.16
.47
6mo net loss
323,000
b2,244,000
Share earns
-
.73
b-Net income


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Saturday about Soviet-Japanese diplomacy incorrectly characterized a planned visit to Tokyo next month by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze.
It will not be the first visit since World War II by a Soviet official of that level; Mr.
Shevardnadze went to Tokyo in 1986.


Witness's Wife Finds Bomb; Bail in Mafia Case Is Altered
LEAD: The wife of a crucial witness in a major Mafia case received a threatening telephone call and found a bomb in her car this week, a Federal prosecutor said yesterday at a court hearing in Brooklyn.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CHARLIE SHEEN, son of the actor MARTIN SHEEN and brother of EMILIO ESTEVEZ, has been admitted to a drug- and alcohol-rehabilitation center for a month.


Technology Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology Marketing
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,701,057
2,620,357
Net loss
98,177
b245,658
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
3,068,850
3,237,983
b-Net income
Revenue represents total revenue.


Cancellation Canceled
LEAD: Soviet hockey authorities, who were outraged when a top Soviet player, Sergei Fedorov, left their national team at the Goodwill Games in Seattle on July 21 to sign a contract with the Detroit Red Wings, have decided not to cancel a series of exhibition games with National Hockey League teams.


Manitowoc Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manitowoc Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
66,303,712
68,338,987
Net inc
6,577,336
6,505,641
Share earns
.64
.63
Yr sales
225,827,669
200,596,301
Net inc
21,029,839
16,898,477
Share earns
2.04
1.64


Patents;   System Warns Pilots About Wind Shear
LEAD: A researcher at Honeywell Inc., the Minneapolis computer manufacturer, obtained a patent this week for a computer system to warn pilots of wind shear, the pockets of air turbulence that have caused planes to crash while taking off or landing.


Wedco Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wedco Technology Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,435,348
5,685,438
Net inc
178,939
524,097
Share earns
.06
.16
Shares outst
3,063,775
3,258,176


Comdata Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comdata Holdings Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
47,896,000
32,720,000
Net loss
32,631,000
1,795,000
Shares outst
42,249,000
33,816,000
6mo rev
94,873,000
64,773,000
Net loss
35,797,000
3,765,000
Shares outst
39,190,000
33,799,000


Books of the Times;   A Rights Crusader On His Home Ground
LEAD:
Black in Selma
The Uncommon Life of J. L. Chestnut Jr.
By J. L. Chestnut Jr. and Julia Cass
432 pages. Illustrated. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


Intercontinental Life reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intercontinental Life (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
43,195,000
41,605,000
Net inc
3,333,000
608,000
Share earns
.46
-
Shares outst
7,133,000
4,440,000
6mo rev
84,645,000
85,890,000
Net inc
7,146,000
1,631,000
Share earns
.92
.07
Shares outst
7,070,000
4,440,000


Mexico Doesn't Need Lectures on Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Security Council's Rare Unity May Be Threatened Over U.S. Warships in the Gulf
LEAD: The United States appears to be heading for a disagreement with the other members of the United Nations Security Council over the use of naval forces to impose a blockade on Iraq and occupied Kuwait.


United Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Medical Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,634,000
8,841,000
Net inc
490,000
b621,000
Share earns
.18
.21
Shares outst
2,778,000
2,934,000
6mo rev
21,178,000
18,367,000
Net inc
895,000
b8,813,000
Share earns
.32
2.96
Shares outst
2,761,000
2,976,000


Edo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Edo Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
34,444,000
35,398,000
Net inc
b1,401,000
1,500,000
Share earns
.19
.21
6mo sales
67,192,000
68,110,000
Net inc
b2,710,000
2,938,000
Share earns
.36
.40
b-Included an extraordinary gain from early retirement of debt of $526,000, or 10 cents a share, for both the quarter and 6 months.


Colonial Commercial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Commercial Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,988,371
8,408,823
Net loss
204,554
b593,459
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
4,443,220
18,854,981
Net inc
60,647
1,067,049
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


Flowmole Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flowmole Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,196,000
10,195,000
Net inc
1,114,000
772,000
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
7,389,000
6,532,000


Lomak Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lomak Petroleum
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,616,400
1,254,300
Net inc
42,600
59,400
6mo rev
2,923,700
2,426,300
Net inc
88,600
14,100


It's Lilco Management That's the Problem
LEAD: The Long Island Power Authority is the wrong agency, at the wrong time, doing the wrong job in an ineffectual and inefficient manner.
The threat of taking over Lilco is no longer credible, and we certainly don't need the Long Island Power Authority to decommission Shoreham.


Data Bank/Aug. 12, 1990
LEAD:
Consumer Credit
June
May
April
Percent change, annual rate
0.8
6.1
0.6
Producer Price Index
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.2
0.3
Labor Productivity
II Q'90
I Q'90
IV Q'89
Percent change, annual rate
1.6
-1.9
-2.2
Unit Labor Costs (non-farm)
II Q'90
I Q'90
IV Q'89
Percent change, annual rate
3.9
7.0
5.2
Electric Power
Aug.


New Deployment in Gulf May Slow Drive for Deep Cuts in Military Budget
LEAD: The commitment of American forces to the Arabian Peninsula is altering the debate over the military budget, promising to slow the momentum for deep spending cuts and to hasten a shift in military planning from superpower standoffs to regional conflicts.


Eason Sparks Jets' Offense
LEAD: The most intriguing drama of the Jets' summer of change emerged in the first half of their preseason opener tonight: Although the Jets led by only 3-0 at halftime, their offense had lifted noticeably after Tony Eason replaced his good friend Ken O'Brien at quarterback in the second quarter.


Secret Service Faces A Rise in Counterfeiting
LEAD: INFLATION, and the drug trade, have aided counterfeiters in Connecticut, says Thomas W. Gardner of the United States Secret Service.


The Niagara of Philosophy
LEAD: THREE RIVAL VERSIONS OF MORAL ENQUIRY
Encyclopaedia, Genealogy, and Tradition.
By Alasdair MacIntyre.
241 pp. Notre Dame, Ind.:
University of Notre Dame Press.
$24.95.


Tracy Tang to Wed Stephen Limpe
LEAD: Tracy Lynn Tang, an associate director of children's book clubs at the Book-of-the-Month Club in New York, and Stephen Timothy Limpe, an investment banker at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets in New York, plan to marry in September.
Miss Tang is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Oscar L. Tang of New York and Vail, Colo.


Just What Is This Thing Called Dance?
LEAD: Choreographers choreograph dances.
Dancers dance dances.
Ballet dancers dance ballets.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
THE DADDIES BOAT
By Lucia Monfried.
Illustrated by Michele Chessare.
Unpaged. New York:
E. P. Dutton. $12.95. (Ages 4 to 8)
MORNING BEACH
Written and illustrated by Leslie Baker.
Unpaged. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


Miss Mather to Wed Raymond Ix Jr.
LEAD: The engagement of Dorothy MacGregor Mather to Raymond Edward Ix Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ix of Lancaster, Pa., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Mather 3d of Philadelphia.
An October wedding is planned.


Williamstown's New Look: More Comedy, Less Chekhov
LEAD: In the quiet of Peter Hunt's office at the Williamstown Theater Fes tival, the opening night balloons have sagged to the marble floor, suggesting an air of dogged ebullience. ''Yeah, we were hoping they'd last all summer,'' says the bearded director, giving the rubbery cluster a little kick. ''But I think we're doing well considering we're in the middle of a recession.


Linda Woodhull Plans to Marry
LEAD: An announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Woodhull Jr. of Bernardsville, N.J., of the September wedding plans for their daughter, Linda Barton Woodhull, and Lieut.
Todd Christopher Davis of the Navy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Allen Davis of Salem, Ore.


Business Diary
LEAD:
OIL AND THE MIDDLE EAST
Prices at the Pump
Gas station owners seemed to react to the oil crisis with the quickened reflexes of commodities traders last week.
Retail prices soared an average of 12 cents a gallon by Wednesday, with analysts blaming psychological factors, motorists blaming gas station owners, gas station owners blaming Arabs and oil companies.


Man Fatally Shot in Yonkers
LEAD: A man was shot dead and a woman seriously injured early yesterday in a private house in Yonkers, the police said.
The man, identified by the police last night as Carmelo Gonzalez, 28 years old, was reported dead at the house, at 711 Scarsdale Road, and the woman was taken to an unspecified hospital in critical condition, they said.


RANGERS ELUDE JAMS, BEATING WHITE SOX
LEAD: Charlie Hough won his third straight decision and the Texas Rangers escaped jams in the seventh and eighth innings today to beat Chicago, 7-5, and drop the White Sox four and a half games behind Oakland in the American League West.
The White Sox stranded 14 runners and could not overcome an early 6-0 deficit.


NIRVANA IN GRAND CENTRAL
LEAD:
THE EXPERIENCE OF PLACE
By Tony Hiss.
Illustrated. 233 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Q and A
LEAD:
Rental Co-op Up for Sale
Question: I rent a co-op apartment that the owner is about to sell.
If the co-op board approves the new owner, it looks as if he will occupy the apartment.
If this is the case, is there any way I can maintain our rental position past the term of the lease? . . .
D.


Where Have All His Spies Gone?
LEAD: On Normannenstrasse in East Berlin, in the heart of an ordinary middle-class neighborhood, stands a massive office complex: 41 concrete buildings as grimly functional as the apartment towers that surround them.
Nine months ago it was the headquarters of East Germany's Ministry for State Security - the Staatsicherheit - or Stasi, perhaps the most sophisticated and far-reaching espionage organization ever created.


In Search of the Latino Writer
LEAD: To the Editor:


And Now, Doctorates in Development
LEAD: Sarit Rozycki is one of a handful of young New York City developers who have been bidding up prices for prime midtown Manhattan real estate parcels recently.
In her case the goal is to put up a 50-story office tower with retail space that she expects to become the first American home of Harrod's, London's swank department store.


A Fall Wedding For Alison Pyne
LEAD: An announcement has been made by Eben W. Pyne of Old Westbury, L.I., of the engagement of his daughter Mary Alison Pyne to Donald Bruce McNaughton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce McNaughton of Setauket, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.


The Hard Thing About Cutting Infant Mortality Is Educating Mothers
LEAD: A PANEL of Bush Administration officials who investigated infant mortality recommended 18 steps to reduce infant deaths in the United States.
Half the recommendations were marked ''high priority'' because they could have a ''direct and immediate effect.''


ARAB TROOPS JOIN SAUDI FORCE; BUSH SAYS HE HOPES THE IRAQIS 'DO SOMETHING' ABOUT HUSSEIN
LEAD: As Egyptian and Moroccan troops began landing in Saudi Arabia to guard against the threat of an Iraqi invasion, President Bush made it plain today that it would please him if President Saddam Hussein of Iraq were to be overthrown.


Go for Wand Outruns Charon
LEAD: Go for Wand seized an early advantage from Charon, held a narrow lead for a mile and then pulled away in the stretch to post a brilliant seven-length victory today in the $217,600 Alabama Stakes at Saratoga Race Track.


Fashion: On the Street;   Ties Are Sizzling With Individuality
LEAD: Neckties, you may have noticed, are loosening up a little.
Gone with the wind are those lockstep power ties that turned gray suits into Wall Street uniforms.
In their place are wider, splashier, more individualistic ties that put zip into any suit, regardless of its color.
Most of these ties trace their roots to Italy, or more specifically, Florence, and their designs, roughly, to the school of Pop Art.


Cambodians Face Loss of Eastern Aid And Trade
LEAD: SOVIET retrenchment and the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe, hailed in the West as the opening to a harmonious new post-cold-war world, promises yet another disaster for the people of Cambodia, who have already had their share of ravaging at the hands of external forces.


Mutual Funds;   Riding Out the Mideast Storm
LEAD: How can investors in mutual funds maneuver safely through the choppy waters of the current stock market?


From the Convention Floor, Democracy Looks Healthy
LEAD: ''THE beautiful hill town of Hampton casts its one vote for the next Governor of Connecticut - Bruce Morrison!''


Hammerin' Hank, Joltin' Joe, mr. Cub And Me
LEAD: As soon as i'd gotten the improbable call inviting me to Chicago to play in the Fifth Annual Equitable Old-Timers All-Star Game, my baseball dream merchant appeared.
My vision was pure, uncomplicated: the brick and ivy of Wrigley Field, patriarchal, antediluvian, the baseball acropolis where Babe Ruth called his shot.


Streetscapes: The Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School;   A Lesson on the Boundaries of Historic Districts
LEAD: At first it seems like a startling architectural conundrum.
The new Central Park West historic district excludes the original, 1907, classically styled building of the Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School at 5 West 93d Street.
Yet it includes the school's 1987 gym building directly across the street, at 4 West 93d


Pearl Harbor All Over Again
LEAD:
FATAL VOYAGE
The Sinking of the USS Indianapolis.
By Dan Kurzman.
Illustrated. 331 pp. New York:
Atheneum. $19.95.


Campus Life: Texas;   Treating a Phobia: A Few Minutes In the Dark, Alone
LEAD: Since January, Doron Ilai, a 31-year-old graduate student in clinical psychology at the University of Texas, has helped 60 undergraduate volunteers confront one of their worst fears: claustrophobia.


Katherine Crispell Marries
LEAD: Katherine Gardner Crispell, an executive assistant at the Avatar Investors Associates Corporation, investment advisers in New York, was married yesterday in Sacramento, Calif., to Michael Ross Shumway, a product manager at Timeplex Inc., a telecommunications company in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
The bride, 27 years old, is a daughter of Mr.


THE WORLD: Excerpts;   Fighting The War of Words Over Kuwait
LEAD: ''Since 1980 when we were at war, we faced circumstances which were as difficult as the war itself because they affected our economy and basic resource, namely, oil.
There was confusion in the oil market.
There was lack of abidance by OPEC decisions. . . .
We say that war is fought with soldiers and harm is done by explosions, killing and coup attempts, but it is also done by economic means sometimes.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Collectors of United States proof sets may be in for a nice surprise - cents in some of the sets lack a San Francisco Mint mark and this is making such sets valuable.
Within one week of the discovery, proof sets lacking the mint mark on the cent are being bought for $600.


National Surveys
LEAD: Want a major league expansion team?
If so, you had better be ready to answer questions on everything from parking to population and lighting to luxury boxes.


Peru's Poor Feel Hardship of 'Fuji Shock' Austerity
LEAD: As an armed soldier stood guard, Carlos Gomez struggled to keep up with spinning numbers on a gas-pump meter.
A gallon of premium had jumped from 41,800 intis to 1,200,000 intis.


Jubilant Mayor Asks the Capital To 'Forgive Me'
LEAD: The cheers of 500 supporters washing over him, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. asked the people of the nation's capital for forgiveness today and urged citizens and Federal prosecutors to help bind the wounds left by his 10-week drug and perjury trial.


Open Tickets
LEAD: To the Editor: A wonderful part of air travel used to be the ''open ticket,'' which meant passengers could use their prepunched airline tickets whenever they wished.
Open tickets still exist, but they cost an arm and a leg.
Most nonbusiness budget travelers are locked into nonrefundable, nonchangeable flights.


PAKISTANIS WARY ON NEW ELECTIONS
LEAD: Less than a week after the abrupt dismissal of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, Pakistanis seem to be in sorrowful agreement that this Western-educated ''Daughter of the East'' had let her country down at its most hopeful moment.


Susannah Rake Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Goodman Jr. of New York have made known the December wedding plans for their daughter Susannah Elizabeth Rake and Adrian Murray Butash, a son of Josephine Guenzer of Olyphant, Pa., and the late Frank J. Butash.


All for Oil, a Fuel That Fouls Air and Water;   Restore Incentives
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Threat Facing Cardiac Surgery Unit
LEAD: If Valley Hospital's cardiac surgery unit is closed, lives will be lost (''Cardiac Surgery Unit Fights for Its Life,'' July 15).


Baking in the Summer Can Yield Satisfying Desserts
LEAD: AS unappealing as the thought of baking might be on a hot summer's day, the abundance of fruit in the market makes it compelling.
Dessert planning is often resolved by filling pastry or topping cake with peaches, plums, nectarines or berries.


September Wedding for Ms. Wilner
LEAD: The engagement of Deborah S. Wilner to Dr.
Richard M. Hoffman has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Milton Wilner of Long Island City, Queens.
A September wedding is planned.


When 'Nonrefundable' Air Tickets Are Refundable
LEAD: On the face of it, the phrase appears to be self-explanatory and irrevocable: nonrefundable tickets are tickets for which the purchaser cannot obtain a refund.


All for Oil, a Fuel That Fouls Air and Water;   More Miles per Gallon
LEAD: To the Editor:


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Avon, Conn.
$146,500
11 Blanchard Road
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 49-year-old Cape Cod; plaster walls, eat-in kitchen, large closets, fruit trees, .67 acre; taxes $1,518.
Bloomfield, Conn.
$140,000
17 Craigmore Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old split level; new kitchen with separate eating area, fireplace, .5 acre; taxes $2,078.


Accounting For Costs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Grown Children Should Act Grown
LEAD: I am baffled by Barbara S. Cuiffo's article about her children (''College Is Out and the Brood's Back Home,'' Opinion Page, July 22).
What was the point of it?
Were we supposed to find her grown children cute or charming in their incredible self-absorption?
Were we supposed to feel sorry for her because of the extra work they caused her?


Roseanne Barr Is Insulting
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Performance Art's The Thing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brennan Wasn't as Eisenhower Expected
LEAD: To the Editor:


Who Speaks for Whom in South Africa?
LEAD: SINCE Nelson Mandela walked to freedom in February, South Africa has witnessed a peculiar and often troubled courtship between those who stand for the competing nationalisms that have vied for the nation throughout its modern history.
Mr.
Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk must now be wondering how long the coziness will last.


Anne Clarke Married To William Meyer Jr.
LEAD: Anne Carter Clarke, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Clarke of Westfield, N.J., was married there yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church to William Harold Meyer Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Meyer of Cranford, N.J.
The Rev.
G.
David Deppen officiated.


The Town That Pullman Built
LEAD: Preserved first by benign neglect and now by design, the red-brick company town of Pullman, Ill., on the outskirts of Chicago, offers the visitor a revealing course in late-19th-century industrial paternalism.
Though this is textbook social history, Pullman today is very much alive, a real place where people live - people proud of their community's past.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Dominican Day Parade, Madison Avenue will be closed today from 37th to 56th Streets from noon to 4 P.M.


Corrections
LEAD: An illustration with the About Men column in The Times Magazine on March 19, 1989, about a veteran's return to a Korean War battlefield, appeared with an incomplete credit.


Agencies and Colleges Showing Effects Of Budget Cuts
LEAD: IN the state's public colleges, tuition will be higher.
At Division of Motor Vehicles offices, lines will be longer.
And on state highways, potholes will deepen before they are filled, more litter will accumulate before it is removed, and more time will pass before the deer accidentally killed by a truck or a car disappears from the side of the road.


The Threat Facing Cardiac Surgery Unit
LEAD: The excellent article about the jeopardy to the Valley Hospital's cardiac surgery-coronary angioplasty program raised many valid points.
However, there are a few items that require additional clarification.


Prague
LEAD: To the Editor: Congratuations to Craig R. Whitney on his article ''Heady Days in Prague'' (Travel, March 18).
A classic.


Olivia Lillich Wed To R. B. Hilton
LEAD: Olivia Parsons Lillich, the vice consul for press and cultural affairs at the United States Consulate General in Shanghai, was married yesterday in Wellesley, Mass., to Robert Butler Hilton, a Foreign Service officer who is the assistant public affairs officer at the United States Embasssy in Sana, the Republic of Yemen.


Fourth American Aircraft Carrier Will Join Armada in the Mideast
LEAD: The Pentagon has decided to send a fourth aircraft carrier to the Middle East, military officials said today.


Chicago Journal;   Old Names Sparking New Fears In Politics
LEAD: It was only a matter of time.


Look Before Leaping, but for Goodness' Sake Leap
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ms. Meyer Is Wed To M. D. Jamison
LEAD: Janice Lauren Meyer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Meyer of Jericho, L.I., and the late Miriam S. Meyer was married last evening to Michael David Jamison, the son of Mrs.
Charlotte C. Jamison of Georgetown, Md., and the late William W. Jamison.
Rabbi Moshe Edelman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.


In Sign of Times, Street Is Named for Beloved Boy
LEAD: Sherif S. Byrd was only 10 years old when he was struck down by a drug dealer's bullet as he played in the spray from a fire hydrant two summers ago on Jesup Place.


Recapturing Maine's Elegance
LEAD: Like wines, antiques of a particular region have a taste of their own.
Although many city shops specialize in country antiques, the collector learns more by regular shopping close to the source - an experience enhanced by local scenic and architectural pleasures.
On the Maine coast, one area rich in antiques of regional interest is along the roads of the peninsulas extending out from this 200-year-old town on Blue Hill Bay, just across the water from Acadia National Park.


F.D.A. to Check on Honey
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration will test the nation's honey because some produced by a large supplier in Massachusetts was found with 22 times the legal limit of a pesticide.
The investigation, first reported Friday by The Boston Herald, involves apparent misuse of fluvalinate, a pesticide that the Environmental Protection Agency describes as ''low to moderately toxic.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday about a family living in a violent Brooklyn neighborhood misidentified two family members in some copies.
Lynette Orr was in the center and her daughter, Crystal, was at the left.


Nudes Expressive of Skill and Power
LEAD: THE David Smith nudes at the Montclair Art Museum come directly from Knoedler &amp; Company, the Manhattan gallery that administers the artist's estate.
As art money gets tighter, there will doubtless be more such liaisons, but this one has - or had - a small snag built in.


Hers;   A Forgiving Land
LEAD: Hands up, American!'' Second Treasure said in Vietnamese.
She poked my ribs. ''You're under arrest!''


Chief Trumpet
LEAD: Scholars like Clinton Rossiter describe the American President in terms that make him sound like a hat rack: Chief of State, Commander in Chief, Chief Diplomat, Chief Legislator, Chief Economic Strategist and, at least until the end of the cold war, Leader of the Western World.


Poll on Troop Move Shows Support (and Anxiety)
LEAD: Americans rallied around President Bush after he ordered military forces to the Persian Gulf, but the public's support is tempered by an undercurrent of anxiety and skepticism of the sort that has hampered American efforts to project power in the world since Vietnam, according to a poll by The New York


Historical Violin Styles: Myth and Reality
LEAD: A staple remark in criticism of the string playing that comes out of Juilliard - and criticism is inevitable, since such a high proportion of the best young instrumental talent passes through that venerable school - runs something like this: ''They're taught to play everything in 19th-century Russian style.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
OSCAR PETERSON: The Will to Swing.
By Gene Lees. (Prima, $19.95.) Duke Ellington called him the maharajah of the piano.
Artie Shaw told college students that one of his performances was ''the epitome of jazz.'' Oscar Peterson is ''a virtuoso without peer'' whose immense talents have earned him 10 honorary degrees and the Order of Canada.


Joan Schwab Is Married
LEAD: Joan Mary Schwab, a daughter of Mrs.
George P. Schwab of North Bergen, N.J., and the late Dr.
Schwab, was married yesterday at Our Lady of Fatima Roman Catholic Church in North Bergen to Laurence Arthur Nardi, a son of Annette Nardi of Bayside, Queens, and the late Dr.
Ralph Nardi.
The Rev.
Edward M.


Review/Mostly Mozart;   Neikrug and Zukerman Play Four Piano-Violin Sonatas
LEAD: Once again, on Thursday evening, a violinist received top billing at the Mostly Mozart Festival in Avery Fisher Hall, but a pianist did most of the work.
In this case, at least, a certain poetic justice prevailed, since the pianist, Marc Neikrug, though a composer of some note, has made his fame chiefly as a longtime accompanist of the evening's violinist, Pinchas


Deborah S. Garb Marries
LEAD: Deborah Shary Garb and Michael Adam Levine were married last evening at the Water Club in New York by Rabbi Richard S. Chapin.
Mrs.
Levine is a daughter of Muriel Garb of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late Dr.
Robert Garb.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Levine of New York.
The bride, a graduate of Smith College with a law degree from Emory University, is an associate in the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin.


Hector Barrantes, Duchess of York's Stepfather, 51
LEAD: Hector Barrantes, the stepfather of the Duchess of York in Britain, died on Friday, the family said.
He was 51 years old.


Two Faces of the Pays Basque
LEAD: Linked by geography, Biarritz and St.
Jean-de-Luz lie 10 minutes apart along the southernmost Atlantic coast of France.
Yet the two cities are as unlike as tea and cocoa: the former elegant, reserved and with a slight English air; the latter cozy and high-spirited.


Jennifer Don Is Married
LEAD: Jennifer Maria Don, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew Don of Pukalani, Hawaii, was married yesterday to Donald Wiseburn Apy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chester Apy of Little Silver, N.J., at St.
Anthony's Roman Catholic Church in Wailuku, Hawaii.
The Revs.
Joseph Napier and Howard O'Shea officiated.
Mrs.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A headline last Sunday on the Business Diary page, with a report about troubles in Chicago commodities trading, referred incorrectly to the market involved.
It was the Chicago Board of Trade


Telling the Truth About Abuse of Women
LEAD: What a relief to have Dr.
Beverly Birns to tell us the truth about violence against women.
In my work researching incest abuse in families I am constantly exposed to the woman blaming in society that asks why mother didn't stop father; that blames mother's alleged rejection of father for father's rape of his children; that blames the Hedda


Dancing Past the Recession
LEAD: The nation, it seems fair to say, has never been in quite the same kind of economic bind it is in now.


NEW ALLEGATIONS IN JESUIT KILLINGS
LEAD: The army unit accused in the slayings in November of six priests searched several Jesuit-owned houses eight hours before the killings and warned residents of the neighborhood to prepare for fighting in the area later that night, a senior Salvadoran Jesuit official says.


All About/Deodorants;   The Success of Sweet Smell.
LEAD: The human race may owe its rise to the survival of the foulest.
Our hominid forebears, said Louis S. B. Leakey, the anthropologist, smelled so rank that hungry predators recoiled, allowing our unappetizing species to flourish and invent civilization.
Brains and an opposable thumb helped, too.


One Sign of Our Time: Global Refugee Flood
LEAD: Fifteen million men, women and children are biding their time outside their countries, often in great deprivation, internationally recognized as refugees.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:
Additional titles of interest:


Port Authority Plans Outlined
LEAD: The new director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said last week that he would keep the Authority's $6-billion plans to renovate bridges, tunnels, airports, marine terminals and the PATH system moving forward.


Reeves Improving
LEAD: He was hospitalized on Wednesday night, but Dan Reeves may be back soon.
Following minor surgery for hardening of the arteries, doctors said the 46-year-old coach of the Denver Broncos could be out of the hospital this weekend and back at work in less than two weeks.


Bystander Deaths Reshape City Lives
LEAD: As the homicide rate soars around the country and the killing of bystanders becomes a fact of life, the routines and rhythms in certain American neighborhoods have been reshaped by fear.


Rights Abuses by Manila and Rebels Are Reported
LEAD: The Government of President Corazon C. Aquino of the Philippines and the Communist insurgents there have violated the international laws of war governing armed conflict, says a report issued today by Asia Watch, a nonprofit organization that monitors violations of human rights.


Wall Street;   Alex. Brown's Reputation in I.P.O.'s
LEAD: In the haste to find new sources of income in slow times, Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons seems to have forgotten that on Wall Street, you are what you take public.


Meet Richard III, A Contemporary In All That's Evil
LEAD: ''Richard III,'' Shakespeare's first enduring drama, is an extraordinary rendition of the price exacted when what is considered appropriate to manly behavior shades first into violence and finally into acts of ultimate brutality.


Kristin L. Powers Weds K.T. Rover
LEAD: Kristin Lynne Powers, a banking executive, and Kevin T. Rover, a lawyer, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Minikahda Club in Minneapolis by the Rev.
Dr.
Harold G. S. King, a minister of the United Church of Christ.


Owens Leads U.S.
LEAD: An inconsistent United States basketball team has had one constant throughout the World Championships in Buenos Aires - Billy Owens.


How a Meadow Complements a Lawn
LEAD: A MYTH has risen among some gardeners about lawns.
They think they would rather substitute a meadow in the belief that it would be much easier to keep. ''All you have to do is plant seed, and voila, a meadow!'' So they say.


The Voltaire Project
LEAD: To the Editor:


Making His Point
LEAD: Things were just fine for Hall Thompson and his Shoal Creek Country Club near Birmingham, Ala., in the weeks leading up to the P.G.A.
Championship there last week.
Then Mr.
Thompson uttered some words that the Rev.
Abraham Lincoln Woods thought he should eat.
In an interview, Mr.
Hall said that Shoal Creek discriminated against blacks and would not be pressured into changing.


Deadline on New York Insurance Bill Is Extended
LEAD: A bill that would raise New York State's minimum automobile insurance requirements for the first time in 33 years has been put on hold until at least after Labor Day.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Tired of TV Baseball? Try the Minors
LEAD: Far from the crowds at Shea Stadium and a cellar season in the Bronx, professional baseball is on display in a quieter and perhaps purer form at minor league parks.


College Duo in Amateur Final
LEAD: The final of the 90th United States Women's Amateur Championship will be contested by two collegians from California, Stephanie Davis of Stanford and Pat Hurst of San Jose State.


The Voltaire Project
LEAD: To the Editor:


Perfuming the Atmosphere With Basil
LEAD: LOCUST VALLEY'S Basil Leaf Cafe sings a summery tune.
Its namesake herb, now burgeoning in Long Island gardens, is used with abandon, perfuming the air and adding pizazz to salads, pastas and pizzas.


Currency;   Looking for Other Havens
LEAD: Last week it was what didn't happen that made the news.
Despite the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the sending of American forces to Saudi Arabia, the dollar did not rise sharply.
In the past, most traders would have expected the dollar to move much higher because it was considered a safe haven.
But at the end of last week, the dollar was only a quarter of a pfennig stronger against the German mark than it had been before the Aug.


In San Francisco, a Good Idea Falls With a Thud
LEAD: When Browning said that a museum's reach must exceed its grasp -all right, I know he didn't quite say that, but it is hard not to wish he had after seeing the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art's major summer exhibition, ''Visionary San Francisco.'' For this is one of the most ambitious, and admirable, efforts to address the realm of architecture and cities that any museum in the country has mounted in the last decade.


Burmese Military Cracking Down Again &lt;
LEAD: The military Government of Myanmar has increased its forces in major cities after killing four demonstrators last week in Mandalay, Western diplomats in the capital, Yangon, said in telephone interviews Friday and today.


WRECKS AT HOUSE BY SIDE OF ROAD
LEAD: Whenever Diane Gardner hears the squeal of tires outside her bedroom window, she picks up the telephone and dials 911.


Style Makers;   Joan Raines and Anthony Muto, Dress Company Executive and Designer
LEAD: ''I've never put anything on that looked so great,'' Teresa Shapiro said, pirouetting in a black crepe dress with a white satin peplum.
She had come to Bergdorf Goodman to see the clothes Anthony Muto had designed for Joan Raines.


Baking in the Summer Can Yield Satisfying Desserts
LEAD: AS unappealing as the thought of baking might be on a hot summer's day, the abundance of fruit in the market makes it compelling.
Dessert planning is often resolved by filling pastry or topping cake with peaches, plums, nectarines or berries.


Fan's Warning To the Yankees
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


The Wrong Spin
LEAD: To the Editor:


Havel Gave Waldheim A Taste of Bitter Gall
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our bathroom has an imitation marble sink that has developed small black slits.
Is there any way to clean or repair these slits?


Norah P. Martin Engaged to Marry
LEAD: Judith Draper Martin of Red Bank, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Norah Penhold Martin, to Edward P. H. Burden, a son of Mrs.
A.
Guilford Tobey of Marblehead, Mass., and the late William A. M. Burden 3d.
A September wedding is planned.


Ravenna
LEAD: To the Editor: Joan Gould writes of Ravenna: ''Nothing of tourist interest was added from the completion of the mosaics'' (in the sixth century) ''to the opening of Benetton.'' Apparently she is unaware of the Tomb of Dante, a building erected in 1780 to enshrine the older tomb by Pietro Lombardo (1483).


Verdicts on Barry Leave a Queasy Calm
LEAD: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11 -


The Threat Facing Cardiac Surgery Unit
LEAD: I was recently an angioplasty patient at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood.
I live and work in nearby Wyckoff.
The fact that the procedure was performed at Valley Hospital insured that a network of physicians who know me personally were available for consultation.


Using Plastic Pipe for Plumbing
LEAD: BY using plastic plumbing pipe instead of metal, amateurs can perform many home repairs and improvements that otherwise might require hiring a plumber.


Joanne S. Lessner To Marry in Fall
LEAD: The engagement of Joanne Sydney Lessner to Joshua David Rosenblum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray H. Rosenblum of Pittsburgh, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Alford H. Lessner of Newburgh, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Paris in the Fall: Hotel Rooms Hard to Find


Question Of the Week;   Should Lawrence Taylor Get A Raise?
LEAD: Carl Banks and Leonard Marshall have really led the Giant defense for the last three years.
Lawrence Taylor's recent injuries, age, and other off-the-field problems call for a trade rather than a raise.
This course of action would help both Taylor and the Giants.
FRANK POWER
New York


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bloomingdale
$196,000
177 Rafkind Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 21-year-old colonial; walk-in closet, h/w floors, new windows; taxes $4,146.
Howell
$108,000
5 Canary Court
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 4-year-old condominium town house; c/a, 1-car garage, den; monthly maintenance $85, taxes $1,469.


What Price Courage?
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Best Time to Stop a Crime Is Before It Happens
LEAD: AS a string of headline-grabbing crimes in recent weeks, including the deaths by stray gunfire of four children, has prompted cries from politicians for action, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown has taken the first steps toward what he describes as ''community policing'' for New York City.
Talking of retraining his officers to be peace-keepers who keep order on the streets rather than crime-fighters who merely respond to emergencies and about the need to build a police force that is ''part of, and not apart from, the community,'' Mr.


Ravenna
LEAD: To the Editor: Joan Gould's otherwise lovely article on the mosaics of Ravenna (Travel, June 10) misstated the Arian heresy.
The point at issue between the Arians and the Orthodox in the fourth to sixth centuries was not whether Jesus was fully human or a god who merely appeared to be human.
Both sides in the controversy condsidered Him fully human and our fellow sufferer; the idea that he only appeared to be human was a characteristic of several other heretical groups, Gnostics, Apollinarians and Monophysites, each in their own way.


Cookie Lavagetto Is Dead at 77; Hit in '47 Series Ruined No-Hitter
LEAD: Harry (Cookie) Lavagetto, the popular Dodger infielder best recalled for his ninth-inning double that spoiled a no-hitter for the Yankee pitcher Bill Bevens in the 1947 World Series, died in his sleep Friday morning at his home in Orinda, Calif.


Campus Life: Dartmouth;   Back to Class To Study Japan And Its Language
LEAD: Although a Dartmouth College student might spend years preparing for a Wall Street career, a group of executives is reversing the process, going from the board room to the classroom.


Julia Ann LaFond Wed in Cleveland
LEAD: Julia Ann LaFond, a daughter of Mr. and Thomas J. LaFond of Westlake, Ohio, was married yesterday in Cleveland to Thomas F. X. Powers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Powers Jr. of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
Walter P. Krolikowski, a great-uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Angels Roman Catholic


All for Oil, a Fuel That Fouls Air and Water;   Rip-Off Artists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Berkeley;   Improving Ties With the Nations Of the Pacific Rim
LEAD: When Robert McCann, a graduate student, traveled to Thailand in June to begin studying that country's language, he joined a growing number of students from the University of California system.
Their academic interests lie in helping California tighten its cultural and economic ties with Pacific Rim countries.


Abby Westervelt, Doctoral Student, Wed to Hayden Pelliccia, Professor
LEAD: Abby Brown Westervelt, a candidate for a doctorate in classics at Harvard University, and Hayden Newhall Pelliccia, a professor of classics at Cornell University, were married yesterday at the summer home of the bride's parents in Warwick, R.I.
The Rev.
Frank H. Geer, an Episcopal priest, officiated.


THE WORLD: The Biggest Consumer;   America Is Still Demanding A Full Tank
LEAD: THE threat by Iraq to the economy of the United States is once more demonstrating that the United States is an energy giant of the undesirable kind.


Jill E. Tracey to Wed Peter R. Malin
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Tracey of Wilton, Conn., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Jill Elizabeth Tracey, and Peter Rhodes Malin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald F. Malin of New York.


Staten Island Youths Winners of State Title
LEAD: In June, just before the start of the Little League playoffs, which lead to the World Series in Williamsport, Pa., the South Shore team from Staten Island heard words that championship franchises dread: ''Break them up.''


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   West Side Feasts and Fancies
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Cafe Luxembourg


Betty Burnham Hinckley, Executive, 67
LEAD: Betty Burnham Hinckley, president of the real-estate firm of Wood Associates of Greenwich, Conn., died on Thursday at Greenwich Hospital.
She was 67 years old and lived in the Riverside section of Greenwich.
Her family said she died of renal cancer.


Technology;   The Service Robot Lumbers Off the Drawing Board
LEAD: The staff at Danbury Hospital in Connecticut has grown accustomed to a strange machine trundling through the corridors.
It is a robot called HelpMate that is being tested as a courier by its developer, Transitions Research Corporation of Danbury, to fetch things, like a late meal tray.


Audubon's Birds Display Their Plumage at the Barnum
LEAD: ROOSTING at the Barnum Museum are 46 of the 435 birds recorded by John James Audubon (1785-1851) for his double elephant-sized folio ''Birds of America.'' And very handsome they look, hanging on sage-green walls stenciled with the occasional avian silhouette in a lighter tone.


Jurors in Central Park Case View Videotaped Confession
LEAD: The jury in the Central Park jogger trial deliberated for a third day in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday without reaching a verdict.


Commercial Property: X-Rated Tenants;   The Sun Is Setting on the Times Square Porn Palaces
LEAD: Twilight seems to be near for the gaudy, raunchy, blazingly public pornographic emporiums in and around Times Square, many of which - by a curious circumstance - are now tenants of the New York State Urban Development Corporation.


On The Outs in Beijing
LEAD:
WAVES
By Bei Dao.
Edited by Bonnie S. McDougall.
Translated by Bonnie S. McDougall and
Susette Ternent Cooke.
208 pp. New York: New Directions.
Cloth, $22.95. Paper, $10.95.
THE AUGUST SLEEPWALKER
By Bei Dao.
Translated by Bonnie S. McDougall.
140 pp. New York: New Directions.


Anything Else Is Just a Cantaloupe
LEAD: In a field covered with vines, John Hand carefully searched for mature melons the other day, looking for ones with yellow lightening their normally green-tinted skins.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Teaching the Easy


Northeast Notebook: Raymond, Me.;   A King Builds His Castle
LEAD: Sitting on a hill in a modest neighborhood in this town of 4,000 year-round residents is a house the locals call the Castle on Mill Street.
It belongs to William King, an architectural draftsman and graphic designer who has been building the 5,000-square-foot dwelling himself, cinderblock by cinderblock, for 18 years.


Miss Tavs Is Wed To M. C. Remec
LEAD: Cynthia Louise Tavs, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry W. Tavs of Miami, was married last evening at the Metropolitan Club in New York to Marko Cyril Remec, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter P. Remec of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Kevin V. Madigan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


Volume Is to Weight as Distance Is to . . .
LEAD: To the Editor:


Police Say Man Killed Father For Throwing Out Son's Fan
LEAD: A 22-year-old man was charged in the shotgun slaying of his father in their Islip, L.I., home yesterday after they argued about the father's throwing the son's electric fan into the garbage, the police said.


A'S CONTINUE DOMINATION OF YANKEES
LEAD: When Willie Randolph sits in the dugout this weekend and looks across the field, the faces he sees are young, unfamiliar and full of uncertainty.
The Yankees are no longer the team Randolph spent 13 years playing for; they are not even a facsimile.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: The nicest discovery that a world champion can make about a training match is that it was unnecessary.
And that is the conclusion that Gary Kasparov can draw from his recent six-game practice series with Lev Psakhis at the La Manga Chess Club in Murcia, Spain.


More Than Spotted Owls Is Endangered
LEAD: ''Ancient forests: Rage Over Trees,'' a National Audubon Society special, tonight at 8 on the Public Broadcasting Service, was shown on the Turner Broadcasting cable system last September - and therein lies a tale.
About three weeks before the original presentation of the hourlong documentary on the controversy over logging in the Pacific Northwest, the Stroh Brewing Company, which had planned to give $600,000 toward the


Debra Todd Is Married
LEAD: Debra Lee Todd, a daughter of Hazel M. Todd of Atlantic Beach, Fla., and the late Carl N. Todd, was married yesterday to Mark Warner Herlyn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warner B. Herlyn of Mamaroneck, N.Y., by the Rev.
William Hester at Marble Collegiate Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Herlyn graduated from the University of Florida and is a flight attendant with American Airlines.


Working 'Smarter,' but Out of the Loop
LEAD: To the Editor:


Colombia Leader Emphasizes Anti-Terrorism
LEAD: In a distinction lost on few Colombians, the new President carefully draws a line between narcoterrorismo and narcotrafico.


Less Beer in Philadelphia
LEAD: Less beer and more restrictions on it are on tap for Eagles fans at Veterans Stadium this fall as the main parts of a plan to reduce drunken rowdiness in the stands during football games.


Waiting for Armageddon
LEAD: Some 50 million Americans share a belief that these are the last days.
They are fundamentalist Christians, men and women who consider themselves ''reborn'' and who read the Bible as inerrant truth.
They also, it turns out, read many other books, both fiction and nonfiction - so much so that one of publishing's fastest-growing markets is religious books, from the melodramatic visions of Hal Lindsey to the elegant apologia of C.


Data Update
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
May 90
May 89
Change
Starts
1,205
1,308
-7.9%
Completions
1,353
1,444
-6.3%
Sales
538
651
-1.7%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)


Don't Blame Victims, Listen to the Poor
LEAD: I read Barbara Warsaw's ''The Other Side of the Welfare Debate'' (May 27) with resentment.
Once again it seems someone is commenting on poverty, morality and indigence from a middle class armchair.
I don't have any answers for American poverty.
But I get so tired of hearing people suggesting the victims are to blame.


Formica: When a Household Name Becomes an 'Also-Ran'
LEAD: No company likes to be knocked off the mountaintop by competitors, but the experience is especially galling if that mountain bears the company's name.
Consider the case of the Formica Corporation, whose name is to laminated plastic countertops what Xerox is to copiers and Polaroid to instant photography.


Moscow Is Said to Evacuate Bulk of Nationals From Iraq
LEAD: The Soviet Union has evacuated all but 700 of its 8,000 citizens living in Iraq, Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis of Italy said today.


Grady Takes 2-Shot Lead in P.G.A.
LEAD: Wayne Grady, perhaps golf's most accomplished runner-up, will try to fight off the man who used to hold that dubious distinction in the final round of the P.G.A.
Championship on Sunday.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
MUSICAL IN THE MAKING


Pursued by His Dead Stepmother
LEAD:
TO ALL APPEARANCES A LADY
By Marilyn Bowering.
336 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Is it possible to get too much of a good thing when it comes to color films?
It is if you can't figure out which one to use.
In recent years film manufacturers have bombarded photographers with so many new and improved emulsions that for many choosing one has become something of a guessing game.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:
Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Absolutely Awesome
LEAD:
HOW I MADE A HUNDRED MOVIES IN HOLLYWOOD AND NEVER LOST A DIME.
By Roger Corman with Jim Jerome. (Random House, $18.95.) The greatest influence on modern American film making is not Ingmar Bergman, not John Ford, not even Alfred Hitchcock, but the man responsible for such efforts as ''She Gods of Shark Reef'' and ''Humanoids From the Deep.


Steinbrenner Had Early Tie to Spira
LEAD: Throughout the commissioner's investigation of George Steinbrenner's association with Howard Spira, the Yankee owner argued that baseball should also look into the connection between Spira and Dave Winfield.
Spira, Steinbrenner contended, became involved on the periphery of baseball through Winfield.


A Great, Wildfire Read
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our bathroom has an imitation marble sink that has developed small black slits.
Is there any way to clean or repair these slits?


World Markets
LEAD: It was a rout.


Mirage of Arab Unity
LEAD: The political map of the Arab world has been remade, or perhaps erased, overnight.


OLD FAMILY TOMBS FACE CONFISCATION
LEAD: Patrick Halpin probably thought the mausoleum he built 125 years ago would be his family's final resting place.


Correction
LEAD: The TV View article on July 29, about Edward R. Murrow, misstated his age at his death in 1965.
He was 57 years old.


Style Makers;   Julie Bowman, Umbrella Designer
LEAD: How does someone become an umbrella designer?
If it's Julie Bowman, born in Cincinnati, she gets a fine arts degree at Indiana University and looks for a job.
Hired by Totes for its umbrella division, she finds a career.


Ask It No Questions: The Camera Can Lie
LEAD: Ever since its invention a shade more than 150 years ago, photography has been seen as a medium of truth and unassailable accuracy.
Photographs have been used by scientists to map the planets and identify subatomic particles, by police and prosecutors to solve crimes and convince juries, by newspaper and magazine editors to document events around the world - and few think twice about it.


Style Makers;   Daniel Levy, Book Editor
LEAD: Daniel Levy never edited a book before last year, and at 32 he is too young to have been involved in the tumult of the 1960's.
But today the Los Angeles native is the editor of Citadel Underground and edits books about the counterculture.


2 Premieres for Merkin's 1990 Season
LEAD: The American premieres of Sir Harrison Birtwistle's ''Ritual Fragment'' and Handel's opera ''Siroe,'' a concert performance of Rameau's ''Castor et Pollux'' and a four-concert ''American Folk'' series are to be part of the Merkin Concert Hall 1990-91 season.


Livelier Cuisine for a Cafe in Westport
LEAD: FEW Fairfield County restaurants have the longevity of Cafe de la Plage in Westport.
The cozy little place in a sandy cove facing Long Island Sound has survived changes in ownership and chefs, has persevered.Its delightful view almost insures survival. (Our memory of the place dates to 1956, when it featured ''San Francisco cuisine.


In Search of the Latino Writer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Living Cells Enter Commerce; Now, Who Has a Claim to Profits?
LEAD: THE biotechnology industry welcomed the California Supreme Court ruling last month that a man was not entitled to share in the profits from a drug developed from tissues removed from his body.
But the case raised questions about the property status of tissues, genes and other biological materials, issues that are not likely to go away.


Protesters Say Navy Boats Ran Over Them
LEAD: Two advocates of the protection of dolphins say they were intentionally run over by Navy boats on Friday when they tried to demonstrate against a test involving explosives earlier in the day off Key West.


Oil Crunch '90: The Game Has Changed
LEAD: If oil prices stay up, how will the poorer countries - and companies - pay their energy bills?


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
THE HOME GIRLS.
By Olga Masters. (Norton, $18.95.) The women in Olga Masters' stories do not triumph.
They rarely smile and are often mean.
Most simply endure.
Yet they are powerful, somehow positive characters.
Like most of the works of Masters, an Australian who died in 1986, the stories in ''The Home Girls'' tell of poverty, sadness, dreams and lost opportunities, often seen through the eyes of children forced to grow up too soon or women bowed by a relentlessly patriarchal society.


17 Are Hurt When Bus Flips on Way to Airport
LEAD: Seventeen people were injured, none seriously, yesterday afternoon in Queens when an airport bus flipped over on the Van Wyck Expressway service road after hitting a large puddle, the police reported.


Bulls Sign Grant
LEAD: The Chicago Bulls signed their leading rebounder forward, Horace Grant, to a three-year contract extension yesterday.
The agreement, whose terms were not disclosed, ends eight months of talks between Jerry Krause, the Bulls' vice president; Jerry Reinsdorf, the owner of the Bulls, and Grant's representatives, Kyle Rote Jr.


Japanese Discord on Iraq Raises Doubts About Premier's Trip
LEAD: The crisis in the Persian Gulf has stirred unusual discord in Japan over how boldly to assert its leadership in denouncing Iraq and seeking oil supplies from other countries in the region, Government officials say.


Sri Lanka May Move Tamils From a Region
LEAD: President Ranasinghe Premadasa is weighing a plan to evacuate one million Tamil civilians from the line of fire before the army mounts an assault on the rebel-held Jaffna peninsula in northern Sri Lanka.


This Middle Eastern Play Is in Rice
LEAD: SINCE Iraq invaded Kuwait, some investors have been prowling for ways to benefit from the turmoil in the Middle East.
One ''Iraq play'' that has been spotted involves Erly Industries Inc., a Los Angeles-based food processor whose 2.8 million shares are trading at $7.125 over the counter.
Like other thinly capitalized stocks, the shares have fallen modestly since the invasion, but speculative investors think they will drop further because of a disclosure in the company's annual report that one short seller described as ''too good to be true.


Using Plastic Pipe for Plumbing
LEAD: BY using plastic plumbing pipe instead of metal, amateurs can perform many home repairs and improvements that otherwise might require hiring a plumber.


Winners and Losers in the Mideast Crisis Game
LEAD: If life is unfair now, it is about to become even more so for some sectors of American business and industry as the sudden rise in oil prices plays out through the economy.
All companies will be affected to some degree by the fallout from Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
For some, the impact may range from negligible to potentially catastrophic.


Pauline Lichtenstein, Administrator, 65
LEAD: Pauline Lichtenstein, former director of research and planning at Hofstra University, died August 4 at home in Manhattan.
She was 65 years old.


Iraq Shatters Some Myths About Oil
LEAD: ''We are frankly puzzled by claims that oil imports from OPEC countries constitute a threat . . . .
References to OPEC as a ruthless cartel whose aim is to gain a stranglehold on economies of the West are completely false and misleading . . . .
We must all endeavor to create a climate of mutual trust and respect .


Judge Bars Inquiry in Daily News Labor Talks
LEAD: A Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday barred a New York State board of inquiry from looking into a labor dispute between The Daily News and its 10 unions, saying the panel would intrude on collective bargaining, disclose confidential information and irreparably harm the newspaper.


Melissa Maguire Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Maguire of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Melissa Maguire to William James Sullivan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy F. Sullivan of Dumont, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.


Review/Cabaret;   Cindy Benson Adds Novelty To Some Familiar Melodies
LEAD: When Cindy Benson was growing up she wanted to be a tap-dancer: someone, as she recalls in her cabaret act, like ''Shirley Temple and Agnes de Mille rolled into one.'' The singer goes on to declare mischievously that she finally got her wish.
In the current Broadway production of ''Cats,'' she portrays a 200-pound tap-dancing feline named Gumbie.


The Editorial Notebook;   Vietnam's Golden Opportunity
LEAD: Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam Vietnam's Communist leaders now have the long-awaited chance to open their country to a brighter economic future.
But that will require them to move away from dogmatic foreign policy positions of the past.
Thanks to Vietnam's withdrawal of its occupation army from Cambodia and Secretary of State Baker's new diplomatic initiative to prevent a Khmer Rouge victory there, direct talks are now under way.


Kalen Donaldson Marries
LEAD: Kalen Leigh Donaldson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Whitney Donaldson of San Rafael, Calif., was married yesterday at Incline Village on Lake Tahoe in Nevada, to Stephen Rudd Best, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Best of Weston, Conn.
The Rev.
James F. Thompson performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Episcopal Church.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday on the Business Diary page, with a brief report about the Honda Motor Company, misidentified the maker of the Acura.
It is Honda.


Sure He's King, But He Comes From Las Vegas
LEAD: On a stage at Pinewood Studios, surrounded by the gilded trappings of British privilege and power, the American actor John Goodman plays a common man - actually a piano player from Las Vegas - who becomes the King of England.


Arab Crisis, as Seen From Carolina
LEAD: As members of the Civitan Club bowed their heads in prayer, a minister reminded them of their good fortune ''in this time of crisis'' to have Representative Howard Coble as their luncheon speaker.


William Bosworth Castle, 92, A Leading Figure in Hematology
LEAD: Dr.
William Bosworth Castle, an eminent hematologist who discovered the cause of pernicious anemia, died Thursday at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
He was 92 years old and lived in Brookline, Mass.


Reasons Signs 2-Year Contract
LEAD: The Giants added another missing body today when Gary Reasons, a seventh-year inside linebacker, signed a two-year contract for more than a million dollars.
Coach Bill Parcells said Reasons might play Monday night against the Bills in Orchard Park, N.Y., in the Giants' first preseason game.


THE CENSUS: WHY WE CAN'T COUNT
LEAD: The insulting stereotype on your cover of a woman mathematician, looking embittered and sexless, may go a long way to explain why so few women enter the field of mathematics.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
Edberg Breezes: Although he is ranked as the No. 1 player in the world, yesterday was just another day at the office for Stefan Edberg as he defeated Andres Gomez, 7-5, 6-3, to advance to the final of the Association of Tennis Professionals Championship in Mason, Ohio.
Edberg passed Ivan Lendl into the top spot on the A.T.P.


What Fathers Do
LEAD: To the Editor:


Managing;   Keeping the Talented People
LEAD: FACT: A lot of Americans have hit their mid-40's - the age at which, traditionally, bright people step onto the lower rungs of the upper management ladder.


Baking in the Summer Can Yield Satisfying Desserts
LEAD: AS unappealing as the thought of baking might be on a hot summer's day, the abundance of fruit in the market makes it compelling.
Dessert planning is often resolved by filling pastry or topping cake with peaches, plums, nectarines or berries.


Darling Falters As Cubs Top Mets
LEAD: The Mets' baby winning streak ended at three games last night when Ron Darling didn't survive the second inning and the Chicago Cubs rode on to a 6-3 victory.
But the Mets kept their half-game edge on first place in the National League East as the Pittsburgh Pirates lost to the St.
Louis Cardinals to run their losing streak to four games.


Corrections
LEAD: Two captions on the Fashion page last Sunday, about jackets for late summer and early fall, were transposed.
The model on the lower left was wearing the DKNY jacket and paisley skirt; the seated model was wearing the Adrienne Vittadini jacket.


Campus Life: Vanderbilt;   With 'Jasper,' An Adventure In Teaching Math
LEAD: Linda Abbey, a fifth-grade teacher at the Spalding Drive Elementary School in Atlanta, has heard the same complaints about mathematics for the last five years.


A Walk Through the Pacific
LEAD: Peter Chermayeff was flying home from Japan two and a half years ago when he looked out at the Pacific and saw the answer to his problem.


Ms. Himsl Weds James R. Arthur
LEAD: Kelton Himsl, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dunstan Himsl of Houston, was married yesterday in Vail, Colo., to James Roberts Arthur, a son of Mrs.
Donald Arthur of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., and the late Mr.
Arthur.
The Rev.
Julian Rush, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Interfaith Chapel.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Risotto And Spinach, Attractive And Easy
LEAD: The bright green of lightly cooked spinach and the creamy white of rice make an appealing package.


A COT IN THE ORANGE BOWL
LEAD:
THE PEREZ FAMILY
By Christine Bell.
256 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Two All-Star Right-Handers Wind Up on Opposite Courses
LEAD: Jack Armstrong started for the National League in the All-Star Game and pitched two shutout innings.
Ramon Martinez followed him and pitched a third scoreless inning.
One month later, Armstrong and Martinez linked up again last Thursday night, and their efforts epitomized the way their fortunes have diverged since the All-Star


How Harley Outfoxed Japan With Exports
LEAD: Gloomy trade figures aside, at least one American product, the Harley-Davidson motorcycle, is outmaneuvering its competitors abroad.


Carol E. Samuels Marries D.B. Taylor in Vancouver
LEAD: Carol E. Samuels, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley A. Samuels, was married in Vancouver, Wash., yesterday to David B. Taylor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Waldo B. Taylor of Portland, Ore.
Judge James D. Ladley of Clark County Superior Court in Vancouver officiated at the Marshall House.


Wedding in December For Marci Robin Kislin
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Kislin of North Brunswick, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marci Robin Kislin to Mitchell A. Heskel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Milton M. Heskel of Huntington Valley, Pa.
A December wedding is planned.


Miss Cozzarelli Weds M. B. McCann
LEAD: Kathleen Mary Cozzarelli, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James D. Cozzarelli of Chalfont, Pa., was married there yesterday to Michael Brian McCann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas D. McCann of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev.
James W. Devlin performed the ceremony at St.
Jude Roman Catholic Church.


Harry W. Faeber, Designer, 95
LEAD: Harry W. Faeber, a designer of printing presses and a consultant to printing concerns around the world, died at Brookhaven (L.I.) Hospital on Thursday.
He was 95 years old and lived on Shelter Island.
His family said he died of pneumonia.


Food;   Creating a Stirrer
LEAD: When my daughters grow up, i want them to be just like Matthew Johnson.


The Beat Goes On, And On And On
LEAD: Whatever became of the notion that brevity is the soul of wit?
The idea occurs, what with all those new CD changers playing for hours without letup.


'Driving Miss Daisy' In Island Premiere
LEAD: ALFRED UHRY'S multi-award-winning play, ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' has not only just ended its deservedly long Off Broadway run in Manhattan, but the Oscar-winning movie version has recently been released on video with an accompanying television advertising blitz.


Kara S. Donahue Engaged to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Kara Shannon Donahue to Alec Stephen Berman has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Julia Halleran Donahue of Cambridge, Mass., and Dr.
Robert M. Donahue of Concord, Mass.


Moscow Praises Arab States For Decisions on Gulf Crisis
LEAD: The Soviet Foreign Ministry today praised the Arab leaders who condemned Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and agreed to send Arab troops to Saudi Arabia.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: The United States Postal Service has stirred the usual summer doldrums by moving up the issuance of a booklet of five stamps featuring Indian headdresses.
The stamps, which had been scheduled for the fall, are to be released Friday in Cody, Wyo.


George Whiteley, 81, Expert on the Atlantic
LEAD: George Whiteley, a teacher, author, sailor and marine biologist, died Wednesday at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 81 years old and lived in West Chester, Pa.


U.S. Group, Including Girl, Allowed to Leave Baghdad
LEAD: After several days of negotiations, 10 Americans attached to the United States Embassy in Baghdad and a 10-year-old California girl who was caught in the invasion of Kuwait crossed the scorching Iraqi desert today into the relative tranquillity of this neighboring Arab country.


Let's Hear It For Capitalism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our bathroom has an imitation marble sink that has developed small black slits.
Is there any way to clean or repair these slits?


Elizabeth Marek, Doctoral Candidate, Married to Marc O. Litt, Law Student
LEAD: Elizabeth Anne Marek was married yesterday at her family's home in Hillsdale, N.Y., to Marc O. Litt.
Archibald S. Snare, a Town Justice in Hillsdale, officiated.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Bay Shore
$140,000
1244 Boston Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old ranch; patio, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Islip Terrace
$140,000
123 Rockaway Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, patio; taxes $3,500.


Question Of the Week;   Should Lawrence Taylor Get A Raise?
LEAD: It's great to be great, and when Lawrence Taylor is on his game, he is the greatest.
His off-field antics, however, tend to grate.
His defiance in opting to play golf instead of living up to his word (contractual agreement) leaves me to ponder how big a fine should be imposed on Lawrence the Great.


Corrections
LEAD: A review of ''Time of Change: An Insider's View of Russia's Transformation'' in The Times Book Review today misidentifies the reviewer, Abraham Brumberg.
He is the editor, not the author, of ''Chronicle of a Revolution: A Western-Soviet Inquiry Into Perestroika.''


Why Two Television Formats May Be Better Than One
LEAD: To the fulminant debate on future television standards - which concerns the introduction of high definition television (HDTV) and its impact on existing broadcast technology - some calm but cutting observations have recently been added by James C. Davies, an executive of Barco Inc., a company that makes video projectors in Kennesaw, Ga.


Outdoors;   Ducks Send a 'Warning '
LEAD: This spring's breeding populations of wild ducks in North America were much the same as in 1989, approximately 22 percent below the 1955-1989 average, according to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.


In Fractious Pakistan, Governments Change, The Military Remains
LEAD: THE army did it.


Women Anchors Are on the Rise As Evening Stars
LEAD: Maria Shriver did not have a baby in order to get into prime time; it only worked out that way.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: THE BOSS: J. Edgar Hoover and the Great American Inquisition, by Athan G. Theoharis and John Stuart Cox. (Bantam, $5.95.) By examining recently released files from J. Edgar Hoover's Federal Bureau of Investigation, the authors tell the story of an ideologue who converted an arm of the Justice Department into an empire.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
DAYS AT THE U.N.


Artist Creates 'Magical Objects' With Fiber Optics
LEAD: CLYDE LYNDS is an artist who combines the talents of a sculptor, a painter, an engineer and a magician.
He casts monumental sculptures in stone; like slow silent fireworks, patterns drawn with points of light seem to move across their surfaces.
Although the lights move as subtly as the hands of a clock, their mesmerizing quality compels the viewer to experience the work in time as well as space.


THE CENSUS: WHY WE CAN'T COUNT
LEAD: I never received a census form, so when The New York Times published a phone number to call to report the omission, I dialed it.
A jolly voice told me that a census taker would come to my home to count me.
I explained that I would be willing to fill out the census form but that my job required intensive travel and it would be difficult to catch me at home for an interview (not to mention that it seemed silly, since my entire ''household'' consists of me).


Couples' Own Embryos Used in Birth Surrogacy
LEAD: In the steamy, oil-rich town of Maracaibo near the northwestern coast of Venezuela, a husband and wife had lived for years with the belief that they would never be able to have children of their own.


How a Meadow Complements a Lawn
LEAD: A MYTH has risen among some gardeners about lawns.
They think they would rather substitute a meadow in the belief that it would be much easier to keep. ''All you have to do is plant seed, and voila, a meadow!'' So they say.


A Refresher, Not a Race
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Error, Stage Left
LEAD: The thought police are busy this year.
With all the best intentions in the world - because aren't their intentions always honorable, from preserving the sanctity of the family to promoting racial equality? - they have proferred petitions, organized boycotts, brought lawsuits.
Last week they even had the capacity to surprise us.


All for Oil, a Fuel That Fouls Air and Water
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Ohio State;   Educators Learn To Turn to Others In Student Crises
LEAD: When a 7-year-old student in the Asbury Elementary School here tested positive for the HIV virus, the principal, Sherry Kuehnle, knew just how to handle the situation.


Bad Genes
LEAD:
GENOME
The Story of the Most Astonishing Scientific
Adventure of Our Time - The Attempt to Map
All the Genes in the Human Body.
By Jerry E. Bishop and Michael Waldholz.
Illustrated. 352 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


Present at the Commission
LEAD: Time and the seven-figure auction prices have proven them right, these men and women who first collected and commissioned Impressionist art.
Their taste has meant enough to history and the marketplace to warrant several books.
IMPRESSIONISM: The First Collectors (Abrams, $75), however, isn't one of them.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended July 28
MANHATTAN
Carnegie Hill
$490,000
4 East 95th Street
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, windowed kitchen, three exposures; maintenance $1,077, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties)


Scenes From a Nightmare
LEAD: Kampala's Mulago Hospital stirs in the early morning like a great lumbering monster, sloshing and swishing as cleaning women hurl buckets of water onto the floor and rhythmically scrub away the memories of the previous night.
On the dusty road outside, streams of people hobble up to the ponderous six-story complex.


The Sound of Money
LEAD:
HIT MEN
Power Brokers and Fast Money
Inside the Music Business.
By Fredric Dannen.
Illustrated. 387 pp. New York: Times Books/
Random House. $19.95.
MUSIC MAN
Ahmet Ertegun, Atlantic Records,
and the Triumph of Rock 'n' Roll.
By Dorothy Wade and Justine Picardie.
Illustrated.


At the End of the Oregon Trail
LEAD: It's hard to imagine an American beyond the age of 12 who doesn't know a thing or two about the Oregon Trail.
Rugged pioneers and their prairie schooners rank up there with the people on the Mayflower as historical archetypes.
But even those who can manage a glib discourse on Manifest Destiny or identify the year when the Great


Theater School Exchange Program Gives King Lear a Russian Accent
LEAD: In a rehearsal room of the Circle in the Square Theater on West 50th Street the other day, a young man playing Edmund in Shakespeare's ''King Lear'' raised his fist and gazed upward.


Corrections
LEAD: A column on page 23 of the Travel section today listing air fares and other information is mislabeled.
It is Travel Watch, not Practical Traveler.
In addition, under the heading ''Discount Fare,'' the column misstates the lowest round-trip air fare between Rio de Janeiro and Miami for the week of Sept.


Postings: Lowering Buyers' Risks;   A New Co-op for Park Slope
LEAD: While gentrification has brought changes to the Park Slope section of Brooklyn over the last decade, the transformation has involved mostly restoring and modernizing the neighborhood's picturesque rowhouses and stately mansions.


Margot Wagner Weds John F. Triggs
LEAD: Margot Ann Wagner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jay E. Wagner of Bay Shore, L.I., was married yesterday to John Francis Triggs, a son of the late Mr.
Triggs.
Judge Harold Silverman, an acting justice of the Supreme Court of the State of New York officiated at the Lowell Hotel in New York.


Waterford Finale: Fireworks And Pops
LEAD: THE Summer Music series in Waterford will close on Saturday with the traditional pops concert.
The program, at 8:30 P.M., will feature ''great Gershwin, Hollywood gems, Grucci fireworks and other treats for the entire family.'' The Gershwin is the Piano Concerto in F, with Jon Klibonoff as soloist.


Exoneration Sought in Mutiny of '44
LEAD: Forty-six years after the Navy convicted 50 black sailors of mutiny for refusing to load ammunition on ships after an explosion killed 320 men, an effort has begun to exonerate them.


Hidden Subsidies to the Airline Shuttles
LEAD: To the Editor:


Barbara M. Taylor Weds M. E. Smith
LEAD: Barbara Mary Taylor, the daughter of Mary D. Raymer of Quincy, Mass., and the late Daniel L. Taylor was married yesterday to Malcolm Edward Smith, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm G. Smith.
Rev.
Richard Feukes performed the ceremony at the First Parish Unitarian Church in Norwell, Mass.


What Publishers Will Do for a Place on the Right List
LEAD: WHEN they talk about what it takes to break the sales barrier and get a book onto that self-perpetuating marketing machine called the best-seller list, publishers often sound more like auto executives than purveyors of literature.
They discuss a book's ''velocity.'' They talk of ''revving up the sales force.


Last in a Line
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rediscovering Brahms: A Distinctive Festival
LEAD: IN New York City, summers mean Mostly Mozart; but 90 miles away at the new Bard Music Festival, the focus will be on Rediscovering Brahms.
The 600-acre Bard College campus is in Annandale-on-Hudson, just north of Rhinebeck, in the heart of the Hudson River Valley.


Works in Progress;   Grandiose Piano
LEAD: It could be argued that the room shown in the photograph above, at the Steinway &amp; Sons factory in Queens, is where a piano actually begins to be a piano.
Known as the belly department, it is where the innards of the instrument - the metal plate and soundboard - are fitted and set in place.
After all, before it gets there, the piano is something less than musical.


BEST SELLERS: August 12, 1990


The Twin Cities
LEAD: Minneapolis and St.
Paul rise up on the plain like two glimmering mirages.
They are known to outlanders as the Twin Cities, but since there's nothing for hundreds of miles across the farmscape that might invite comparison or confusion, most Minnesotans simply call them the Cities.
They perch on tree-lined bluffs at the confluence of the Mississippi and the lesser-known but equally handsome Minnesota


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A table last Sunday listing the performance of world stock markets was out of date.
The data, supplied by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, were for the week ended July 27.
The table for the week ended Aug. 3 appears today on page 26.


PEAKS TAKE TOLL ON MATTERHORN
LEAD: While this Swiss town celebrates the 125th anniversary of the first ascent of the Matterhorn, the mountain has claimed 10 lives in the first four weeks of the summer.


In Grief, Lockerbie Families Are Divided
LEAD: THE families of the victims of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, bound together by the tragedy of the crash, have been split by a debate over legislation that in large part arose from their anger, grief and determination to prevent future terrorist bombings.


Taking His Mark
LEAD: The lifetime ban of Ben Johnson has proved to be short-lived.
Canadian officials announced last week that Mr.
Johnson would once again be allowed to compete for his country.
The West Indian born Toronto sprinter was told he could never again run for Canada after he forfeited a gold medal in the 1988 Olympics for using steroids.


David Lynch Pushes America to the Edge
LEAD: Four films and a hit television series have established David Lynch as the reigning master of locating the bizarre, the surreal and the disturbing in American life, and his new film, ''Wild at Heart,'' which opens Friday, is certain to further that reputation. ''I like people who are in trouble, in darkness and confusion,'' Mr.


U.S. Gulf Policy: Vague 'Vital Interest'
LEAD: In his statement to the nation on Wednesday explaining the decision to send American troops to the Arabian Peninsula, President Bush said that the defense of Saudi Arabia was of ''vital interest'' to the United States.
But Mr.
Bush and his top aides have not clearly defined just how the Iraqi invasion and annexation of Kuwait touches the lives of Americans or affects their future.


Wendy Light to Wed Danal F. Abrams
LEAD: October wedding plans for Wendy Ellen Light and Danal Frederic Abrams, a son of Lynn E. Abrams and Dr.
Martin Abrams, both of Great Neck, L.I., have been made known by the prospective bride's father, Gerald Light of Floral Park, Queens.


The Split Among Arabs Unleashes a People's Anger
LEAD: FOR Arabs everywhere, it was a momentous week, one in which long-suppressed antagonisms exploded into anger, military action and recriminations.
For the Western powers, it was a week whose benefits and costs are only beginning to be counted.


Northeast Notebook: Providence, R.I.;   Macy's to Open At a New Mall
LEAD: Macy's has announced it will open a store in downtown Providence, which has no major department store.
It will be an anchor of Providence Place, a $300 million mall, office and hotel project to be built not far from the State House lawn.


Question Of the Week;   Should Lawrence Taylor Get A Raise?
LEAD: I was always an offensive groupie until a strong Giant defense, led by Lawrence Taylor, gave me an appreciation for the beauty of the defensive game.
It makes my adrenaline flow to chant ''L.
T.!'' during a game, to watch him - like an animal of prey ready to attack.
What are the Giants waiting for?


Couple Found Shot Dead in Their L.I. Home
LEAD: The Nassau County police are investigating the deaths of a couple who were found by their son on Thursday night shot in the master bedroom of their split-level ranch house.


Share the Work, Share the Bounty
LEAD: THE way Judy Godino sees it, getting the family food through a cooperative buying club only looks like trouble.
Granted, it entails planning weeks in advance, ordering in bulk, making sure someone can take time off from work to unload the delivery truck and separating everyone's order once it all arrives.


All Ye Need To Know
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our bathroom has an imitation marble sink that has developed small black slits.
Is there any way to clean or repair these slits?


Julia A. Johnson To Marry in Fall
LEAD: October wedding plans for Julia Anne Johnson and Charles Martin Trautschold 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome F. Trautschold Jr. of Potomac, Md., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Johnson of Grosse Pointe, Mich.


Waiting for Better Times at America's Shipyards
LEAD: Worldwide orders for new ships have begun to recover after one of the industry's longest slumps.
Yet the Bethlehem Steel Corporation, for one, has recently disbanded a team of managers, designers and engineers capable of building new ships at the company's yard here.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: For a bridge drama in four acts, the final of the Women's Knockout Teams at the Summer Nationals in Boston two weeks ago would be hard to match.
On one side of the battle were the defending champions: Juanita Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., Cheri Bjerkan of Elmhurst, Ill., Pam Wittes of Los Alamitos, Calif., Randi Montin of Woodland Hills, Calif., Kay Schulle and Jill Meyers, both of Santa Monica,


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
Born on the Fourth of July
1989.
MCA/Universal. $91.95.
Laser disk, $39.98. 2 hours, 25 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.
A gung-ho marine when he's sent to Vietnam, Ron Kovic (Tom Cruise) returns a paraplegic and undergoes a radicalization that turns him into an implacable spokesman for Vietnam Veterans Against the War.


Liberian Rebels Intensify Drive on the Capital
LEAD: Rebels are advancing on the capital in an attempt to depose President Samuel K. Doe before a five-nation West African peacekeeping force arrives to impose a cease-fire and set up elections.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Do Tennis Players Start at Too Young An Age?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Miss Roska Is Married to E. H. Weiner
LEAD: Carolyn Kangleon Roska, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jose C. Roska of Bloomsburg, Pa., was married yesterday to Erik Helge Weiner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Erik Weiner of Falkoping, Sweden.
The Rev.
Joseph H. Fennessy performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church in Berwick, Pa.


CAMACHO COASTS IN TITLE DEFENSE
LEAD: Hector Camacho retained his World Boxing Organization junior welterweight title here tonight when he won a unanimous 12-round decision over Tony Baltazar at the outdoor stadium of Caesars Tahoe hotel and casino.


The Paris Season For Gate-Crashers
LEAD: The summer invasion so dreaded by American residents of Paris is in full spate.
As the French Parisians flee their city, heading for the sewage-saturated seashore, on come wave upon wave of our fellow Americans, inundating Paris and our apartments: the friends, the friends of friends, the children of friends of friends, the friends of friends of the children of friends, the whole implacable pack of them determined to live it up in Paris for one-eighteenth of what it costs them to live very simply in, say, Fond du Lac,


Imagining Mars
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Executive Computer;   A Scanner in Hand, Worth Several Typists at Desks
LEAD: The Caere Corporation, a leader in the field of optical character recognition, last week introduced a hand-held scanning system that allows users to select printed information from a page of paper, convert it to computer text and enter it directly into whatever software they are running.
Because it uses a lightweight and compact hand scanner, the Caere


Bank Contributors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jurors Promised Not to Discuss Their Votes
LEAD: The jurors in Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug and perjury trial said they vowed not to discuss details of how they voted on the 12 counts on which they deadlocked, providing little help to prosecutors considering whether to retry the case.


Miss Sherman Weds A. M. Shainberg
LEAD: Robin Sherman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall D. Sherman of Short Hills, N.J. was married yesterday evening to Andrew Mead Shainberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond M. Shainberg of Memphis.
Rabbis Barry H. Greene and Harry K. Danziger, assisted by Cantor Norman Summers, officiated at Temple B'nai Jeshurun in Short


Paige Power Wed To S.A. Metzger
LEAD: Paige Power and Scott Andrew Metzger were married yesterday at the Chapel of the Snows in Stratton, Vt., by the Rev.
John T. Scully, a Roman Catholic priest.


Miss Perry Weds Donald Allard Jr.
LEAD: Margaret Norris Perry was married yesterday to Donald John Allard Jr. at the Annisquam (Mass.) Village Church by the Rev.
Harold B. Sedgwick, an Episcopal priest.


Stranded Girl Free


Where Peter Rabbit Romped on Cape Cod
LEAD: The traveler heading north on Water Street in Sandwich, Mass., will encounter a scene that conjures up the archetypal New England village.
As the road winds toward the center of Cape Cod's first settled town (1637), it passes several 17th- and 18th-century buildings on the shores of tranquil, wooded Shawme


Marjorie Williams Marries
LEAD: Marjorie Curtis Williams, a reporter for The Washington Post, and Timothy Robert Noah, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, both in Washington, are planning an October wedding.
The couple's parents are Beverly A. Williams of Princeton, N.J., and Alan D. Williams of Jersey City, and Mr. and Mrs.


INSIDE
LEAD:
A 6-Year-old Wins a Matisse in Court


Correction
LEAD: An article on July 22 about an increase in the number of women on corporate boards misstated the age of Catalyst, a research and advisory organization for women in the business world.
Catalyst is 28 years old; its Corporate Board Resource service, which helps place women on boards, is 13 years old.


Lifestyle;   Big Mac With Chopin, Please
LEAD: Danny Deaver adjusted the ornate golden candelabrum on the black Baldwin grand, smiled and glided into his Chopin medley.
A polonaise or two later, he peered down from his perch on the restaurant's balcony to acknowledge the applause of the diners below.
Their tables were bedecked with fresh flowers, which also blossom in the men's and ladies' rooms.


The Voltaire Project
LEAD: To the Editor:


If You're Thinking of Living in: Lincoln Square
LEAD: Lincoln Square, the West Side neighborhood dominated by Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, is not the place for those who feel underdressed when everyone else seems to be in furs and evening dress.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Never mind the people who get hysterical over nothing, the disorganized, the dillydalliers and shillyshalliers.
It's only to be expected that these types would be prone to panic.
But what about the middle-of-the-roaders, the average Jill and Joe?
And what about the calm, cool and collected, the logical, the organized, the ''nothing fazes me'' types?


One Sign of Our Times: World's Refugee Flood
LEAD: Fifteen million men, women and children are biding their time outside their countries, often in great deprivation, internationally recognized as refugees.


Campus Life: Pittsburgh;   Soviet Emigres Find Legal Help In a New Land
LEAD: In Kharkov, a city in the Ukraine, Alexander Kisler could depend on the government to provide his water.
In Pittsburgh, Mr.
Kisler had to depend on a legal counseling service to keep his water free.


Robert W. Cleveland, Executive, 80
LEAD: Robert W. Cleveland, a road builder and heavy-equipment supplier, died on Thursday at the United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 80 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.
His family said he died of lymphoma.
The company that bears his name was the contractor for road work at several major projects in the 1930's and 1940's, including the New York World's Fair of 1939-40 and the Pentagon in World War II.


Corrections
LEAD: A caption on page 21 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about the movie ''The Exorcist III: Legion,'' misidentifies the actor shown.
He is Jason Miller.


How a Meadow Complements a Lawn
LEAD: A MYTH has risen among some gardeners about lawns.
They think they would rather substitute a meadow in the belief that it would be much easier to keep. ''All you have to do is plant seed, and voila, a meadow!'' So they say.


On Language;   Talking Tall
LEAD: American English is not what it used to be.


Using Plastic Pipe for Plumbing
LEAD: BY using plastic plumbing pipe instead of metal, amateurs can perform many home repairs and improvements that otherwise might require hiring a plumber.


Saddam Hussein, Mideast's Noriega, Has to Go
LEAD: The issue underlying President Bush's moves in the Persian Gulf is not Kuwait or Saudi Arabia or even oil.
It is Saddam Hussein, the Noriega of the Middle East.
Like his Panamanian counterpart, he has to go.
He ought to be disposed of now before his power and opportunity for doing greater damage grows.


Jeffrey Sharp to Marry Jennifer Antupit in Fall
LEAD: The engagement of Jennifer Carol Antupit to Jeffrey Duncan Sharp, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John T. Sharp of Tifton, Ga., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel N. Antupit of Pound Ridge, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


Question Of the Week;   Should Lawrence Taylor Get A Raise?
LEAD: I think L. T. should get a raise because if you look at the salaries of other football players who are not nearly as good as he is, you see that they earn as much as or more than he does.
The Giants wouldn't be nearly as good without him.
A lot of people go to the games just to see him sack the quarterback.


Very Often, Low-Tech Is Beautiful
LEAD: To the Editor:


Father Is Held and Confesses to Newborn's Killing
LEAD: A 19-year-old man who had moved to Queens from Nebraska two weeks ago was charged yesterday with killing his 6-day-old son, dismembering the body and then feeding it to a German shepherd he was training as a guard dog, the police said.


'Those Dancing Feet' Keep '42d Street' Alive
LEAD: THE show, a $2 million musical extravaganza, was in trouble.
The director-choreographer had fallen ill, the production was falling apart, and the producer was on the warpath.
After a five-week tryout at the Kennedy Center in Washington (where the reviews were bad, but business was good), a Broadway premiere was expected.


A Little Weird, but All Right for Starters
LEAD: A woman wary of trees, the father of a creature who seems part baby and part worm, a trashy-chic punk heroine and a deadpan Hungarian woman on the road to Cleveland: some movie heroes are deeply weird, in the best sense of the word.
Such socially misfit, funny and appealing characters are most likely to escape from film makers' imaginations at the start of their careers.


Janet S. Weiss Is Married To Dr. Thomas J. Dwork
LEAD: Janet S. Weiss, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry R. Weiss of Tenafly, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Thomas J. Dwork, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry J. Dwork, also of Tenafly.
Cantor Nathaniel Benjamin assisted Rabbi Bruce Block in performing the ceremony at the Loews Glenpointe Hotel in Teaneck, N.J.


Watershed Worries Reinforce Opposition to New Mail Center
LEAD: WESTCHESTER'S mail service received a dubious distinction recently when the Postmaster General of the United States, Anthony M. Frank, called it ''the worst in the nation.''


A Question Not Raised
LEAD: To the Editor:


Breaking Point in Michigan
LEAD: After this year's Indianapolis 500, which wiped out the race's speed record at the expense of several blistered tires, it looked as if the Indy car drivers could not come up with an encore.


Black F.B.I. Agent Looks Back on Years of Harassment
LEAD: In the end, Donald Rochon was still deprived of what had once been his life's dream, to finish out his career as an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Telling Brahms a Thing or Two
LEAD:
FROM RUSSIA TO THE WEST
The Musical Memoirs and Reminiscences of Nathan Milstein.
By Nathan Milstein and Solomon Volkov.
Translated by Antonina W. Bouis.
Illustrated. 282 pp. New York:
A Donald Hutter Book/Henry Holt. $24.95.


Evening Hours;   Under a Tent, In a Museum, At a Factory
LEAD: Ruby and white were the colors for the 40th anniversary celebration of the Saratoga National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame on Monday.
Most of the women wore red or white, matching the decor in the tent on the museum lawn.
The 550 guests danced and dined under 12 crystal chandeliers.


A Genius for the Vulgar
LEAD:
LARRY RIVERS
By Sam Hunter.
Illustrated. 358 pp. New York:
Rizzoli. $75.


CRIME
LEAD: Fat, crude, surly Superintendent Andy Dalziel literally plays God in BONES AND SILENCE (Delacorte, $17.95), the 10th entry in Reginald Hill's outstanding procedural series featuring the bluff Yorkshire detective and his sensitive and contemplative associate, Inspector Peter Pascoe.
The role of the Deity, which Dalziel assumes for a pageant of medieval mystery plays in his cathedral city, suits the Old Testament personality of the detective, who has achieved local fame as ''a man who walked through brick walls as he headed for the truth.


May the Italians Rediscover Their Old Caring, Generous Nature
LEAD: To the Editor:


Scarves From India and Beyond
LEAD: The filmy, long scarf known as the dopatta, whose function was once limited to preserving the modesty of Muslim and Sikh women on the Indian subcontinent, has burst out of purdah and into the world of fashion.
In silk or cotton or weightless organdies, block-printed, woven, tie-dyed, embroidered or ''crinkled,'' the 6-to-8-foot-long scarf, made by fashion houses rather than clothing factories, is a best seller in Indian and


Amy Rosen Weds C.L. Connelly
LEAD: Amy Sue Rosen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest B. Rosen of Broomall, Pa., was married yesterday to Christopher Love Connelly, a son of Patricia L. Anderson of San Francisco and John E. Connelly of Fort Salonga, L.I.
Judge Edward B. Rosenberg of the Court of Common Pleas officiated at the Radnor Valley Country Club in Villanova,


Review/Mostly Mozart;   Shaham and Ohlsson Share A Program of Concertos
LEAD: In taste and personality, the two soloists for Friday's Mostly Mozart concert at Avery Fisher Hall were well matched to their concertos.
In an all-Mozart evening that also included the Overture to ''Lucio Silla'' and the ''Paris'' Symphony, Garrick Ohlsson played the piano solos in the G-major Concerto, No.


In the Movies, Jazz Musicians Are Destined to Die Young
LEAD: Young, gifted and doomed - that's the prognosis for jazz musicians in the movies.
On screen, jazz is a siren call, an obsession, an addiction that disrupts the lives it touches and consumes anyone under its sway.
The musicians are pure souls, verging on idiot savants, who are so wrapped up in the music that they invariably mess up both business and romance.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
In Fashion, in Public


H. G. Mangelsdorf, 83, Former Oil Executive
LEAD: Harold G. Mangelsdorf, a petroleum industry executive who spent much of his 40-year career in senior positions with Standard Oil of New Jersey, now Exxon, died on Wednesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 83 years old and lived in Short Hills, N.J.
His family said he died of heart disease.


Correction
LEAD: A map on April 1 with an article about Glacier National Park included an incorrect highway symbol and misspelled a nearby town.
As a reader wrote recently to point out, the highway is U.S. 89, not Interstate 89, and the town is Kalispell.


Meg Laidlaw to Wed John M. Nebens
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Laidlaw of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margaret Elizabeth Laidlaw to John M. Nebens, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis M. Nebens of Millwood, N.Y.


''42nd Street'' Brings Joy to Candlewood Theater
LEAD: THE show, a $2 million musical extravaganza, was in trouble.
The director-choreographer had fallen ill, the production was falling apart and the producer was on the warpath.
After a five-week tryout at the Kennedy Center in Washington (where the reviews were bad, but business was good), a Broadway premiere was expected.


Angela Janklow Planning to Marry Gerald C. Harrington Jr. Next Year
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Morton L. Janklow of New York have made known the engagement of their daughter, Angela LeRoy Janklow, to Gerald Christopher Harrington Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harrington of Bronxville, N.Y.
A spring wedding is planned.


Sports of The Times;   Power Breakfast With George and Hank
LEAD: It is dawn of Hank Steinbrenner's first day on the job as high potentate of the Yankees.
The scene is a scruffy little pied-a-terre used by George Steinbrenner on his visits to New York.
This morning the flat seems unusually crowded because Hank has slept on the couch.
George: Good morning, son.
Hank: I'm not supposed to talk to you,


U.S. Reduces Bonus for Operator of A-Plant
LEAD: Unhappy with the pace of the environmental cleanup at its uranium processing plant in Fernald, Ohio, the Energy Department has decided to deny three-quarters of a $1.67 million semiannual bonus to the company that manages the plant for the nation's nuclear weapons manufacturing complex.


Regina Niner Is Married
LEAD: Regina Marsh Niner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Niner Jr., of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Kevin Edward Conley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Conley of Winchester, Mass.
The Rev.
Peter W. Peters performed the Episcopal ceremony at the University of Maryland chapel in College Park, Md.


Hispanic Elderly Are Unaware of Available Aid
LEAD: For three years after coming to the East Bronx from Peru, 83-year-old Alejandra Ramirez and her family believed that she was ineligible for public assistance, that she could not be fed by Meals-on-Wheels, for example.


Postings: One-Family Homes;   Buffalo Tops State In Growth
LEAD: Census figures show that the Buffalo area experienced New York State's highest percentage gain in home-building permits for the latest five-year period for which statistics are available.


John Briggs Jr., 74; Critic Who Handled Media for Toscanini
LEAD: John G. Briggs Jr., a music critic who once served as Arturo Toscanini's press agent, died on Friday at the Cooper River Convalescent Center in Pennsauken, N.J.


Talking: Docks;   Ebb Tide In Market For Slips
LEAD: Dockominium sales lie dead in the water.
Echoing the direction of the real estate market in general, demand has all but dried up for these slips, some of which had been selling as high as $2,000 a linear foot in the New York area only 18 months ago.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Raymond, Me.;   A King Builds His Castle
LEAD: SITTING on a hill in a modest neighborhood in this town of 4,000 year-round residents is a house the locals call the Castle on Mill Street.
It belongs to William King, an architectural draftsman and graphic designer who has been building the 5,000-square-foot dwelling himself, cinderblock by cinderblock, for 18 years.


For Emigre Scientists, Job Hunting Is Difficult
LEAD: While American universities and corporations worry about a future shortfall of research scientists and engineers, Victor Vigdorchik, a theoretical physicist and mathematician from the Ukraine, works as a home attendant in Brooklyn.


Fresh Air Fund Seeks More Host Families
LEAD: On the wall of the Fresh Air Fund office in midtown Manhattan hangs a patchwork quilt decorated with names and designs representing some of the 13 states and countless communities that are the destinations of thousands of poor city children for two weeks in the summer.


The Small Folks at Home
LEAD:
THE FIVE OF HEARTS
An Intimate Portrait of Henry Adams and His Friends, 1880-1918.
By Patricia O'Toole.
Illustrated. 459 pp. New York:
Clarkson N. Potter. $25.


Yes, a Bright Side to the S.&amp; L. Bailout
LEAD: By common agreement, the savings and loan bailout is a major financial debacle for everyone except depositors, whose money is safe because of Government guarantees.
The cost is borne ultimately by the American taxpayers.


Excerpts From Statements By Bush on Strategy in Gulf
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference yesterday in Kennebunkport, Me., as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of Cable News Network:
OPENING STATEMENT


Market Forces
LEAD: Very little seafood reaches the table in New York City without passing through hands of criminals, according to Frank H. Wohl.
Mr.
Wohl, who was appointed by a Federal court in 1988 to oversee the Fulton Fish Market with an eye to curbing the racketeering that has long been rampant there, said in a report last week that an ''atmosphere of lawlessness'' persisted.


A Life Spent on One Musical Path
LEAD: ''I like attention being given to special birthdays,'' says William Schuman, ''especially when it means performances.
I think anything that draws attention to your music and gives a pat on the back is a titillation, but as someone said, 'Flattery is okay if you don't inhale.' ''


Question Of the Week;   Should Lawrence Taylor Get A Raise?
LEAD: Definitely, absolutely, positively!
Lawrence Taylor is the best linebacker in the history of professional football.
He is definitely a future Hall of Famer and I would like to see him continue his illustrious career with the Giants.
He puts his heart and soul into the game, and in my book that makes him deserving of a raise.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: The Treasury auctions three- and six-month bills.
TUESDAY: Retail sales for July.
Early August auto sales.
WEDNESDAY: Business inventories for June.
Industrial production and capacity utilization for July.
Planned foreclosure auction of the home of Charles H. Keating Jr., the Arizona savings and loan executive.


Allies Reminded of Need for U.S. Shield
LEAD: Just as Washington was preparing to lower its profile in Europe in the new post-cold war era, the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait has abruptly reminded Western Europe that it still looks to the United States to defend its vital security interests.


Fashion;   For Fall, Stylish Feet (and Knees) Are Covered Up
LEAD: What do you wear with leggings, cat suits, ski pants or micro-miniskirts?
Boots.
Or at the very least, shoes that look like boots.
That's the big news in fall footwear.
Even regular shoes are cut high on the vamp for what fashion people call a ''choked up'' look.


Morrisania
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miserable Level of Discourse
LEAD: To the Editor:


Company Wins 4th Exporting Award
LEAD: THE Endresens, father and son, are good at making new money by exporting products to the Old World.
They are so good at it that Jan Endresen, the son and president of the family-owned company, Aerotech World Trade Corporation of White Plains, recently received a special Presidential citation.
It was the same award his father received in 1975 when he headed the business.


Wooed, Wined and Overworked, Wall St. Lawyers Meet Pink Slips
LEAD: They were the legal profession's gilded generation, an army of lawyers without limits.
As law students, they were wined and dined and wooed by the most prestigious law firms in New York.
Once hired, they began settling into a frantic but fantastically lucrative life.
It was a life of glamour, prestige and, they assumed, stability.


Outsiders Belong Outside
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ravenna
LEAD: To the Editor: Seldom does the Travel section present such an artistic blending of history, art, theology, psychology, the earthy and the transcendent, the ridiculous and the sublime, as appeared in Joan Gould's beautifully written evocation of Ravenna.
It was as though her ''Mosaic Postcards From


Timely Stories, And They're Documented
LEAD: Slid in among video's new releases this summer are documentaries worth noting.
One is ''Common Threads: Stories From the Quilt,'' the 1990 Academy Award winner, to be released next month by HBO.
Broadcast by HBO-TV last year, the tape presents five profiles from the AIDS Memorial Quilt, begun in 1987 by the Names Project in San Francisco.


Sanctions on Iraq Appear Effective as Neighbors Block Trade
LEAD: The United Nations embargo on trade with Iraq and Kuwait appears to be throttling shipments of food, military spare parts and other essential goods into the area.


Miss Robinson Weds J. C. Brown 4th
LEAD: Louisa Law Robinson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel S. Robinson of Pottersville, N.J., was married yesterday to J. Crosby Brown 4th, a son of Mrs.
J.
Crosby Brown of Blue Hill, Me., and the late Mr.
Brown.
The Rev.
Alfred M. Niese Jr. performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
John's on the Mountain in Bernardsville, N.J.


Eugenia Sawin Marries Charles Gauvin
LEAD: Eugenia Waterman Sawin, a daughter of Martica R. Sawin of New York and David M. Sawin of Saunderstown, R.I., was married yesterday to Charles Frederic Gauvin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Normand E. Gauvin of Barrington, R.I.
The Rev.
John Ineson, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Episcopal ceremony in the Old Meeting House in Yarmouth,


Mary M. Halladay Is Married to Brian L. Rogers
LEAD: Mary MacIntyre Halladay, the daughter of Comdr. and Mrs.
Maurice E. Halladay of Portsmouth, R.I., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Brian Lewis Rogers, the son of Barbara D. Rogers of Wilmington, N.C., and A. Lewis Rogers of Chatham, Mass.
The Rev.
Frank W. Carpenter, a Unitarian minister, officiated.


Carolyn Ross Is Married
LEAD: Carolyn Mary Ross, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Ross of Laurel Hollow, L.I., was married yesterday to John Andrew Stephenson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Stephenson of Mt.
Kisco, N.Y., by the Rev.
Charles A. Ribado at St.
Dominic's Roman Catholic Church in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mrs.
Stephenson, 26 years old, graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's in school counseling from Long Island University.


Retracing the Santa Fe Trail
LEAD: The rents that the Santa Fe Trail tore through the earth of Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma and New Mexico serve as one great metaphor for travel.
Now they are followed ''in pursuit of an experience that is never quite brought to completion.'' (The words are those of the trail historian Marc Simmons.) Traveling the Santa Fe Trail from Kansas City to Santa Fe is addictive, hallucinogenic, for without the forgotten fears of Indian attack or thirst or childbirth to dispel the boredom, finding the historical remains of the trail in the empty prairies becomes a desperate necessity.


Fashion;   Around the Head in a Variety of Ways
LEAD: The ever-popular headband has acquired a new versatility and softness.
In most cases, this means a wide band of fabric pulled on like a ski band and adjusted in a variety of ways to the wearer's liking.


Look Before Leaping, but for Goodness' Sake Leap
LEAD: To the Editor:


Death Before Taxes
LEAD:
BITTER HARVEST
Gordon Kahl and the Posse Comitatus: Murder in the Heartland.
By James Corcoran.
Illustrated. 274 pp. New York:
Viking. $18.95.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Keep up with transplanting perennials, shrubs, especially conifers, but water everything well so the roots become established.
Mail orders for hardy bulbs that will be planted in the early fall months.
Cut off the stalks of early-blooming hostas and daylilies; carefully remove seed pods from other perennials.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If that means Saddam Hussein changes his spots, so be it.


THE CENSUS: WHY WE CAN'T COUNT
LEAD: James Gleick's article ''The Census: Why We Can't Count'' (July 15) gets to the heart of our diminished capacity to collect accurate data on a large scale.
The Census Bureau has (admirably, I believe) carried out the census it planned.
However, the size, diversity and mobility of our society have rendered time-honored cenus methods imprecise, at best.


Campus Life: Baylor;   A Ban on Dancing Survives Another Test
LEAD: For a short time last spring, it looked as if the Baylor University students of 1990 would be allowed to do something none of their predecessors had been allowed to do in the school's 145-year history - dance on campus.


SAUDI ARABIA/At a Glance
LEAD:
Vital Statistics
Capital: Riyadh
Population: 12.7 million ('89)
Government: Monarchy. King Fahd took office in 1982.
Area: 839,996 square miles (about one-third the size of the U.S.)
Economy: Oil production is the major industry.
Reserves in '89 were 225 billion barrels, one-quarter of the world supply.


How a Meadow Complements a Lawn
LEAD: A MYTH has risen among some gardeners about lawns.
They think they would rather substitute a meadow in the belief that it would be much easier to keep. ''All you have to do is plant seed, and voila, a meadow!'' So they say.


A Star Is Barred and 'Miss Saigon' Cancels
LEAD: WHEN Actors' Equity voted on Tuesday to bar the English actor Jonathan Pryce from re-creating his prize-winning portrayal of a Eurasian pimp in a Broadway production of the London hit musical ''Miss Saigon,'' a lot more was potentially at issue than the future of the $10 million show, or its record $25 million advance sale, or whether the union even had a legal basis for taking such action.


Baking in the Summer Can Yield Satisfying Desserts
LEAD: AS unappealing as the thought of baking might be on a hot summer's day, the abundance of fruit in the market makes it compelling.
Dessert planning is often resolved by filling pastry or topping cake with peaches, plums, nectarines or berries.


'In the Shadow of the Dome'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Postings: Coming to White Plains;   14 Modest-Income Condos
LEAD: With state subsidies in place, plans are advancing for a 14-unit condominium in White Plains for buyers with modest incomes.
A one-bedroom apartment would cost $95,991 and a two-bedroom $112,181, said Jane Henderson, executive director of the White Plains Housing Information Service, the not-for-profit developer.


Ms. Smyke Wed To D.S. Moskin
LEAD: Camela Irene Smyke and David Scott Moskin were married yesterday at the Meeting House in New Marlborough, Mass., by the Rev.
William A. Johnson, an Episcopal priest.


THE CENSUS: WHY WE CAN'T COUNT
LEAD: Gleick is not convincing in arguing that a statistical sample would produce an improvement over the actual census count.
The imperfect art of sampling, and the inevitably political selection of the ''right'' adjustment formula, would add entirely new sources of distortion to the census results.
Gleick seems to forget that we are not talking about stars or fish.


WITH FUEL PRICES SOARING, MAKE PLANS TO DRIVE FOR ECONOMY
LEAD: A lot of people have been wringing their hands, but it was George F. Will who so deftly put his finger on the problem at the pump.


Tech Notes;   M.I.T.'s Video Version of the Hologram
LEAD: The Media Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is experimenting with holograms using a video image.
Holograms, images created on flat surfaces by laser light that appear to be three-dimensional, are now frequently seen as decorative art, on credit cards among other things.
Video hologram technology, when perfected, might offer architects the ability to draw a house on a computer screen and then examine its three-dimensional appearance or it could become the basis of three-dimensional television.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-17


Cooper to Be Waived
LEAD: After 11 seasons, it appears the Los Angeles Lakers and their top defensive guard, Michael Cooper, will part ways.
The Lakers will ask waivers on Cooper on Wednesday so that he can pursue plans to sign a three-year, $5 million contract with an Italian team, according to a report in yesterday's editions of The Los Angeles


Vincent Obsessed
LEAD:
VAN GOGH
His Life and His Art.
By David Sweetman.
Illustrated. 391 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers. $30.
VINCENT AND THEO VAN GOGH
A Dual Biography.
By Jan Hulsker.
Edited by James M. Miller.
Illustrated. 470 pp. Ann Arbor, Mich.:
Fuller Publications. $39.


Question Of the Week;   Should Lawrence Taylor Get A Raise?
LEAD: Is this a trick question?
Just total the starting defensive unit's salary and divide by two.
That's what L. T. is worth.
He is the ''G'' in Giants.
Lawrence Taylor is the Ultimate Wrecking Machine.
JOHN SHITEMI
Brooklyn


Using Plastic Pipe for Plumbing
LEAD: BY using plastic plumbing pipe instead of metal, amateurs can perform many home repairs and improvements that otherwise might require hiring a plumber.


Not All Drug Lords Are Outlaws
LEAD: The list of drug traffickers in the war on drugs includes a lot of unscrupulous villains: the Colombian drug lords, gangs like the Bloods and the Crips and some U.S. pharmaceutical manufacturers.


THE CENSUS: WHY WE CAN'T COUNT
LEAD: I wish James Gleick had spoken to some real enumerators instead of bedazzling himself with academics.
If he had, he would have learned that most of the 350,000 workers on the 1990 census took pride in their work and looked upon it as a patriotic endeavor.


Joanna Louise Fowler Weds Eric C. Jonsson
LEAD: Joanna Louise Fowler, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Howland Auchincloss Fowler of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Eric Carl Jonsson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan R. Jonsson of Honolulu.
The Rev.
D.
Worth Carson performed the ceremony at the National Presbyterian Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Jonsson, 27 years old, will begin work in September as an investment analyst for the Capital Research Company in San Francisco.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
THAT PLACE IN MINNESOTA: Changing Lives, Saving Lives.
By Ed Fitzgerald. (Viking, $18.95.) Take an executive at the pinnacle of his profession in an industry that associates creativity with alcohol.
Mix in an exhilarating career full of deals sealed at three-martini lunches.
Add forced retirement at the age of 65 and you have created circumstances, at least for Ed Fitzgerald, as explosive as a Molotov cocktail.


TV Needs More Than 1 Ratings Agency
LEAD: The latest spat over the accuracy of television ratings should not be dismissed as just another round of posturing among symbiotic elements of the advertising industry.
The rift marks no less than the collapse of the ''social contract'' that for decades bound the networks, advertisers, agencies and, ex officio, the viewers they buy and sell.


New York's Unmet Promises to Kids
LEAD: It has been three years since Gov.
Mario Cuomo proclaimed this to be the Decade of the Child.
How is he doing?
When measured against his own promises, the Decade of the Child remains a modest but worthy effort that is not yet the major initiative the Governor pledged it would be.


Palestinians Give Passionate Support To Hussein as a Hero and a Liberator
LEAD: If Saddam Hussein is having trouble finding admirers elsewhere in the world, he need only visit this modest village.


Q and A
LEAD:
By Freighter to Australia


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: The New York Times Poll;   IN A CRISIS, SUPPORT WITH RESERVATIONS
LEAD:
Those who approve of the way President Bush is dealing with Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. 74%.
Those who say the Bush Adminsitration tried hard enough to reach diplomatic solutions prior to taking military acton. 48%.
Those who expect the United States military to end up fighting Iraquis.


Looking Back
LEAD: Long after the Parking Violations Bureau scandal seemed moribund, it jumped up to bite Michael G. Dowd last week.
In 1986, Mr.
Dowd helped bring the vast scandal into the open when he informed prosecutors that his Queens company, which collected overdue parking fines for New York City, had for several years paid kickbacks to officials including the Queens Borough President, Donald R.


Cleanup Follows Path of Tornado on Staten Island


The Big Screen Pokes Fun at the Little
LEAD: While Bruce Willis is wiping out terrorists on the ground in ''Die Hard 2,'' a plane full of hostages is circling above Dulles Airport, carrying minor but symbolically loaded characters like a slick, creepy television reporter.
William Atherton, as the same journalist whose snooping tortured the hero's family in the first ''Die Hard,'' ducks into a bathroom and phones in a live broadcast about the plane's dangerous situation.


Grateful Dead Member Died Of Overdose, Coroner Rules
LEAD: Brent Mydland, the 37-year-old keyboardist for the Grateful Dead rock band, was killed by an overdose of drugs, the office of the Contra Costa County coroner ruled Friday.


America Could Face a Long and Costly Commitment in the Mideast
LEAD: JUST as President Bush was beginning to trust in the stability of the emerging world order, the crisis most feared in the new era has exploded on the Arabian Peninsula.
A war over oil is testing his ability to handle sudden adversity and holding out little hope for the kind of benign ending that followed the quiet revolutions of 1989.


Elections Board Battlers May Lose the War
LEAD: THE county's Board of Elections, which has drawn Albany's attention for the inability of its two commissioners to work together, may have new leadership after this year's elections.


Lockerbie Aftermath: Split Among Families
LEAD: ON Dec. 21, 1988, the families of Alexander S. Lowenstein and Warren M. Buser were bonded forever and their lives were changed irrevocably when the two men died in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 high above Lockerbie, Scotland.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 12, 1990


U.S. Joins Suit Alleging Fraud by Researcher
LEAD: The Justice Department said Friday that it would join a lawsuit brought against a medical researcher who is accused of falsifying results of scientific work financed by Government grants.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
ROOTING FOR TAPROOTS


THE WORLD: The Big Voices;   A Debate About the Powers At the U.N.
LEAD: AS the United Nations Security Council prepared sanctions against Iraq last weekend for invading Kuwait, the epicenter of the drama was not the Council Chamber with its horseshoe table, nor was it even the conference suite reserved for private consultations between the Council's 15 members.
The most critical talks occurred in the office of France's avuncular United Nations Representative, Pierre-Louis Blanc, at his mission in 1 Dag Hammarskjold


;   The Spirit of Marsalis With the Swing of Sinatra
LEAD: From Yehudi Menuhin to Stevie Wonder, American music has a long tradition of Wunderkinds, though few if any have demonstrated the range of talents commanded by Harry Connick Jr.
In the last three years, the 22-year-old entertainer from New Orleans has released no less than five albums.
This week three of them - a number matched only by New Kids on the Block - are listed on Billboard's pop album chart.


Putting Prokofiev and Mozart in the Same Basket
LEAD: About all Prokofiev's ''War and Peace'' and Mozart's ''Cosi fan tutte'' have in common, it might be plausibly argued, is that both play in two long acts.
Forget for the moment that Mozart sustains lengths more skillfully than anybody, let alone Prokofiev.
Such gross differences are easy to point out.


Children's Fashion;   Fantasies a la Eloise
LEAD: Thirty-five years ago, a 6-year-old named Eloise first stampeded through the corridors of the Plaza Hotel, and children are still enchanted by her kinetic escapades.
So what better way to celebrate the anniversary of Kay Thompson's story, with illustrations by Hilary Knight, than to return to the scene of Eloise's crimes.


An Earthly Garden Of Delightful Friends
LEAD: WHILE most people look at a garden and see flowers, Sydney Eddison, of Newtown, also sees people.
There are Viki Ferreniea, who gave her peonies, and Jim York, from whom she got her thread-leaf Japanese maple. ''And then there's Helen Gill,'' Mrs.
Eddison said as she pointed out the soft border of lamb's ears and the tall stands of irises.


Tokyo Signs the Paychecks
LEAD:
WORKING FOR THE JAPANESE
Inside Mazda's American Auto Plant.
By Joseph J. Fucini and Suzy Fucini.
258 pp. New York: The Free Press. $19.95.
JUMP START
Japan Comes to the Heartland.
By David Gelsanliter.
262 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   The Problem of 'Sick-Building Syndrome'
LEAD: SICK-BUILDING SYNDROME, a disorder that medical and environmental professionals say is widespread, but largely unregulated, refers to vague illnesses reported by people who work in large office buildings where the windows are inoperable.


In Lawsuit, Child Wins A Matisse
LEAD: A 6-year-old descendant of the photographer Edward Steichen won a long battle for a Matisse painting on Friday when her family settled a lawsuit over it with the Museum of Modern Art.


Postings: More Lighting;   Meeting Tenant Fears
LEAD: For 40 years, Louis L. Friedman has cursed the darkness and lit a few candles.
As a New York State Senator from Brooklyn in the early 50's, he sponsored a bill requiring landlords to put lights in front of apartment buildings.
He believed this would deter muggers and make it less perilous to navigate stairways at night.


Soldiers In the Sands
LEAD: The alliance between the United States and Western Europe will face a clear but so far unspoken danger in the Middle East.
It is important to face it in advance.


Campus Life: Washington, St. Louis;   Black Students Learn How to Be Entrepreneurs
LEAD: Until this summer, said Kory T. Morrow, a 16-year-old high school student here, he never even considered opening his own business.
But with the guidance of the Minority Youth Entrepreneurship Program at the John M. Olin School of Business at Washington University in St.
Louis, he and four other youths wrote detailed plans to open a mail-order software company.


Miss Glazier Wed In Pennsylvania
LEAD: Wendy Firth Glazier, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl W. Glazier Jr. of Toronto and New Hope, Pa., was married yesterday to Robert Lovell Brainard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Brainard 2d of Edgartown, Mass.
The Rev.
Donald V. Young performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Solebury,


Why Sing the Anthem Before Games?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mets Routed by Surging Cubs
LEAD: The Mets want you to know they are not in a swoon, a slump or even a sinking spell.
Not even after losing 6 of their last 10 games and 2 straight to the Chicago Cubs.
And don't waste your time fretting over Frank Viola just because he has been kayoed the last two times out and won only twice in his last seven starts.


Complication On Asbestos
LEAD: The fragile alliance forged last week by 10 Federal judges trying to coordinate and resolve quickly tens of thousands of asbestos personal injury disputes will complicate settlement talks in many large cases, making their immediate resolution much more difficult, lawyers and judges said yesterday.


Pennsylvania Job Cuts
LEAD: JLG Industries said Friday that it planned to cut 150 workers at its plant here because of a previously reported softening in its incoming orders.
The latest reductions are in addition to the elimination of about 135 positions at some of the company's foreign and domestic plants, JLG said.
It said current levels of unfilled orders are at 45 days' sales.


O'Brien Starts; Eason Stars
LEAD: Rather than take credit for rousing a moribund Jets team, Tony Eason seemed more intent on explaining why his good buddy Ken O'Brien didn't do as well as he did at quarterback Saturday night.


Curt Warner Is on a Mission
LEAD: CURT WARNER, the Seattle Seahawks' leading career rusher, remembers standing on the sideline at the Kingdome last season while Steve Largent was honored as a Seahawk for all seasons.
Largent's No. 80 jersey was retired and Largent received tribute after tribute for his dedication, loyalty and production as one of the finest receivers in pro football history.


Jumping Squabble
LEAD: GIVEN the squabble over who would represent the United States Equestrian Team in show jumping at the 1990 World Equestrian Games, which wound up in Stockholm last week, you would have thought it was the riders who did the jumping and the horses who hung on for dear life rather than the other way around.


Tow Truck Driver Is Slain; 3 in Another Truck Sought
LEAD: A tow truck driver was beaten to death in Brooklyn early yesterday, probably by three occupants of another tow truck, the police said.


Disabled Veterans Eager to Take Shot at Gold
LEAD: GEORGE KUSTYN, Frank Jones and Haskell Manson, three disabled military veterans, were sitting around a table at a Veterans Affairs medical center in Canandaigua, N.Y.
In a place where old war stories are often told and retold, swapped, embellished or simply invented, their conversation was anything but stale.


INSIDE
LEAD:
The Mayor's Satiny Moods
Aides determine Mayor Dinkins's humor by the warm-up jacket he wears, with Janet Jackson coming out on nice days and one from the Kronk Boxing Club on bad.
Page B1.
Historic Black Cemetery
Neglected and nearly forgotten, a cemetery for freed slaves jeopardized by Dallas highway work is evoking emotions among blacks as well as historical interest.


Metro Matters;   Youths and City Decay in Schools Of Indifference
LEAD: A few days ago, while reading a newspaper, Martin Cohen saw a face out of the past.


McEnroe's Major Priorities: Blend of Family and Tennis
LEAD: ON the tennis court, his terms remain totalitarian.
He stalks his stage like a maestro, and before issuing the inimitable strokes that trill forth from his racquet like music, he wants to hear a pin drop.


Skulls Found: Japan Doesn't Want to Know Whose
LEAD: A little more than a year ago, construction workers cleared the site of an old government building to erect the new National Institute of Health and unearthed something that left them a little shaken: 35 human skulls and thighbones that appeared to date to World War II.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Allstate Insurance Co., Northbrook, Ill., a subsidiary of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., promoted Rita P. Wilson, a vice president, to senior vice president of corporate relations, effective Sept. 1.
She replaces Lawrence H. Williford, who is retiring.


Indian Powwow Has Religious Origins
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dump Toxic Wastes Off New York Beaches?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Amid Mosaic Of Moods, Mayor Runs A Wary Ship
LEAD: David Norman Dinkins is a man of moods, and eight months into his term as Mayor of New York City, his aides have learned to judge them by the satiny warm-up jackets he works in.
If he appears in his favorites -gifts from the pop singer Janet Jackson or the Grammy Awards organization - the day is fine.


Market Place;   A Wary Response To 'Junk' Auction
LEAD: INSTABILITY in the Middle East has unnerved many investors and led some ''junk bond'' portfolio managers to stay away from an auction of securities last week, the founder of a new trading system says.


Like Oil and Taxes, Paperbacks Are Going to Cost More
LEAD: The $5.95 paperback - a mainstay of bookstores and airports - is going the way of the 2-cents plain, the 25-cent candy bar and, in New York, the $6 movie ticket and the $1 subway token.


No Loss of Eloquence
LEAD: DURING the 38 seasons that Byrum Saam broadcast baseball in Philadelphia, he was known as much for his non sequiturs as he was for his eloquence.
That's partly because the 75-year-old Saam, who was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame last week, never worked for a pennant winner.


Robert Lawrence Weds Miss Gault
LEAD: Barbara Stewart Gault, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Gault of San Francisco, was married yesterday in Rutherford, Calif., to Robert Prescott Lawrence, a son of James Lawrence of Brookline, Mass., and the late Martina Brandegee Lawrence.
The Rev.
Victor Ta Wei, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Beaulieu Gardens.


Emily Taravella Weds
LEAD: Emily Johannah-Marie Taravella, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Taravella of Queens, was married yesterday to Mark Andrew DiTaranto, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent DiTaranto of the Bronx.
The Rev.
John C. Mulqueen performed the ceremony at St.
Elizabeth's Catholic Church in Ozone Park, Queens.


People
LEAD: *
Beth Rockwood has been named director of media planning at the New York office of Young &amp; Rubicam.
The agency also named George Sharpe to the new position of director of media business development.
Don Davis, Carla Loffredo and Diane Spencer have been named group media directors.


Previous Exports to Iraq May Prove Costly for U.S.
LEAD: President Bush's freeze on Iraqi assets and financial dealings may prove costly to the United States Government, which has guaranteed the payment of $1.7 billion that Iraq owes for the purchase of American farm products.


Ilysse A. Feingold Is Wed
LEAD: Ilysse A. Feingold, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Feingold of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Steven G. Moss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold M. Moss of Old Bethpage, L.I.
Rabbis Arnold Turetsky and Alexander Shapiro co-officiated at the Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   2 of Iraq's Pilots Are Said to Bolt
LEAD: Two Iraqi Air Force pilots have defected by flying their MIG planes to a base in northern Saudi Arabia, diplomats in the Middle East said today.


Illegal Guns: Go Get Them
LEAD: In Brooklyn, a young woman leaving early for work hurries back inside her vestibule.
In the schoolyard across the street, the kids are shooting again.
Now she can see the fire leaping from the muzzles of their semiautomatics.
Each year, she reflects, the shooters seem a bit younger.
These kids look to be no more than 13 years old.


Rebels Reported to Kill 119 in Sri Lanka
LEAD: Tamil gunmen rampaged through five fishing villages on Saturday night, killing Muslims in the street with machine-gun fire and machetes, military officials said today.
They said at least 119 people were slain.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Chiat/Day/Mojo has sold the assets of a public relations subsidiary, Jessica Dee Communications, New York, to the firm's management.
Patrice Tanaka, the general manager and creative director at Jessica Dee, will be the president and chief executive of the new company, to be called Patrice Tanaka &amp; Co.


Freeze on Iraqi Assets Expected to Cost U.S. Banks Little
LEAD: The freeze on Iraqi and Kuwaiti investments and bank deposits announced by President Bush and officials of other Western countries last week is not likely to be costly to American banks, according to Government data and bankers' estimates.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Aid Helped Hussein's Climb; Now, Critics Say, the Bill Is Due
LEAD: For 10 years, as Iraq developed a vast army, chemical weapons, nuclear ambitions and a long record of brutality, the Reagan and Bush Administrations quietly courted President Saddam Hussein as a counterweight to Iran's revolutionary fervor.
Now, critics say, Washington is paying the price for that policy.


Chronicle
LEAD: Los Angeles and New York lie far apart in many ways, but they draw closer for two days next month.
About 100 Angelenos are flying east to hear ANDRE PREVIN lead the Los Angeles Philarmonic at the benefit opening on Sept. 26 of Carnegie Hall's centenary season.


New Yorkers Get to Tell It Like It Is
LEAD: Hoping to leave their marks on history, hundreds of New Yorkers bared their souls to a Sony Camcorder last week for a video time capsule of life in New York in 1990.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Despair, Calm and Disdain Greet Mobilization at Bragg
LEAD: For the second time in eight months, thousands of soldiers here have said swift goodbyes and answered a President's call to action, leaving behind frightened families who study foreign maps and wonder why their fortunes have suddenly been pitted against those of distant dictators.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Proposals by Iraqi President: Excerpts From His Address
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the address on the Persian Gulf crisis made by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, carried by Baghdad radio and the official Iraqi News Agency and translated from Arabic by The Associated Press:


United Artists Shifting Theater Unit's Officers
LEAD: Peter Warzel has been named president and chief executive of the newly created office of the president at United Artists Theater Circuit Inc., the theater exhibition subsidiary of the United Artists Entertainment Company, the cable and movie theater company that is based in Denver.


Books of The Times;   An Ill-Tempered Look At the Clock's Tyranny
LEAD:
Keeping Watch
A History of American Time
By Michael O'Malley
384 pages. Viking. $19.95.


Wendell G. Randolph, Chemical Engineer, 94
LEAD: Wendell G. Randolph, a chemical engineer who played an important role in developing gas masks for the United States Army in World War I and who later headed a family concern that produced industrial paints, died on Monday at his home in Saddle River, N.J.
He was 94 years old.


Group Says It Has Freed 2d Swiss Hostage
LEAD: A group calling itself the Palestinian Revolutionary Squad said today that it had released a second Swiss hostage in Lebanon, a relief worker for the International Committee of the Red Cross.


Still Raining After 7 1/2 Hours
LEAD: In what may have been the longest rain delay in baseball history, the Texas Rangers and the Chicago White Sox waited . . . and waited . . . and waited.


Unearthing of Freed-Slave Cemetery May Put Dallas Road Project on Hold
LEAD: The Freedman's Cemetery, burial place of as many as 2,000 freed slaves and their descendants, has sat just off the North Central Expressway ever since the road was built over some of the graves 50 years ago.


Salzburg Guggenheim Offshoot Exists in Hopes and Blueprints
LEAD: Amid the ceremony of the opening night at the Salzburg Festival last month was another premiere, less noticed perhaps but with names just as big as the festival's Jessye Norman and Seiji Ozawa.


Pakistan's New Government Arrests Supporters of Bhutto
LEAD: Pakistan's new Government began rounding up supporters of the ousted Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, today.


Stephen Zimmerman Weds Miss Sloves
LEAD: Judith Leslie Sloves, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney G. Sloves of Yonkers, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stephen Zimmerman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Zimmerman of Bayside, Queens.
Rabbi Solomon W. Sternstein was assisted by Cantor Lawrence Avery in performing the ceremony at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y.


Business Scene;   Airlines in Pull Of Global Magnet
LEAD: THE changes wrought by airline deregulation since 1978 go on and on.
Many fares were cut drastically.
Routes within the nation were revamped.
The industry became concentrated in the hands of nine major carriers.
And now globalization is bringing a new upheaval.


Bishop Warns That Corruption Could 'Sink' Kenya
LEAD: In an unusually broad attack on corruption, a prominent church leader charged Saturday that misuse of power for economic gain had become the norm among Government officials.


Brooklyn Youth Fatally Shot Outside Car Service Office
LEAD: A 17-year-old was shot and killed yesterday by a man leaving a Brooklyn car service office with his girlfriend, the police said.


Orion Sees Its Financial Star Fade
LEAD: The summer has been brutally competitive in Hollywood, but perhaps no studio has more at stake than Orion Pictures, one of the last small independent companies.


Modified League
LEAD: GIVEN the rampant popularity of rotisserie league baseball, it is not surprising that a group of bankers, lawyers, politicians, brokers and other businessmen and entrepreneurs who club together in Pennsylvania would start a league of their own.


Ms. Leahy Weds Adam Weinberg
LEAD: Christine A. Leahy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Leahy of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Adam E. Weinberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael F. Weinberg of Old Westbury, L.I.
The Rev.
Eliot Daley, a Presbyterian minister, and Rabbi Morton Rosenthal performed the ceremony at the Mountain Lakes


Possible Suit by NBC Union
LEAD: A major union at NBC said Friday that it would probably go to court to fight the network's contract proposal that the company plans to impose on Wednesday.


Rubella, Not Measles, Causes Birth Defects
LEAD: To the Editor:


They Must Not Die for a Lawyer's Mistakes;   Unjust Punishment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Biker Rally Ends in Violence
LEAD: Gang violence erupted at the end of the Black Hills Motor Classic, a motorcycle rally that attracted more than 300,000 bikers to this town of 6,000 people.
A barroom fight Saturday between the Outlaws and the Sons of Silence left three people in serious condition in a hospital, two with stab wounds and one shot.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
50th for Graf: Steffi Graf yesterday won her 50th pro singles title, defeating Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere, 6-3, 6-2, in the final of the Great American Bank tournament in San Diego.
Graf, who as of Friday will have been the top-ranked female for three years, became the third woman in the 22-year open era to win 50 tournaments or more.


Months After Pipeline Fireball, Village Scars Remain
LEAD: Along Route 30, the main road that runs past the Schoharie Creek, there is a blackened void in the center of this village.
Trees have been burned away, and all that remains of a dozen homes and stores are charred stone foundations.


Coutts Journal;   In Canada's Big Sky Country, Eyes Turn South
LEAD: The bearded trucker finishing his pancakes at the Hillview Cafe called himself Big Dog, his call-sign on the citizen's band radio as he takes oil pipes, produce and other loads from Texas, Oklahoma and California into Canada.


Need for Lower Rates Stressed by Analysts
LEAD: How soon will the Federal Reserve move to reduce interest rates and will the cuts be deep enough to ward off a recession that many economists believe is already gripping the nation?


Question Box
LEAD:
Hitless More Than Once
Q.
There have been seven no-hitters in the major leagues this season, with a different team the victim each time: Seattle, Detroit, Oakland, Toronto, St.
Louis, the Chicago White Sox and the Yankees.
Has a team ever been no-hit more than once in a season?
A.
In this century, it's happened 10 times - seven times in the American League and thrice in the National - but no team has ever suffered the embarrassment of being held hitless in a game more than twice in a season.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   BUSH ORDERS NAVY TO HALT ALL SHIPMENTS OF IRAQ'S OIL AND ALMOST ALL ITS IMPORTS
LEAD: President Bush ordered the United States military today to block exports of Iraqi oil and all imports to Iraq except some food shipments, Administration officials said.
The blockade would fulfill the President's threat to halt Iraqi commerce.


Outdoors: Fishing In a (Bigger) Crowd
LEAD: IT used to be that the only crowd anybody ever noticed on the Missouri River was a tower of tricos, a gray cloud of flies 30 feet high at the water's edge an hour or two after sunrise.
A welcome crowd, for when the flies mated and fell to the water in midmorning a frantic hour or two of trout feeding and trout fishing followed.


Rookie Passer Eyes Giant Job
LEAD: When the Giants face the Buffalo Bills in Orchard Park, N.Y., tonight in their first exhibition game, they plan to use four of their five quarterbacks.
They will start the season with two or three.


Voices of Concern Over Gulf Stakes


Protection From Sun
LEAD: Athletes who spend long periods outdoors are susceptible to overexposure to the sun.
A new product, Sun Spots, has been designed to reduce the problem by signaling when it is time to reapply sun screen to the skin.


Treasury Will Sell Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday the rate was 7.40 percent on the three-month bill and 7.29 percent for a six-month bill.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Aug. 12:
MONDAY
FPL Group Inc
Waste Mgmt. Inc.
Minn. Mng. &amp; Mfg.
TUESDAY
Briggs &amp; Stratton
Questar Corp.
Foote Cone &amp; Belding
Suntrust Bks.
MCA Inc.
Toro Co.
McDermott Intl.
United Telecom.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   And Now the 'B Word' (Do Not Say Blockade)
LEAD: The Bush Administration's reluctance to call the blocking of Iraqi commerce on the high seas a naval blockade apparently reflects legal and political concerns about using a word associated with declared wars.


A Soviet Film Re-creates History, But It Makes History in Hollywood
LEAD: James Cagney, Pat O'Brien and Humphrey Bogart made ''Angels With Dirty Faces'' on this set, and Warren Beatty used it when filming ''Dick Tracy.'' The so-called Tenement Street lot at the Warner Brothers studio here is hardly the place one would expect to find a Soviet film crew busy at work, but a Soviet actor, Lev Lemke, playing Leon Trotsky, stood patiently in front of an apartment building facade the other morning, waiting for a cue from his director, Leonid Maryagin.


Gorbachev Denounces Estonia's Declaration
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today denounced the latest separatist declaration by the Baltic republic of Estonia and said it was invalid under Soviet law.


Scotti D'Arcy, Record Producer, 67
LEAD: Scotti D'Arcy, a producer of poetry records and theatrical works, died on July 18 at the Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J., where she lived.
Her death, at the age of 67, resulted from pneumonia and respiratory failure, a family spokesman said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE OIL JOLT
President Bush ordered the Navy to intercept Iraqi oil shipments and all but limited humanitarian imports of food and other supplies, carrying out his threat to blockade Iraqi commerce. [Page A1.]  The world economy is in better shape to withstand higher oil prices and a drop in supplies than it was during the 1973 and 1979 oil shocks, economists and energy experts say.


Review/Dance;   At Jacob's Pillow, Escapes In Dreams and Simplicity
LEAD: The Dayton Contemporary Dance Company is a remarkable troupe.
As impressively involved with the past as with the present, the company made both come alive in a rousing performance here on Saturday night in the Ted Shawn Theater at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival.


The Changing City; Woodside, Queens;   New Accents and Old Brogue Quietly Reshape Woodside
LEAD: Madge O'Boyle stood in front of the apartment building in Woodside, Queens, where she has lived for three decades, since shortly after the Irish native arrived in the United States, and chatted with neighbors on the sun-baked steps.


Japan Stocks Fall Sharply
LEAD: Tokyo stock prices tumbled more than 5 percent today on the widespread selling of long cash-index positions by futures arbitragers before regaining nearly a percentage point.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues fell 1,153.12 points, or 4.22 percent, to close at 26,176.43.


Grady Captures P.G.A. Title
LEAD: In a duel between two players battling their own histories as much as each other, Wayne Grady transcended a career of near misses today while Fred Couples remained a prisoner of his past in the final round of the 72d P.G.A.
Championship.


Tap Dancers and Parade Welcome Sun's Return
LEAD: Just before New Yorkers forgot what that self-luminous, gaseous yellow sphere up in the sky looked like it made a cameo appearance yesterday.


Chronicle
LEAD: CHARLES SAATCHI and KAY HARTENSTEIN wed quietly in London recently.
Mr.
Saatchi, 47 years old, is a major art collector and co-founder of the advertising conglomerate, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi.
Ms.
Hartenstein, 37 years old, has been described in the British press as an art dealer and sold ads from 1984 to 1986 for GQ in New York


Dr. George Parks, 56, Professor And Pace Business School Dean
LEAD: Dr.
George M. Parks, dean of Pace University's Lubin Schools of Business, died on Saturday while scuba diving in Bermuda, the university said yesterday.
He was 56 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.


Sara Seegar, Actress, Dies at 76; Worked in Theater, Films and TV
LEAD: Sara Seegar, an actress who appeared on and off Broadway, in films and on television, died yesterday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Langhorne, Pa.
She was 76 years old and lived at Stone Meadows, Newtown, Pa., with her husband, the actor Ezra Stone, who said she died of a cerebral hemorrhage.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Oil Crisis Like 1973's? It's Not Necessarily So &lt;
LEAD: The jump in oil prices and drop in supplies stemming from Iraq's invasion of Kuwait will do far less damage to the world's economy than did the 1973 and 1979 oil shocks, economists and energy experts say.


Ronit Amir Lowenthal, Pianist, 56
LEAD: Ronit Amir Lowenthal, a pianist and teacher, died on Thursday in Cottage Hospital in Santa Barbara, Calif.
She was 56 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Leslie MacGregor Wed in Connecticut
LEAD: Dr.
Leslie Catherine MacGregor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rob Roy MacGregor of South GLastonbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
David William Levine, the son of Judith F. Levine of New York, and the late Arthur T. Levine.
Rabbi Emily F. Korzenik officiated at the Castle Inn in Old Saybrook,


Dr. Weissman Weds Adam Goodfarb
LEAD: Dr.
Audrey Michelle Weissman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Weissman of Old Westbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Adam Davis Goodfarb, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman R. Goodfarb of Ardsley, N.Y.
Rabbi Solomon Goldman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.


FEARING RECESSION, AMERICANS SKIMP ON VACATION COSTS
LEAD: Recession looms across America, and wary vacationers are camping out, eating in and heading home early to save a few dollars.


The S.&amp; L. Cleanup Advances - Slowly
LEAD: The first anniversary of the savings and loan bailout bill has brought forth a predictable one-two punch from Republicans.
Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady proclaimed that everyone should ''rise above the political blame game.'' And the Republican National Committee ran ads blaming the Democrats.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   An Old Desert Hand Commands U.S. Forces
LEAD: As head of a command once viewed as something of a misfit in the Pentagon's organizational charts, Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf finds himself playing a pivotal role in the largest United States military operation since Vietnam.


Bridge
LEAD: If you are defending with a A-10 holding that surrounds an honor on your right, it might seem obvious to cover if that card is led.
But honors should not be covered routinely, and it may be right to play low even if, as in the diagramed deal, everyone knows that the other defender has nothing in the suit.


S.A.S. Stabilizes Its American Niche
LEAD: Jan Carlzon, the president and chief executive of Scandinavian Airlines System, does not suffer from delusions of grandeur.


Cards Complete Sweep of Pirates
LEAD: Bob Tewksbury pitched a six-hitter and Todd Zeile had a homer and double as the St.
Louis Cardinals got a season-high 17 hits and beat the slumping Pittsburgh Pirates, 6-0, today for a three-game sweep.


Western Union Replaces Workers
LEAD: The Western Union Corporation has locked out most of the 2,500 unionized employees who are negotiating a new contract with the communications company.


Reviews/Music;   All of Lazar Berman's Power Is on Display at Rutgers
LEAD: In 1976, when the cold war was cold indeed, Lazar Berman appeared virtually unannounced from behind the Iron Curtain and provided the West with an exotic glimpse of a secretive Soviet musical life.
On his first United States tour, Mr.
Berman made an overwhelming impression as a pianist of great physical power - a performer who did more than just overcome technical problems; he seemed to crush them into insignificance.


Soviet Area Seeks Sovereignty
LEAD: The autonomous republic of Karelia on the Finnish border has declared sovereignty, the official press agency Tass reported.
Karelia, home to 700,000 people, declared that its constitution and laws took precedence over those of the Soviet Union and of the Russian republic, in which it is located, Tass said.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Transcript of U.S. Statement About Measures Against Iraq
LEAD: Following is a transcript of the statement on measures to be taken against Iraq made today by President Bush's press secretary, Marlin Fitzwater, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:


William E. Foley, Judicial Officer, 79
LEAD: William E. Foley, the Federal judiciary's chief administrative officer from 1977 to 1985, died Saturday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 79 years old and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.


Political Memo;   Few Approach Starting Gates For 1992 Presidential Stakes
LEAD: In the world of presidential politics, nothing much is happening in Panora, Iowa, these days, or Lansing, Mich., for that matter.
And that is big news.
After more than a decade of complaints that the American process for selecting its presidents had become too long, too grueling and too expensive, it can be announced here today that the 1992 race for President will be shorter.


Liberian Loyalists Slow Rebel Drive
LEAD: Government troops mounted a successful counterattack today, dashing rebel hopes of seizing the capital before a West African task force arrives to impose peace.


Miss Graham Wed To C. S. Wachtel
LEAD: Michelle Lynn Graham, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Graham of Warren, Ohio, was married yesterday to Clifford Scott Wachtel, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur A. Wachtel of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Matis Blum performed the ceremony at the Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York.


Barry Says He Will Continue to Serve Community
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. said today that he intended to remain active in community life in the nation's capital, but he refused to disclose whether he would run again for elective office.


Susan M. Levin Is Wed
LEAD: Susan M. Levin, a daughter of Charlotte S. Levin of Wilmington, Del., and the late Dr.
Jules S. Levin, was married yesterday to Dr.
David A. Liebergall, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gordon S. Liebergall of Suffern, N.Y.
Rabbis David Wolpe and Leonard Gerwirtz co-officiated at Temple Har Zion in Philadelphia.


Autocracy and Democracy in the Sand
LEAD: The House of Saud. The Emirate of Kuwait. The United Arab Emirates.


In Soviet Georgia, Unity On Self-Rule Falls Apart
LEAD: Sitting on a hotel balcony with the soaring peaks of the Caucasus Mountains at his back and two hawk-eyed bodyguards watching him from below, Zviad Gamsa khurdia recently offered his view on the cut-throat world of Georgian politics.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I think it is a good thing that we don't have a field of announced candidates.
I think the public can't take three-year Presidential races.
They get bored.
Candidates get stale.''
- Ron Brown,Democratic NationalChairman.
[A16:6.]


Crisis at Top Loan Insurer: A $1.5 Billion 'F'
LEAD: The nation's largest guarantor of student loans is facing a financial crisis because its borrowers defaulted on $1.5 billion in obligations in the last two years.
And on Capitol Hill, some legislators are saying that the $2 billion the Treasury spends each year on student loan defaults is a sign that the


Commercials Get a New Star: Television
LEAD: FORGET about product benefits, emotional bonding or any of the other conventions of effective advertising.
These days, television commercials are increasingly about television.


Linda Fessler Is Marries
LEAD: Linda Beth Fessler and Michael Jeffrey Weinstein were married yesterday at Temple Ohr Torah in North Woodmere, L.I., by Rabbi Theodore Jungreis.
Mrs.
Weinstein is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Fessler of Merrick, L.I.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Weinstein of Jericho, L.I.
The bride, 26 years old, is a graduate of the Fashion Institute of Technology and is the art director at Quadriga, a publisher of religious greeting cards in New York.


Review/Theater;   Reeve Resurrects Death as a Charming Stranger
LEAD: As the title character in ''Death Takes a Holiday,'' Christopher Reeve has another role commensurate with his larger-than-life presence.
Replacing his bright Superman cape with a cloak of spectral darkness, he is a not-so-Grim Reaper.
More than anything, it is the actor's drollness that helps invigorate this creaky vehicle, revived at the Williamstown Theater Festival.


Chronicle
LEAD: In northwest Connecticut, there is a celebrity tennis tournament of a distinctly different sort.
The public is not invited, the players are discreet if not sheepish when talking about it and trophies are given for the worst players.


Reviews/Music;   Hip-Hop With an Accent And a Plea for Community
LEAD: Soul II Soul's concert at the Palladium on Friday night sputtered along amiably, a sort of pleasant variety show.
The group, which looked as if it were going to dictate the future of pop and dance music with its ''Keep On Movin' '' album from last year, has a new record plummeting down the charts; the


G.M. Strike in Michigan Imperils Industry Talks With Union
LEAD: A four-day-old strike at a General Motors Corporation parts plant in Flint, Mich., is affecting other G.M. plants around the country and is influencing bargaining between the Big Three automakers and the United Automobile Workers union.


Red Sox Open 3-Game Lead
LEAD: Marty Barrett hit a tie-breaking two-run double in the ninth inning today that sent the Boston Red Sox past the Seattle Mariners, 7-2.


Cambodia Seeking Direct Talks With the U.S.
LEAD: Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia has expressed hope that the United States will talk directly to his Government on ending the long war in his country.


Topics of The Times;   The Beach as Ashtray
LEAD: Finding a clean patch of sand has become a real challenge on public beaches and playgrounds.
There may be fewer smokers but they seem to leave ever more cigarette butts behind.


Time Stops for Lawyers Awaiting Jogger Verdict
LEAD: Time seems to have stopped for almost everyone involved in the Central Park jogger trial as the jury deciding the fate of three defendants charged with the rape and attempted murder of a jogger deliberated for a fourth day yesterday without reaching a verdict.


Exxon Is Sued On Price Rises
LEAD: The Attorney General of North Carolina filed a lawsuit Friday against the Exxon Corporation, charging the oil company with deceptive trade practices, and a judge issued an injunction to stop the practices from continuing.
Attorney General Lacy


Confrontation in the Gulf;   A Rightist Israeli Legislator Named Ambassador to U.S.
LEAD: Israel's Cabinet today appointed a member of Parliament, Zalman Shoval, to be Ambassador to the United States.


A Youth Tennis Program Is Serving the Underprivileged
LEAD: TENNIS has long been considered an elitist sport in the United States, but recent programs have begun to tap the rich vein of athletic talent in America's poorer big-city neighborhoods.


Americans Turn the Tables And Buy a British Agency
LEAD: During the last decade, acquisitive British advertising agencies snapped up some of Madison Avenue's most famous names - Ogilvy &amp; Mather; Ted Bates; Compton; Backer &amp; Spielvogel and J. Walter Thompson.


Heinz Contract For O'Reilly
LEAD: The H. J. Heinz Company has signed its chief executive, Anthony J. F. O'Reilly, to a five-year contract that includes options to buy four million shares of stock, company officials said Friday.


Only Cypriots Can Settle Cyprus Dispute
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush's Double Gamble
LEAD: If President Bush loses the gamble he took in pledging that Iraq's conquest of Kuwait ''will not stand,'' he might turn out to be a loser in American politics too.


Sports of The Times;   Cookie Lavagetto's Double
LEAD: Cookie Lavagetto, who died at age 77 in his sleep Friday morning at his home in Orinda, Calif., was famous for one thing: He was the Brooklyn Dodger who struck a celebrated pinch-hit in the 1947 World Series.
Thoughts of Lavagetto the ballplayer led to the notion here that great moments in sports don't last as long as they used to.


Europe's Quick Pace May Slow a Bit
LEAD: The higher oil prices that are likely to be the legacy of Iraq's military moves in the Middle East will slow but not stop the buoyant economy of Western Europe, economists say.


Providence Journal;   World War Long Over, But Not The Battles
LEAD: Behind a tiny American flag on his office desk, Cliff Wilson, the state commander of the American Legion, talks of Pentagon cutbacks, glasnost and the current Middle East crisis with cool detachment.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Lifeline Systems Inc., Watertown, Mass., a provider of computerized health-care services, to Cabot Advertising, Boston, with a budget of $1.5 million.


Zerline Goodman Is Wed at Vassar
LEAD: Zerline L. Goodman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Goodman of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael Andrew Rothenberg, a son of Dr.
Eleanore Dubin Rothenberg and Stanley Rothenberg, both of New York.
Rabbi Charles Feinberg performed the ceremony at the Vassar College Chapel.


Who's to Pay Wins In Saratoga Upset
LEAD: Who's to Pay, who just before the race didn't have a rider, collared Steinlen, who nobody thought could lose, to score a two-length upset victory today in the $88,200 Bernard Baruch Handicap at Saratoga Race Track.


Karen Perlmutter Weds Neil Koffler
LEAD: Karen Wendy Perlmutter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome A. Perlmutter of Greensboro, N.C., was married yesterday to Neil Harrison Koffler, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen C. Koffler of Newport Beach, Calif.
Rabbi Harvey Goldman was assisted by Faith Joy Smith, a rabbinical student, in performing the ceremony at Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel in South Orange, N


Running Long on Consistency
LEAD: CAL RIPKEN JR. hasn't missed a day's work in more than eight years, an impressive enough achievement for a bus driver, a college professor or a stockbroker.
It is all the more remarkable in that Ripken is the Baltimore Orioles' shortstop.


In New York's Parks, More Litter and Less Money
LEAD: Newspapers blow across the dusty, threadbare Great Lawn of Central Park.
Abandoned cars block a running path in Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx.
Citywide, trees that were once regularly pruned and meadows that were once regularly sodded now receive infrequent care.


Grady Wins P.G.A. Championship


Peekskill Seeks to Stop New Homeless Shelter
LEAD: Frank Wilson was one of the last speakers a few weeks ago when more than 350 people gathered in a library meeting room to protest the construction of a $3 million shelter for the homeless in this small river city.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A2-11
President Bush ordered U.S. forces to block Iraqi oil exports as well as all imports to that country except some shipments of food.
The blockade would fulfill the President's threat to halt Iraqi commerce.
Page A1
Bush reluctant to call a blockade a blockade


Review/Television;   Recalling Watts Riots And the Fires' Kindling
LEAD: If earnest intentions could do the job, ''Heat Wave,'' tonight's play at 8 on the TNT cable network about the 1965 rioting in the Watts area of Los Angeles, would make for a more exciting two hours.
The writer, Michael Lazarou, is not lacking in sympathy for the young black men who burned and looted through most of that hot August week.


A Beach in Virginia Is Closed After Explosives Are Found
LEAD: A mile of beach has been closed here after 28 explosive shells, some of which may date to the Civil War, were discovered in sand dredged from the Chesapeake Bay.


India Says Troops Kill 24 in Kashmir Raid
LEAD: Government troops reported killing 24 people in a raid on Friday on two villages in the Kashmir valley in search of Muslim separatists who had ambushed an army convoy.


Helen Drees Ruttencutter, Writer, 63
LEAD: Helen Drees Ruttencutter, a musician and a writer for The New Yorker magazine, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan at the age of 63.
Her family said she died of a brain tumor.


Confrontation in the Gulf: Man in the News;   Mediator Turned Risk-Taker; Hosni Mubarak
LEAD: For a man long known for his caution, President Hosni Mubarak has put himself in a hot seat, at the center of a storm he himself warned could be ''horrifying.''


A's Remain Perfect Against the Yanks
LEAD: The games have become so predictable that it isn't so much a question of if the Yankees will lose as it is when.
By the time this afternoon was over, they had lost again to the Oakland Athletics, and they seemed to have no explanation for the way things had gone over the weekend.


Steinbrenner Decision Leaves Room for Doubt
LEAD: To the Editor:


Zunis' Effort to Regain Idols May Alter Views of Indian Art
LEAD: There is a secret shrine on a sage-covered hill in the heart of the Zuni Reservation where Indians exercise a radically new concept of their property rights every time it rains or snows, every time the sun bears down with the heat of the day.


Camacho, Star of Ring and Ballroom
LEAD: In a ballroom of Caesars Tahoe late Saturday night, Hector Camacho came to party.


Blaze Destroys Museum's Fire Dept. Display
LEAD: A Fire Department display room in a landmark building was destroyed in a fire here today believed to have been set, fire officials said.


49ers Are Defeated By Raiders, 23-13
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers didn't exactly sparkle as they started their quest for a third consecutive National Football League title, although for a time they looked ready to pull off a trademark second-half comeback.


New Boom In U.S. Oil Is Doubted
LEAD: Executives of American oil companies say they do not expect the sudden jump in crude oil prices to stimulate exploration and drilling because they have not yet been convinced that the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait will have a long-term effect on prices.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
Retail Sales
July
Wednesday
Industrial Production
July
Capacity Utilization
July
Inventory and Sales
June
Thursday


Japan Beer Sales Surge
LEAD: The Japanese are reacting to one of the hottest summers in years by consuming beer in record amounts.
Beer sales are rising at such a rapid rate that the Kirin Brewery Company, Japan's top brewer, has raised its profit forecast twice since February.
Kirin attributed part of its recent profit growth to strong demand for its new Ichiban Shibori beer.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Many Prominent Americans Support the President's Action in the Gulf . . .Resistance to Blatant Aggression, Defense of Allies and, Above All, Oil
LEAD:
Henry Kissinger
National security adviser to Richard M. Nixon, 1969-75; Secretary of State, 1973-77.
Now chairman of a consulting firm, Kissinger Associates.


Topics of the Times;   Double-Barreled Fashion
LEAD: ''Man is unique among the animals in wearing clothes,'' the fashion historian James Laver wrote once, ''and the question arises as to why he should do so.'' After dismissing modesty and protection against the weather as possible reasons, Mr.
Laver came up with what he described as a ''scientific answer .


Iraqi Invasion Adds To Markets' Problems
LEAD: The world's stock markets have quickly declined since Iraq invaded Kuwait 12 days ago.
But the invasion's dramatic impact merely exaggerated the problems already troubling the world markets.


Americans Focus On Who Will Lead
LEAD: While the United States national soccer team played the consolation match of the Marlboro Cup of New York tournament at Giants Stadium today, some people in the stands were focusing on the question of who will be coaching the team in future competitions, including the 1994 World Cup.


Reviews/Music;   Simply Ignoring Everyone Else's Rules
LEAD: Sonic Youth tears rock apart from the inside out.
All that its listeners can depend on, most of the time, is a basic brute-force drumbeat; above it, Sonic Youth sets free the riotous discord and primal noise that virtually all popular music confines in conventional harmony and ordinary song forms.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a production error, a front-page article on Saturday about the outcome of the trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry of Washington appeared twice in some copies, and a report on the effects of the international embargo of oil from Iraq and Kuwait was omitted from those copies.


A Rallying Hurst Wins the Amateur
LEAD: Pat Hurst of San Leandro, Calif., rallied from three holes down to capture the 90th United States Women's Amateur Championship today in 37 holes over Stephanie Davis of Bainbridge Island, Wash.


Reviews/Music;   Britten's 'Albert Herring' Is Given a Sylvan Setting
LEAD: Everything about Glimmerglass Opera's final production of the season, Britten's ''Albert Herring,'' which opened this evening in the Alice Busch Theater, bespoke painstaking preparation.
In fact, the staging was not entirely new, but an outgrowth of a production mounted last summer by the company's Young American Artists


They Must Not Die for a Lawyer's Mistakes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ape Trainer Wins Suit Against Rights Group
LEAD: A Las Vegas showman was awarded $4.2 million on Saturday in his defamation lawsuit against an animal rights group that made public a videotape of his striking his orangutans.


Ms. Rubin Is Bride Of Paul J. Goldberg
LEAD: Julie K. Rubin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Rubin of Merrick, L.I., was married yesterday to Paul J. Goldberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry J. Goldberg, also of Merrick, at the Lyman Estate in Waltham, Mass.
Rabbi Henry Zoob officiated.
The bride graduated from the University of Massachusetts and received a master's degree in audiology from Purdue University.


U.S. Ends Soviet Curb
LEAD: In a bid to bolster United States-Soviet trade, President Bush today raised a longstanding ceiling on the number of Soviet business people permitted to live and work in the United States.


Any Move Toward a Peaceful Settlement Could Precipitate a Military Revolt at Home
LEAD: As President Saddam Hussein of Iraq confronts the United States and its allies on the Saudi border, he must also watch his back against potential military enemies at home, intelligence analysts say.


As Track Creeps South, Slow-Paced Provence Fights Fast Trains
LEAD: France's growing network of high-speed trains may be the envy of many Europeans, but plans to extend it to the country's southern Provence region are stirring more protests than pride.


Results Plus
LEAD:
BASKETBALL
U.S. Holds Off Argentina
Kenny Anderson scored 32 points and the United States, which squandered most of a 22-point second half lead, held off Argentina, 104-100, last night in the quarterfinal round of the World Basketball Championships in Buenos Aires.
The United States, which went 3-0 in the qualifying round, will face Australia on Tuesday as quarterfinal-round play continues.


Davis Team Selected
LEAD: The team that will represent the United States against Austria in the Davis Cup semifinal round next month in Vienna will be Andre Agassi and Michael Chang in singles, and Rick Leach and Jim Pugh in doubles, the United States Tennis Association said yesterday.


Board Ultimatum Denied by Sears
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company categorically denied a report that its chairman, Edward A. Brennan, had been given an ultimatum by its board of directors last week to shape up the company's sagging retail operations or leave.
Crain's Chicago Business reported today that Mr.
Brennan had been told at a directors meeting last Wednesday that he had six months to achieve marked improvement in retail profits.


Research Probes What the Mind Senses Unaware
LEAD: THE power of subliminal messages is taken as an article of faith by many people.
Critics of advertising often take for granted the power of ''hidden persuaders.'' Many parents stand convinced that messages buried in rock music are poisoning their children's minds.
And for vendors of audio tapes, the power of the imperceptible exhortation to strengthen memory or take off pounds is more than an article of faith - it is a profit center.


Ellis Island Undergoes Architectural Transformation


Costs Rising for Chemical Industry
LEAD: Higher crude oil prices are starting to affect prices in the chemical industry, a leading consumer of petroleum products, executives of chemical companies say.
And because products derived from crude oil are used to make many of the basic materials that go into a host of other products, notably plastics, consumers will soon feel the pinch.


To Our Readers
LEAD: Because of a power failure caused by a fire yesterday at a Consolidated Edison plant in New York, trading was halted around 1:15 P.M. on the American Stock Exchange and the five New York futures exchanges - the New York Mercantile Exchange; the Commodity Exchange; the New York Cotton Exchange; the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange, and the New York Futures Exchange.


Hedley Donovan Is Dead at 76; Retired Chief Editor of Time Inc.
LEAD: Hedley Donovan, a former editor in chief of Time Inc. who is credited with greatly enhancing the journalistic stature of Time magazine, died yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan after a long illness.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan and Sands Point, L.I.


Allied in Move For Southmark
LEAD: Andre Danesh, the president of the Allied Financial Corporation, said today that he was in talks to raise funds to acquire control of the Southmark Corporation, the Dallas-based real estate and financial services concern that emerged on Friday from Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy laws.


2 Japan Banks' Ratings Cut
LEAD: Moody's Investor Service said today that it had downgraded the long-term debt ratings of Japan's Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank and Fuji Bank, two of the world's five largest banking companies.


Resistant Bacteria a Concern in Poor Nations
LEAD: ANTIBIOTIC-resistant bacteria seem to be more prevalent in certain parts of the world, particularly in developing countries, suggesting that such bacteria could become a serious public health threat, according to a new study.


Grant Gets a Raise
LEAD: Horace Grant, a 6-foot-10-inch forward who averaged 13.4 points and 7.9 rebounds as a starter for the Chicago Bulls last season, has signed a $6 million three-year contract extension, The Chicago Tribune reported yesterday.
The agreement would make Grant, 25 years old, the second-highest-paid Bull after Michael Jordan, and one of the highest-paid forwards in the National Basketball Association.


Workers Take Holiday In Midst of a Calamity
LEAD: Men and women, jackets off and ties askew, streamed out of the emergency exit doors of the World Financial Center by the hundreds, and Marjorie Greenberg, a 22-year-old recruiter for American Express, was leading the pack.
She vaulted onto the West Side Highway just after 2:30 and hailed the only visible taxi leaving the downtown maw, looking as elated and thankful as an American serviceman hauling himself onto the last chopper out of the American Embassy compound in


Review/Television;   Maria Shriver Joins Prime-Time Race
LEAD: Tonight, at 10 P.M., NBC brings on the latest entry in the 1990 prime-time network news magazine glamour stakes. ''Cutting Edge With Maria Shriver'' follows close upon NBC's ''Real Life With Jane Pauley'' and CBS's ''Face to Face With Connie Chung,'' which have made fast starts from the post.
If ''Cutting Edge'' does as well in the ratings, Ms.


U.S. MILITARY FORCE POURS IN;   Americans Escape
LEAD: The international embargo on Iraqi trade tightened noticeably today when an Iraqi tanker sailed away from a Red Sea port without taking on crude oil, and two or three other ships, according to the White House, failed to land Iraqi-bound cargoes in the Middle East.


Allied-Signal Product
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency gave permission last week for Allied-Signal Inc. to begin marketing a substitute for chlorofluorocarbons, a chemicial that has been found to cause damage to the earth's ozone layer.
The new substance, called HCFC 141b, can replace chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, in solvents and foam insulation, said William M.


Order for Blockade Largely Isolates U.S. At Security Council
LEAD: The Bush Administration's announcement that American warships are enforcing United Nations trade sanctions against Iraq left the United States largely isolated today at the Security Council, with most of the 15 members saying a new Council decision would be needed before military force could be used.


Poland's Public Schools to Offer Classes in Religion
LEAD: Despite objections from the nation's tiny Protestant minority and qualms among senior Government officials, Poland's public schools will begin voluntary classes in religious education this fall.


Bankruptcy and Success Meet in Catskills Hotels
LEAD: Shaeri Reinsilber left her husband at home in Toronto and drove eight hours with a girlfriend to the Catskills resort region here for one thing and one thing only: the food.


Masaaki Tahara, a Banker, Marries Miss Caspler, a C.P.A., in New Rochelle
LEAD: Denise Grace Caspler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy S. Caspler of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married Sunday at her parents' home to Masaaki Tahara, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Susumu Tahara of Takamatsu, Japan.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated.


Increased Stake In Alexander's
LEAD: Vornado Inc., the New Jersey real estate developer, said yesterday that it intends to acquire at least $15 million worth of the stock of Alexander's Inc. and perhaps as much as 25 percent of the company's common shares outstanding.


Careers;   Executives Cautiously Optimistic
LEAD: A survey on the views of American business leaders was released last week, and the findings indicated a ''guarded optimism'' about the economy.
Because of the Middle East crisis, an update was quickly made to get the executives' reaction.
They supported President Bush's stand.


Safety-Kleen Makes Management Changes
LEAD: The Safety-Kleen Corporation has announced the retirement of its chairman of the board and changes in several top management positions.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
7.93
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.41
7.40
8.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.31
7.29
7.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.54
8.54
8.28
30-YR.


Three New Worlds in the Mideast
LEAD: Words: After all the aggression, alarm, councils of state, hostages and troop movements, the controversy of the instant in the Iraq-Kuwait crisis is merely semantic.
Should President Bush's orders to U.S. forces to halt shipments of Iraqi oil be termed a blockade, a quarantine, an interdiction or a barricade?


Chess
LEAD: On hearing of the Franco-Polish grandmaster Savielly Tartakover's pronouncement, ''Sacrifices only prove that someone has blundered,'' you might be inclined to put it down as just one of the witticisms for which he was always ready to sacrifice the truth.
It's not entirely invalid, although it is an exaggeration to claim that beautiful games must take their start in gross errors.


At Least 500 Americans Manage to Flee Kuwait
LEAD: At least 500 Americans who were trapped in Kuwait by the Iraqi invasion have been able to leave the country and more are expected to depart, the State Department said today.


Shuttle Parachute
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration has begun landing tests of a drag parachute system to be installed in the space shuttles to help slow them down after they touch down.


LARGE DRIFT NETS MOVE TO ATLANTIC
LEAD: Huge, super-efficient drift nets of the kind that ignited a storm of international protest in the Pacific Ocean have been spotted for the first time in the Atlantic near the Caribbean, raising fears that Atlantic marine life could be threatened and that commercial and sport fisheries important to the eastern United States could be devastated.


Liberia Rebel Agrees to Cease-Fire Talks
LEAD: In a move that could signal a break in Liberia's military stalemate, a rebel leader agreed today to hold cease-fire talks with a group of West African leaders.


Simon Grolnick; Psychoanalyst, 60
LEAD: Dr.
Simon Grolnick, a psychoanalyst and a teacher, died on Sunday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset L.I.
He was 60 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I., and East Hampton, L.I.


Trump Is Said to Name First Boston as Adviser
LEAD: Donald J. Trump will use the First Boston Corporation rather than Merrill Lynch &amp; Company to reorganize some of his casino debt, people involved in the negotiations said yesterday.


Besieged Mohawks Face Food Scarcity in Golf Course Dispute
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ethyl Eichelberger, Performer, 45; Creator of a Gallery of Characters
LEAD: Ethyl Eichelberger, a flamboyant presence on the New York theatrical scene for the last 15 years as an actor, performance artist, clown and playwright, died over the weekend at his home on Staten Island.
Black-Eyed Susan, an actress who was a frequent leading lady in his plays, said that he had AIDS and had committed suicide by slashing his wrists.


Sanders Joins Falcons And Is Fined $37,000
LEAD: Deion Sanders showed up at the Atlanta Falcons' training camp in Suwanee, Ga., yesterday minus a $37,000 chunk of his $4.4 million salary and bonuses.
After going through a physical examination in the morning, Sanders suited up and practiced at cornerback for the Falcons in an afternoon scrimmage.


2 Airlines Cut Some Fares
LEAD: Two airlines said yesterday that they had lowered some domestic air fares for a short time.
Other airlines have raised most ticket prices to account for higher fuel prices.


Our Towns;   Parents Work, So Camp Means Catching the 7:37
LEAD: ''Thomas, do you care if your peanut butter sandwiches are squished?'' Nancy Inglis called to her 9-year-old, racing to get him ready for day camp.
The humidity was so bad that the white bread had swollen. ''Oh, well,'' she said, smooshing in two sandwiches.
The stove said 7:07.


Books of The Times;   A Man's Fight for the Rain Forest
LEAD:
The World Is Burning
By Alex Shoumatoff
377 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95
The Burning Season
The Murder of Chico Mendes and the Fight for the Amazon Rain Forest
By Andrew Revkin
317 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.


BUSINESS DIGEST, TUESDAY, AUGUST, 14, 1990
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


Rinfret Proposes Towns Bid For Waste-Site Exemptions
LEAD: Pierre A Rinfret, the Republican gubernatorial nominee, said today that he would solve the perennial problem of finding sites for landfills and garbage incinerators by forcing local governments to bid for the right not to build them.


Chinese Said to Kill 450 Tibetans in 1989
LEAD: A former Chinese journalist says security forces killed more than 450 Tibetans in the capital of Lhasa in 1989, the Observer newspaper has reported.


Joe Morgan Couldn't Play At the Club
LEAD: Rusty Staub and Joe Morgan were teammates and friends with the Houston Astros in the mid-1960's and shared an interest not only in doubles and double plays, but in drivers and divots, too.
So Staub, a member of a nearby country club, had naturally taken Morgan as his guest to play golf at this club a few times.


B. Kliban, 55, a Cartoonist Who Drew Zany Cats
LEAD: B. Kliban, an art-school dropout whose cartoons of hordes of round-eyed, striped cats became a multi-million-dollar craze, died Sunday at the University of California Medical Center in San Francisco, two weeks after undergoing heart surgery.
He was 55 years old and lived in Corte Madera, Calif.


Pakistan Reports Clash With India in Kashmir
LEAD: Indian soldiers tried to capture a mountain outpost, starting a firefight with Pakistani soldiers along the cease-fire line dividing the disputed region of Kashmir, Pakistan said today.


Every 10 Minutes, a Landing By U.S. Planes at Saudi Base
LEAD: Every 10 minutes or so, another plane lands in the Saudi desert with American troops and equipment.


By Design;   Highlights for Tanned Legs
LEAD: Maybe it's just another manifestation of the current casual attitude toward clothing, but bare tanned legs are this summer's in-the-city look.
It's a touch of the country come to town.


Big-Screen Nostalgia With an Outdoor Twist
LEAD: A huge screen in Central Park will mark the setting tonight and tomorrow of ''The Video Drive-In,'' a free event that will hark back, more or less, to the era of drive-in movies, when families and lovers watched the latest Hollywood romance or adventure from the relative privacy of their cars.


Treasury Security Prices Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in a session that effectively ended shortly after 1 P.M. yesterday, after a fire in lower Manhattan led to a widespread loss of electrical power.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
BBS of America, Spring Valley,N.Y., an importer of German road and race wheels, appointed Percy Herrmann vice president of sales and marketing.


'Boot Camps' for Rikers Island
LEAD: With some success, prison systems in New York and a few other states have established ''boot camps'' to ease crowding and provide a more constructive routine for young prisoners.
Allyn Sielaff, New York City's new corrections commissioner, proposes such a system for the city's jails; he makes a good case.


Players Balk at Plan
LEAD: Several N.B.A. players yesterday challenged the league's new pre-pension benefit plan, saying that a lowering of the salary cap as a result of the plan will hurt free agency.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allen Group., Melville, L.I., an automotive products manufacturer, completed two separate acquisitions: the purchase of a 50 percent interest in a new-partnership joint venture with Metropolitan Air Research Testing Authority, Nashville, and the purchase of 80 percent of the stock outstanding of Grayson Electronics Co., Lynchburg, Va.


Labor Pact Is Ratified At U.P.S.
LEAD: A strike against the United Parcel Service of America Inc., the world's largest package shipper, was averted today when drivers and handlers rejected the recommendation of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters' leadership and narrowly ratified a new three-year contract.


Dollar Off Amid Prospects Of Higher Rates Overseas
LEAD: The dollar fell yesterday against primary foreign currencies, which are expected to strengthen as interest rates rise overseas while those in the United States fall as monetary authorities try to avert the threat of a recession.


Guards, Angered by Assault by Inmates, Block Entrance to Rikers
LEAD: Hundreds of correction officers, protesting the assault and robbery of another officer by inmates last week, blocked the entrance to Rikers Island yesterday.


Backup Computer Is Balky On Craft Exploring Venus
LEAD: One of the Magellan spacecraft's backup computers rejected commands when a memory chip failed, but the problem is not expected to hinder the $744 million exploration of Venus, engineers say.


Player Sues N.C.A.A. Over Eligibility Rules
LEAD: College football, already beset by whirlwind changes, is faced this week with a new legal challenge to its authority.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Navy Cuts Seawolf Plan
In a move expected to save $7 billion in military spending through 1994, the Pentagon plans to cut in half the program of building new Seawolf attack submarines and to reduce the purchase of destroyers.
Page A14.
The Growing Gap in Wages
There are several new theories that explain the gap between the incomes of the wealthiest and poorest Americans, which is now the widest since World War II, even after adjusting for inflation.


Rare Owl May Face New Peril
LEAD: IN at least two cases, the rare northern spotted owl has bred with the more common barred owl, but scientists say it is too soon to tell whether the crossbreeds are isolated quirks of nature or the progenitors of a new owl species.


Rig Count Up in Week
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States rose last week for the first time in three weeks, jumping by 26, to a total of 992, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
A year earlier, the count was 858.
Ike Kerridge, a vice president of Baker Hughes, said the increase might be related to the Iraqi oil embargo.


Environmentalism vs. Jobs Troubles Taos
LEAD: In isolated pockets of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, it is possible to gaze for miles and lose track of the century.


89-Yard Run By Hampton Helps Giants Beat Bills
LEAD: When the Giants chose Rodney Hampton in the first round of the National Football League draft last April, some people wondered what they would do with another running back.
They found out tonight when Hampton, on his first carry in a professional game, ran 89 yards for a touchdown.


Antarctica Sheds Ice and Scientists Wonder Why
LEAD: SATELLITE monitoring shows that Antarctica has shed more than 11,000 of its 5 million square miles of ice since the 1970's, and scientists say further study is needed to determine whether the findings indicate that global warming is melting polar ice.


U.S. Aide Visits Syria After Talks in Cairo
LEAD: An Assistant Secretary of State arrived here from Cairo today for his second visit to Syria in two days, a United States Embassy spokesman said.


The Killer Drug We Ignore
LEAD: For years, law enforcement, policy-makers and the media have been preoccupied with the menace of cocaine and crack.
In the meantime - partly as a result of our single-minded focus on cocaine - heroin has quietly and quickly extended its reach in this country.


Market Place;   Some Lessons In Power Outage
LEAD: The fire at a Consolidated Edison plant yesterday showed just how fragile - and resilient -the nation's trading systems are.


Black Group Sets Boycotts
LEAD: The predominantly black Progressive National Baptist Convention ended its annual meeting today by calling on its 1.8 million members to boycott Japanese auto makers on the ground that they discriminate against black Americans.


Piniella's Prediction Proves on the Mark
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds, making good on Manager Lou Piniella's brash victory prediction, pushed their lead in the National League West back to a comfortable six and a half games tonight by rallying from a four-run deficit to beat the San Francisco Giants, 6-5.


Pilot in Mysterious Crash Is Indicted Again
LEAD: A pilot whose plane crashed mysteriously off the Bahamas last year, was among four men charged today in connection with an investments plan prosecutors said was fraudulent.


Winfield Still Feels Connection to Yankees
LEAD: The feud is over now, but it is still not behind Dave Winfield.
Even though he is separated from George Steinbrenner by several months and thousands of miles, Winfield acknowledged today that he remains bound to him, and to the Yankees.


Cheney Orders Navy to Sharply Cut Submarine and Destroyer Programs
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has sharply scaled back the Navy's Seawolf attack submarine program and has trimmed the service's purchase of new destroyers, the Pentagon said today.


'Rogue Computer' Faulted for Bad Parking Tickets
LEAD: A ''rogue computer'' used by New York City's Parking Violations Bureau is responsible for $19 million worth of tickets issued annually to people who do not own cars, people whose cars have been stolen and people who have paid their fines, City Council President Andrew J. Stein charged yesterday.


Gorbachev Restores Rights To Victims of Stalinist Abuse
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today issued a sweeping decree to restore the rights of unrehabilitated victims of Stalinist repression, saying thousands of innocent people still bore a ''stain of injustice.''


Bronx Baby Killed as Father Cleans Gun
LEAD: A 3-week-old Bronx boy was shot to death in his crib Sunday night when a gun his father was cleaning discharged, the police said.


A P.G.A. Marked By Larger Matters
LEAD: The 72d P.G.A.
Championship was an amalgam of social revolution, overly severe course conditions, unexpected fades by top players and just-as-unexpected contenders.


Curtis Mayfield and 6 Others Injured at Brooklyn Concert
LEAD: Curtis Mayfield, the musician, was seriously injured last night when part of the stage collapsed during a windstorm at a free concert in Brooklyn.


Stranded by Invasion


Sun Microsystems Plans Stock Offer
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. said it planned to offer 5.9 million new shares of common stock together with about 1.1 million shares to be offered by individual stockholders.
Of the shares to be sold, 5.6 million will be offered in the United States by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, Salomon Brothers Inc. and Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.


Unequal Pay Widespread in U.S.
LEAD: People who work in the same field and are of similar age and education are finding that their wages, once very close, now extend across a much wider range, new studies of Labor Department data show.


Hard Questions Dog Carolina Unification
LEAD: To the Editor:


Eason Will Start Next Game


Concord Journal;   Saving Thoreau's Pond: Rock Stars (Who Else?)
LEAD: The 20th century has chipped away at an idyllic tract of land that surrounds Walden Pond, where Henry David Thoreau used as a retreat to ponder the natural order.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The foreign power's aim to re-gain control of this Arab land and those who live on it.''
- King Hussein. [A9:5.]


Jay Rubin, 86, President Emeritus Of New York Hotel Union Council
LEAD: Jay Rubin, president emeritus of the New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council, A.F.L.-C.I.O., died on Sunday at his home in Newtown, Conn.
He was 86 years old.


Bridge
LEAD: It often happens that an apparently trivial spot card assumes crucial importance in the late stages of the play.
Keep your eye on the heart six on the diagramed deal, played in the final round of the Regional Swiss Team Championship in Cherry Hill, N.J., in mid-June.


Arafat's Support of Iraq Creates Rift in P.L.O.
LEAD: The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the support given to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq by the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, Yasir Arafat, has created a deep rift within the organization's leadership.


Rabies Vaccine to Be Tested on Virginia Island
LEAD: Eight years after it developed a genetically engineered rabies vaccine, a Philadelphia research institution gained final approval today to conduct the first outdoor field trial of the vaccine in the United States.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


200 Pilots Included In USAir Layoffs
LEAD: USAir Group Inc., the owner of the nation's seventh-largest airline, whose profits have been hurt by industry fare cuts, said it planned to lay off 200 pilots and an unspecified number of other workers.
The company, which has hubs at Pittsburgh, Philadelphia and Charlotte, N.C., said it would announce the layoffs to employees on


Cash Beats Wilander
LEAD: Pat Cash, continuing his long journey back after severing an Achilles' tendon 16 months ago, recovered tonight to beat Mats Wilander, 1-6, 7-5, 6-3, in the opening round of the Volvo International tennis tournament.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-11
The embargo on Iraq tightened noticeably when an Iraqi tanker sailed away from a Red Sea port without taking on any crude oil, and two or three other ships failed to land Iraqi-bound cargoes in the Middle East, the White House said.
Page A1


Liechtenstein Applies to U.N.
LEAD: The tiny principality of Liechtenstein, nestled between Austria and Switzerland, asked to join the United Nations in a letter to Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar circulated today.
Liechtenstein, with a population of about 30,000 and an area of 61 square miles, would become the 160th member of the United Nations.


For South African Squatters, Life Just Gets Harder
LEAD: When the wind blows, as it does in these days of squall and bluster at the Cape of Good Hope, the black plastic roof of Mongezi Sonqwelo's home flaps like a loud and loosened sail so that he has to pause in a winter's tale that has much to do with both the weather and South Africa's future.


Kidnappers in Lebanon Release Swiss Hostage to Syrian Officials
LEAD: Abductors in Lebanon have freed a Swiss hostage, Elio Erriquez, after 10 months of captivity, turning him over to Syrians, who took him to Damascus and released him early today to the Swiss ambassador.


Coslet Criticizes Jets
LEAD: Bruce Coslet, the Jets' head coach, called for improvement by his quarterbacks yesterday and reaffirmed that Tony Eason would be the starter when the team plays its second preseason game, against the Chiefs in Kansas City, Mo., on Saturday night.


Some Financial Exchanges Are Brought to a Halt
LEAD: The fire in Consolidated Edison's electrical substation yesterday brought some important parts of Wall Street's business to a halt, closing several exchanges and slowing trading.


Bush Returning to Washington for Budget Session
LEAD: President Bush is returning to Washington on Tuesday, a day earlier than scheduled, and plans to hold a budget meeting and a news conference where aides said he would prod the Democrats to come to a ''reasonable'' agreement on the budget.


On Horse Racing;   Allies and Foes of Sports Betting
LEAD: Is widespread legal sports betting inevitable or preventable?


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Bank Earnings listing in Business Day on Thursday misidentified a company that had a loss of $2.9 million in the quarter ended June 30.
It was the Homestead Holding Corporation, a Middletown, Pa., savings and loan holding company, not the Homestead Financial Corporation, a savings and loan and real estate development company based in Millbrae, Calif.


Mandela's Cause Isn't Limited to South Africa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about the National Veterans Golden Age Games, on the On Your Own page of SportsMonday, misidentified the man at left.
He was Frank Jones.


Barry Quits Party to Be an Independent
LEAD: In a move that was both technical and political, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. left the Democratic Party today and declared himself an independent, a position that allows him to seek re-election as Mayor or a seat on the District of Columbia City Council.


Public Relations Firm to Present Anti-Abortion Effort to Bishops
LEAD: More than 200 Roman Catholic bishops holding secretive meetings here will get their first glimpse on Tuesday of a new anti-abortion campaign put together by a public relations company.


Japan Trade Surplus Dips
LEAD: Japan's trade surplus shrank 10.3 percent in July from the period a year earlier, largely because of increased imports, the Finance Ministry said last week.


Policies Uncertain, Tokyo Leader Abruptly Puts Off a Mideast Visit
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu on Monday abruptly put off his plans to travel to the Middle East amid indications that his advisers were divided and uncertain about how to promote Japan's interests there.


Shutdown at Ford
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would idle its Ford Thunderbird and Mercury Cougar assembly system at its Lorain, Ohio, assembly plant for one week because of a shortage of interior trim materials.
The shutdown is effective today.
The Thunderbird-Cougar assembly system employs 2,700 hourly employees on two shifts and builds about 5,600 units weekly, Ford said.


Why This Odd Ethnic Scrutiny of Latins?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dow Up 30.20 in Late Rally; Trading Light
LEAD: The stock market recovered from an opening slump to finish sharply higher yesterday, showing resiliency in the face of uncertainty over Middle East developments.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the Florida Democratic primary for governor misstated the home town of Representative Bill Nelson, one of the contenders.
He lives in Melbourne, not Miami.


Expanding Democracy in Georgia
LEAD: In Georgia, a runoff election is required if no candidate receives 50 percent of the vote in a primary.
The Justice Department says that's a form of racial discrimination, not a prudent exercise of democracy.
The department's lawsuit is a new and welcome sign of sensitivity to civil rights by the Bush


No Accord At Bond Corp.
LEAD: Bondholders in the financially troubled Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd. of Australia have failed to agree to the sale of the company's brewing assets, a company director said last week.


The Endowment: A Reflective Defense of It and a Show That Tweaks It;   Arts Adviser Says the Problem Isn't Obscenity: It's Mediocrity
LEAD: Practically ever since the debate on the National Endowment for the Arts began to rage last year, the issue that has divided the agency's detractors and supporters has been whether the endowment has financed pornography and blasphemy or whether it has acted to protect the right of American artists to express themselves freely.


4 Die in Boardinghouse Fire
LEAD: A fire early today in a Dallas boardinghouse killed four residents, and a fifth, Margaret Ann Wright, 46 years old, was charged with arson, the authorities said.
Nine people, some of them clients of the Dallas County Mental Health-Mental Retardation Center, lived at the house, they said, but they could not confirm whether Ms.


GTE Picks President For Its New Group
LEAD: The GTE Corporation has named Terry S. Parker president of its new Telecommunications Products and Services Group.


Breeden Sees Industry Glut
LEAD: The United States securities industry has ''substantial overcapacity'' that is similar to the overcapacity in the banking industry, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission said here today.


Road Still Rough for Black Candidates
LEAD: Just a year after L. Douglas Wilder made history in Virginia by becoming the first black elected Governor of a state, national attention has been focused on the chances of new breakthroughs by black candidates for governor in Georgia and South Carolina and for the Senate in North Carolina.
But when


Review/Fashion;   Borrowing From a Sunbeam, Resort Wear Glows
LEAD: Designers think clearly about the resort season.
Their shows, presented without elaborate fanfare, are concise; the clothes are not obscured by special effects.
So it is easy to catch the message.


Light Into a Black Box
LEAD: FOR most people, a computer - like a VCR, an automatic teller machine, or perhaps even an automobile - is a ''black box.'' You do something to it, it does something in return, and what happens in between, within the box, is a mystery.


Judge Blocks Law on Access To Sex Calls
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday blocked enforcement of a law that would have prevented telephone customers in New York from reaching ''dial a porn'' numbers without first requesting access to the services.


Burning Plants Adding to Nitrogen
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have known for years that nitrogen, the gas that makes up 78 percent of the Earth's atmosphere, is pumped into the air by microbes that convert nitrates in the soil into nitrogen gas.
Now scientists in Germany have suggested that there is another way the gas is released into the atmosphere: through the burning of trees, plants and grass by humans.


Review/Architecture;   Gateway to America Is Once Again Ready To Greet the Masses
LEAD: Ellis Island, the 24-acre pile of landfill in New York Harbor that was the first stop for millions of immigrants hoping to enter the United States between 1892 and 1924, is again poised for the surge of crowds.
This time the visitors will be coming to see a $156 million restoration of the island's ornate Beaux-Arts main building, which is to reopen Sept.


Burden of Breathing
LEAD: Q How much carbon dioxide does the average person exhale into the atmosphere each year?
Could this make a significant contribution to the burden of greenhouse gases?


Jordan Denounces U.S. For 'Explosive' Tactics
LEAD: King Hussein of Jordan, whose position in the gulf crisis has been equivocal, accused the United States in a speech published today of creating an ''explosive situation'' that threatens the entire Middle East.


Chronicle
LEAD: The actress ESTHER ROLLE, known for her 1970's role as an iron-willed matriarch in the television series ''Good Times'' and more recently for her portrayal of the housekeeper in the film ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' was injured in a one-car highway accident on Sunday afternoon in Nevada.
The driver was killed and two other passengers were injured.


Loan Problem At Eurotunnel
LEAD: The English Channel tunnel project suffered a setback today when the British-French consortium building the undersea rail link said it was having difficulty winning support for a new $3.8 billion loan.


Kuwaiti Oil Concern Seeks Saudi Supply
LEAD: Kuwait's London-based overseas marketing and refining company said today that it was negotiating with Saudi Arabia to supply some of the 400,000 barrels of crude oil and refined products that it had received from Kuwait each day before the Iraqi invasion.


Con Ed Fire Knocks Out Power, Disrupting Wall St. and Subways
LEAD: A four-alarm fire in an electrical substation knocked out power to the skyscrapers of lower Manhattan yesterday, disrupting financial markets, darkening trading floors, trapping hundreds of people in elevators and forcing thousands of others to walk down endless shadowy flights of stairs lighted by emergency beacons.


Complicated Surgery Through Tiny Incisions
LEAD: THOUSANDS of surgeons are learning a new technique for removing gallbladders that could greatly simplify the operations now performed on some 500,000 Americans each year.


Mexico Sets Telmex Sale
LEAD: Mexico started the sale today of its giant telephone company, Telefonos de Mexico S.A., whose privatization is a showcase for President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's drive to spin off inefficient state-owned industries.


Unequal Justice
LEAD: An American jury sent a stern message to the Attorney General the other day: The Government of the United States should never stoop to acting like a pimp.


IVAX Chairman Gets Ferro Stake
LEAD: Dr.
Phillip Frost, a physician who is chairman of the IVAX Corporation, a pharmaceutical concern based in Miami, has acquired a 7.7 percent stake in Ferro Corporation.
Mr.
Frost said he received permission in March 1989 from Government antitrust regulators to raise his stake in Ferro, a Cleveland-based chemical concern, to as high as 15 percent.


I.M.F. Position On Brazil Debt
LEAD: The International Monetary Fund is likely to urge Brazil to agree to resume debt payments to its creditor banks before striking a new financing deal with the country, the third world's biggest debtor, international monetary officials said.


Don't Celebrate 1492 - Mourn It
LEAD: Throughout the country, groups are organizing counter-celebrations of the quincentennial of the year 1492.
They are preparing to counteract the official celebrations of the 500th anniversary of Columbus's landing in the Americas.
A New York group, tentatively called Columbus In Context, had its first meeting last month.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Saturday about a dispute between the Federal Government and New York State over an $80 million Westway grant incorrectly characterized a state application to avoid repaying the grant.
The application dealt with potential development between the Hudson River bulkhead and the ends of the river piers, not the area between the bulkhead and the West Side Highway.


Blockade of Iraq Raises Oil Prices
LEAD: Oil prices moved up more than $1 a barrel on world markets yesterday as traders reacted to the American blockade of Iraqi oil and the Saudi decision to turn away an Iraqi tanker that had sought to load at a pipeline terminus.


Tallying the U.S. Forces in the Mideast
LEAD: With the aircraft carrier Saratoga expected to reach the Mediterranean Sea by today, the United States will have about 10,000 ground troops in Saudi Arabia and about 20,000 sailors and airmen on more than 30 ships in the Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf region.


Iraqis Are Reported to Send Home $3 Billion Taken From Kuwaitis
LEAD: Iraq has transferred between $3 billion and $4 billion in gold bullion, foreign currencies and goods seized from Kuwaiti financial and commercial institutions to Baghdad, Arab bankers in London and the Persian Gulf region said today.


Bethlehem Steel Plans Sale of Unit
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, the nation's second-largest steelmaker. said it planned to sell its railroad freight car division as part of an effort to divest itself of assets unrelated to its basic steelmaking operations.


Employer Health Care Gassed by Double Talk
LEAD: To the Editor:


Winfield Shows Old Flair As Angels Beat Yanks
LEAD: Dave Winfield faced the Yankees for the first time since he was traded last May and had a good laugh about it.


Pentagon Faces Daunting Challenge In Rushing Sizable Force to Mideast
LEAD: The deployment of American forces to Saudi Arabia, the largest United States military operation since the Vietnam War, has severely strained the ability of the Pentagon to move thousands of troops and tons of weapons and equipment quickly over great distances.


Mandela's Cause Isn't Limited to South Africa;   Communist Connection
LEAD: To the Editor:


Why This Odd Ethnic Scrutiny of Latins?;   Xuxa, as in Shoeshine
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patterns
LEAD:
Resort Comes Into Its Own


Steinbrenner Son and Yanks: New Doubts Over Succession
LEAD: With George Steinbrenner having to surrender day-to-day control of the Yankees next Monday, there are signs that the succession process is in disarray.
The Yankee owner's 18 limited partners are scrambling for solutions even as they prepare to gather in Cleveland tomorrow to select a new general partner.


2 Giants Battle in Wiring Money
LEAD: The American Express Company, the nation's largest financial-services concern, is aggressively challenging the Western Union Corporation at a business it pioneered and has long dominated: wiring money.


U.S. MILITARY FORCE POURS IN;   U.S. Alliances Recast
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis is recasting the United States' relations with two of its oldest Middle East allies, Israel and Jordan.
Upset by the support


Editorial Notebook;   Children of Privilege, Learning
LEAD: Gillian Williams stands at the front of Room 20 of the San Gabriel Avenue Elementary School.
She directs 30 second-graders making their family trees. ''Who goes with you to Disneyland?
Who goes with you on picnics?'' That her voice lacks authority is understandable; she is an unusual student teacher who only recently took over the class.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the Feast of the Assumption, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City tomorrow.


Jogger Rape Jury Asks for String and Ruler
LEAD: The jury in the Central Park jogger trial, in its fifth day of deliberations, asked for photographs of the victim and the testimony of a police detective who questioned one of the defendants.


Challenge to College Football


TENTATIVE ACCORD SET IN G.M. STRIKE
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers and the General Motors Corporation today reached a tentative agreement that could end a parts plant strike that has forced eight other plants to close or curtail operations, a company spokesman said.


Steinbrenner Drew Up Anti-Vincent Release
LEAD: Lawyers for George Steinbrenner were prepared last week to accuse Commissioner Fay Vincent of severely damaging Steinbrenner's reputation and business by misrepresenting their agreement that will end the owner's management of the Yankees next Monday.


Chip Indicator Continues Slide
LEAD: Chip orders declined in July as the American semiconductor industry's leading indicator continued the downward slide it began in June, a trade group said today.
The Semiconductor Industry


Rafsanjani Stresses Iran's Military Role For Security in Gulf 13&gt;
LEAD: President Hashemi Rafsanjani has declared the readiness of Iran to restore security to the Persian Gulf area and he called for the army to be put in readiness.


Three Mets Ready to Face Hefty Fines
LEAD: The Mets, still waiting for penalties to fall on three of their star players for participation in the free-for-all with the Philadelphia Phillies last week, said yesterday that they expected hefty fines but would appeal any suspensions.


TLC Beatrice Net Up
LEAD: TLC Beatrice International Holdings Inc., a multinational food products company operated by the financier Reginald F. Lewis, reported yesterday that its second-quarter net income doubled, to $17.5 million, from $8.8 million in the corresponding period last year.
The company's revenue increased 26 percent for the quarter, to $403.7 million, from $320.5 million in the period last year.


Workers Strike In North Sea
LEAD: Maintenance workers on Britain's North Sea oil platforms went on a 24-hour strike today, the fourth in a series of protests over union recognition, pay and safety.


Texas Gas Pipeline Sold
LEAD: KCS Group Inc. said today that it had signed a definitive contract to acquire 90 percent of a 150-mile intrastate natural gas pipeline in Texas from the Morgas Company of Conroe, Tex., for $21.5 million.
It said the Moran family, which controls Morgas, would retain a 10 percent interest.
KCS said the 12-inch main line runs from north of Houston to 20 miles northeast of Madisonville, and six lateral lines connect to multiple sources of natural gas supply and market outlets.


Gold Rises Above $400; 5-Month High
LEAD: Prices of precious metals continued to advance yesterday, fueled by the Middle East crisis.
Gold jumped to more than $400 an ounce for the first time in five months.


Above the Clamor of the City, More Clamor
LEAD: Old MacDonald, presumably, had a rooster to wake up to (45 decibels from across the barnyard).
In New York City, he could not hear the crowing for the noise.


Despite Flaw, Hubble Finds New Stars
LEAD: Despite its serious optical flaws, the Hubble Space Telescope has provided scientists with a detailed look into a prolific star-forming area, clearly showing 60 stars in an area once thought to have only 27 stars.


Chronicle
LEAD: PRINCESS ANNE, the daughter of QUEEN ELIZABETH II of Britain, will be 40 years old tomorrow.
The Queen's sister, PRINCESS MARGARET, will turn 60 on Tuesday.
There are no official plans to celebrate either birthday, but The Daily Mail has reported that ''a bash at Balmoral'' - Balmoral Castle in the highlands of Scotland - is planned for Princess Margaret's birthday.


A.T.&amp;T.'s New Card Stirs Strong Response
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that the pace at which it distributed its new A.T.&amp;T.
Universal card, a combination calling card and general purpose credit card, had accelerated sharply this summer.


Business and Health;   Unions Joining Discount Plans
LEAD: While labor unions are still actively campaigning for a greater Government role in health insurance, a growing number of them have agreed to participate in discount health-care plans.
With no immediate prospects for a national system, union officials say the discount plans can help stretch the limited dollars available for wages and other benefits as health costs keep rising.


Review/Theater;   A Couple Bound In Conflict
LEAD: Near the start of the Soviet writer Sofiya Prokofyeva's two-character drama ''Sin Testigos'' (''Without Witnesses'') the wife in a marriage that came apart nine years earlier declares in a soliloquy that the submergence of her personality in her husband's became a kind of death.
Now she feels nothing.


Velischek Traded
LEAD: The New Jersey Devils yesterday completed payment for the acquisition of Peter Stastny, the 33-year-old center, in a trade with the Quebec Nordiques last March 6.
At the time, the Devils sent Craig Wolanin, a defenseman, to Quebec, but promised one more player.
Yesterday, they named Randy Velischek, a 28-year-old defenseman, who played in 62 games last season for the


Soviets Prepare to Evacuate 7,830 Citizens Still in Iraq
LEAD: Baghdad has assured Moscow that Soviet citizens still in Iraq are not directly threatened by the Persian Gulf crisis, but the Kremlin is drawing up plans to evacuate them anyway, the official press agency Tass said today.


A New Interest in Taxing Trades
LEAD: Events in the Middle East have revived concern on Wall Street about the prospect of a securities transfer tax - something the financial community is dead set against.


A 9-Pound Mac Clone
LEAD: APPLE Computer Inc. has given its blessing to a small Colorado company that makes a nine-pound Macintosh-compatible portable.
The rival portable machine, called the Outbound Laptop System, is made by Outbound Systems Inc. of Boulder.
It is smaller, lighter and - if you already own a Macintosh Plus or SE - less expensive than Apple's own Mac Portable.


Soviet Justice Chief in U.S. For Talks on Legal Systems
LEAD: Veniamin Yakovlev, the Soviet Minister of Justice, arrived in Washington today for a week of talks on the legal systems in the Soviet Union and the United States.


Ex-Judge Named to Study Action Under Asbestos Plan
LEAD: A Federal judge in Brooklyn took the first steps yesterday toward carrying out a national plan for resolving asbestos personal injury cases.
Federal District Judge Jack B. Weinstein said that he had appointed Marvin E. Frankel, a former Federal judge, as a special master to conduct hearings on part of the plan.


Chronicle
LEAD: B. D. WONG, the actor who was an initiator of the ''Miss Saigon'' dispute, met yesterday at City Hall with Deputy Mayor BARBARA FIFE and DENNIS DELEON, who heads the Mayor's Commission on Human Rights.


A Profession Divided Is Finding It Hard To Teach Prevention
LEAD: THE ultimate goals of medicine are to prevent illness and to promote public health, and thus many would expect them to be a prime focus of medical education.


The Endowment: A Reflective Defense of It and a Show That Tweaks It;   Sending Helms A Message From Home
LEAD: ''The homosexuals are in a battle against American values,'' the speaker says. ''Their ultimate aim is to have the American people accept the proposition that their perverted 'life style' is as worthy of protection as race, creed and religion.
I do not buy that.
I say to them, 'Bosh and nausea.' ''


Tucurui Journal;   In an Amazon Lake, Underwater Logging Blooms
LEAD: Perched on the gunwale of a skiff here, Juarez Cristiano Gomes chuckled to himself as he watched a trail of small bubbles rising to the surface of Tucurui Lake.


Pakistanis Agree to Join Defense of Saudi Arabia
LEAD: Pakistan agreed today to join an international force deployed to defend Saudi Arabia against Iraq.


Gus Journal;   Nomads in Kenya See the Future. It Is Houses.
LEAD: The new moon was due in several days, a signal on this occasion for the twice-a-year ceremony known as sorio, for sacrifices, marriage and reconciliations.


Man's Life Support Extended
LEAD: A man who drank a cocaine-laced soft drink from Colombia and collapsed in a coma last month showed signs of life today, and doctors postponed shutting off his life-support systems.
The 25-year-old man, Maximo Rene Menendez, was declared brain dead on Monday, and an order was signed by a Dade County judge allowing a hospital to turn off his life-support system.


T/SF Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* T/SF Communications
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
22,563,000
18,343,000
Net inc
85,000
254,000
Share earns
.01
.07
6mo rev
43,115,000
35,639,000
Net loss
436,000
b105,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


General Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Computer Corp.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,104,000
2,869,000
Net inc
b43,000
c356,000
Share earns
.03
-
Yr sales
11,993,000
11,455,000
Net loss
1,735,000
d2,360,000
b-Included gain of $100,000, or 6 cents a share, from settlement of disputes with Revco D.S.


Self-Requiem for the Board of Estimate
LEAD: A dying institution of government will conduct its own last rites in a marathon session to start tomorrow.
In the process, New York City's Board of Estimate can improve - or obstruct - the life of the city it has managed for 92 years.
Dozens of items are on the agenda for its last meeting; four in particular will determine how the board, and its members, are remembered.


Kushner-Locke Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kushner-Locke Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,848,000
1,110,000
Net inc
210,000
41,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
8,825,000
11,242,000
Net inc
704,000
852,000
Share earns
.04
.06


Barry to Seek Council Seat, Not 4th Mayoral Term
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. ended speculation about his political future today, announcing that he would stick by his earlier decision not to run for a fourth term as mayor and would seek a seat on the City Council instead.


Reading Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reading Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,347,000
1,584,000
Net inc
5,920,000
b16,074,000
Share earns
1.19
3.23
Shares outst
4,970,311
4,970,720
6mo rev
8,508,000
2,418,000
Net inc
5,901,000
b17,979,000
Share earns
1.19
3.62
Shares outst
4,970,387
4,970,720


Metallurgical Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metallurgical Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,789,041
837,785
Net loss
39,417
80,481
6mo rev
3,118,048
1,969,411
Net loss
133,245
67,766


Aero Systems Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aero Systems Engineering
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,942,000
6,515,000
Net inc
340,000
187,000
Share earns
.13
.08
6mo rev
13,901,000
10,922,000
Net inc
668,000
b159,000
Share earns
.26
-
b-Net loss


First Executive Earnings Drop
LEAD: The First Executive Corporation, a life insurance company that invested heavily in ''junk bonds,'' said today that its earnings fell 40.2 percent, to $30.5 million, or 10 cents a share, in the quarter that ended June 30.
It had earned $51 million, or 45 cents a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.


Mesa Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mesa Airlines Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,182,464
5,826,363
Net inc
1,014,359
101,546
Share earns
.61
.06
9mo rev
30,066,977
15,662,284
Net inc
1,809,328
323,141
Share earns
1.08
.23


Mr. Rinfret on Garbage
LEAD: Pierre Rinfret, the Republican gubernatorial candidate, believes that one way to give plausibility to his quixotic campaign against Gov.
Mario Cuomo is to offer dramatically unconventional solutions to New York State's problems.
He now proposes to resolve the struggle over landfills and incinerator sites by allowing local communities to bid for the right not to have them.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-20
King Hussein will meet the President in an apparent attempt to mediate the worsening crisis in the Middle East.
The Jordanian leader reportedly has a letter for the President from Saddam Hussein of Iraq, whom he met in Baghdad on Monday.
Page A1


The Hard Lessons In Selling a Cookie
LEAD: THERE was a time, not long ago, when the dark clouds of misfortune settled on a middle-aged woman living in Manhattan.


Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times;   Freezing COLA's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Excerpts of News Conference By Bush on Budget and Gulf
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference at the White House yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:
OPENING STATEMENT


Ragen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ragen Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,580,000
1,853,000
Net loss
b454,000
c717,000
9mo sales
5,259,000
6,105,000
Net loss
b913,000
c1,137,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $94,000 and $168,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Vincent Looking Into a Yankee Official's Conduct on Spira
LEAD: In the aftermath of his investigation of George Steinbrenner, Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, has scheduled a Sept. 6 hearing on the conduct of Leonard Kleinman, the Yankees' executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Tuesday Morning Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tuesday Morning Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,878,589
21,950,171
Net inc
658,330
631,450
Share earns
.17
.16
Shares outst
3,958,127
3,917,127
6mo sales
39,822,830
35,874,376
Net loss
657,485
120,789
Shares outst
3,954,627
3,917,127


General Datacomm Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Datacomm Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
49,659,000
47,206,000
Net inc
b435,000
c2,037,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
15,091,000
14,788,000
9mo rev
149,926,000
151,872,000
Net inc
b1,579,000
c2,840,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
15,015,000
14,699,000


Waban Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waban Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Sales
622,959,000
526,777,000
Net inc
6,825,000
8,799,000
Share earns
.24
.31
Shares outst
28,600,000
28,392,557
6mo sales
1,169,083,000
986,040,000
Net inc
8,240,000
15,308,000
Share earns
.29
.54
Shares outst
28,591,823
28,343,947


AIDS Therapy Experiment Yields Encouraging Results
LEAD: A new AIDS therapy that involves administering a drug, withdrawing some of the patient's blood, shining ultraviolet light on it and returning it to the body has shown promising preliminary results in a study of five patients, researchers say.


Books of The Times;   New Black Detective and a Familiar Navajo One
LEAD:
Devil in a Blue Dress
By Walter Mosley
219 pages. W. W. Norton. $18.95.
Coyote Waits
By Tony Hillerman
292 pages. HarperCollins. $19.95.


Corrections
LEAD: A Sports World Specials item on the former Phillies' broadcaster Byrum Saam in SportsMonday this week misstated the year in which Ted Williams batted .406 for the Boston Red Sox.
It was 1941.


Abatix Environmental Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abatix Environmental Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,580,307
2,028,432
Net inc
82,862
96,780
Share earns
.03
.05
6mo sales
4,638,874
3,728,382
Net inc
94,445
184,870
Share earns
.04
.10
Shares outst
2,295,994
1,842,468


Pakistan's Caretakers Face Mountain of Tasks
LEAD: Prime Minister Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi, who will head a caretaker government until national elections on Oct. 24, has named a Cabinet of experienced administrators, a significant number of whom once belonged to Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party.


Mobile Telecommunications Tech.  Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mobile Telecommunications Tech.  Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
15,339,757
8,290,060
Net loss
5,610,032
2,581,349
6mo rev
29,266,367
15,474,479
Net loss
10,288,309
5,640,762


Market Place;   Judge Upholds Bondholders In Home Shopping Case
LEAD: A Delaware judge ruled yesterday that Home Shopping Network Inc., which made millions of dollars at the expense of its bondholders, did so by cheating those investors.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
Just David's


Altex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altex Resources
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,393,000
3,227,000
Net inc
516,000
833,000
6mo rev
5,513,000
6,094,000
Net inc
1,680,000
1,663,000
Share earns
.12
.12
Results are in Canadian dollars.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   A New Twist for Klein's Obsession
LEAD: Calvin Klein has updated the erotic and often surreal advertising for his Obsession fragrance by using the quirky romantic touch of David Lynch, the creator of the provocative television series ''Twin Peaks.''


Mission Resource Partners L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mission Resource Partners L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,832,908
5,396,042
Net inc
697,285
1,663,321
Share earns
.16
.38
6mo rev
7,802,867
8,820,256
Net inc
1,508,493
2,046,967
Share earns
.35
.47


Penalties Could Have Been Worse
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry, who makes $1.8 million a year, said it was a ''stiff'' fine - all of $1,000.
He also said he wouldn't do it again, unless, of course, he had to.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a chart yesterday on the American forces in the Middle East misidentified the Marine unit involved.
It is the First Marine Expeditionary Force, not the First Marine Division.


Bridge
LEAD: Four decades ago a combative bridge writer named Alphonse Moyse Jr., known as Sonny, used to advocate the advantages of playing in a 4-3 trump fit.
He was thinking of major-suit games, and he would have been intrigued by the diagramed deal, on which North-South played the ''Moysian fit'' in a minor suit, rejecting two plausible seven-card fits in the majors.


Stamford Capital Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stamford Capital Group Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b29,652,000
c2,525,000
Per share
-
.10
Shares outst
18,226,314
18,075,405
6mo net loss
b35,122,000
c3,758,000
Per share
-
.13
Shares outst
18,226,314
18,067,842


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. COORDINATES FLOTILLA IN GULF
LEAD: The United States Navy is coordinating its actions in the Persian Gulf with the French and British Navies and with the Saudi armed forces, the commander of the Joint Task Force for the Middle East said today.


Slight, Speedy Bell Seeking Jets Slot
LEAD: Midway through the seven-week grind of a pro football training camp, the Jets' Grantis Bell can claim two distinctions, one for sure.
At 5 feet 9 inches and 156 pounds, he is the smallest Jet, and he may be the fastest, too.
There have been no competitive tests to prove that.


Mozambique and Rebels Report Progress in Talks
LEAD: The Mozambican Government and rebel leaders ended a second round of talks here today after what they described as a fruitful exchange on ways to end their 13-year war.


Dominion Textile reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Textile
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
377,100,000
397,400,000
Net loss
5,800,000
c25,700,000
Yr sales
1,379,400,000
1,403,100,000
Net inc
11,000,000
bc28,800,000
Share earns
.19
-
b-Net loss
c-Included an extraordinary charge of $38,100,000 for both the quarter and year.


Presidential Realty reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Presidential Realty (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,236,000
2,414,000
Net inc
551,000
1,388,000
Share earns
.17
.46
6mo rev
4,238,000
4,755,000
Net inc
1,141,000
2,677,000
Share earns
.50
.85
Results included gains from sales of properties and investment of $509,000, or 16 cents a share, for the latest 6 months, and $123,000, or 3 cents a share, for the year-ago quarter and 6 months.


ABOUT EDUCATION
LEAD: Last month, a six-member team of American high school students placed third in the 54-nation International Mathematical Olympiad in Beijing.
Only China and the Soviet Union scored ahead of the Americans.


Homecare Management Inc.  reports earnings for Year April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homecare Management Inc.
Year April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,714,633
2,460,448
Net inc
245,472
b148,865
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
13,721,158
13,638,889
b-Net loss


BANKS' PAYMENTS TO INSURE DEPOSITS MAY JUMP BY 30%
LEAD: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation moved today to raise the premiums banks pay for deposit insurance by $1.1 billion, or 30 percent, next year.
The action reflects increased concerns about the safety of the deposit insurance system and about the effects of depressed real estate prices on commercial banks and the overall economy.


Craig Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Craig Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,859,000
b4,819,000
Share earns
.67
1.08
9mo net inc
6,769,000
b7,667,000
Share earns
1.36
1.77
b-Included one-time gain of $2,426,000 on sale of investment property for both the quarter and 9 months.


Layoffs, Shifts Set by U.P.I.
LEAD: United Press International will lay off 31 employees, transfer others and leave some small news bureaus with no staff as part of a series of organizational changes, the news agency said yesterday.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.06
9.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.45
7.31
7.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.34
7.31
7.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.51
8.54
8.16
30-YR.


Once a Hotel Desert, Times Square Blooms
LEAD: Times Square, which has been a near-wasteland for hotels since the Beaux-Arts splendor of the Astor met the wrecker's ball in the 1960's, is now at the center of a virtual tide of new hotels.
Coming in the wake of a wave of high-rise construction on the West Side, two brand-new skyscraper hotels, the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza on Broadway at 49th Street and the Hotel Macklowe on West 44th Street just east of Broadway, have opened in the last few months.


SIS Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SIS Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,337,830
10,681,783
Net loss
481,373
144,600
6mo rev
17,495,686
19,272,952
Net loss
1,414,610
777,419
The company is in Chapter 11 bankruptcy and filed a joint plan of reorganization with the bankruptcy court on Aug.


Anacomp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anacomp Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
164,945,000
158,229,000
Net inc
b5,034,000
c4,473,000
Share earns
.12
.10
9mo rev
473,627,000
476,632,000
Net inc
b15,172,000
c8,922,000
Share earns
.36
.19
b-Included extraordinary credits which are related to gains from tax- loss carryforwards and early extinguishment of debt of $1,934,000, or 5 cents a share, for the quarter and $5,234,000, or 14 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Heist (C.H.) Corp.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heist (C.H.) Corp.(O)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,287,235
14,619,944
Net inc
573,800
587,002
Share earns
.37
.38
6mo sales
65,005,890
53,007,289
Net inc
2,639,351
1,719,031
Share earns
1.70
1.11


Collagen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collagen Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,815,000
11,279,000
Net inc
1,310,000
1,020,000
Share earns
.15
.12
Yr sales
50,959,000
37,680,000
Net inc
4,095,000
b3,071,000
Share earns
.46
.37
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $241,000, or 3 cents a share.


The Loss Of A Hero
LEAD: If you like farce you had to love the outcome of the Government's case against Marion Barry, Washington's most famous film star (a.k.a. ''the Mayor'') and leading contender for the title of Playboy of the Western World.


Bavaro Season Already in Danger
LEAD: Mark Bavaro's season is in danger.
The Giants' All-Pro tight end, recovering from knee surgery, will probably not return to practice at least until next week, which means he will have missed most of the last three weeks.


Find/SVP Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Find/SVP Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,010,000
3,494,000
Net loss
78,000
75,000
6mo rev
7,903,000
6,883,000
Net loss
40,000
b30,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Seeks to Revive Panel That Enforces U.N. Decrees
LEAD: The Bush Administration has proposed reactivating a moribund United Nations military body as a way to promote closer cooperation among the countries with warships in the Persian Gulf enforcing the trade embargo against Iraq.


Tax-Exempt Bonds For Dormitories
LEAD: The New York State Dormitory Authority yesterday offered $229 million worth of tax-exempt bonds through underwriters led by Prudential-Bache Securities.
The bulk of the securities offered in the negotiated sale were three term bonds maturing in 2010, 2018 and 2020.


Alco International Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alco International Group Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
834,192
766,462
Net loss
193,153
107,673
9mo rev
2,632,177
2,167,625
Net loss
600,152
433,068


Petroleum Heat &amp; Power reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petroleum Heat &amp; Power (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
90,954,000
83,104,000
Net loss
15,240,000
9,666,000
6mo rev
321,198,000
287,835,000
Net inc
352,000
4,756,000
Share earns
.02
.30


Four Mets Receive Fines
LEAD: For the Mets, the final fallout from a fight with the Phillies last Thursday night involved a couple of hurt wallets but no damage to their lineup.


Delmed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delmed Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,131,000
6,054,000
Net inc
32,000
b2,419,000
6mo sales
11,817,000
11,796,000
Net inc
140,000
b2,569,000
b-Net loss and included charge of $2,500,000 for the settlement of certain patent infringement disputes with Baxter International Inc.


Oil Executive Named President of Bow Valley
LEAD: Bow Valley Industries on Monday said that Jerry R. Wright would join the Canadian oil and gas company as president and chief operating officer.


Quebecor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quebecor Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
636,400,000
437,471,000
Net inc
10,085,000
b8,668,000
Share earns
.43
.36
6mo rev
1,126,787,000
858,869,000
Net inc
56,471,000
b12,823,000
Share earns
2.40
.54


American Health Svc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Health Svc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,115,115
6,257,455
Net inc
b455,644
417,045
Share earns
.03
.05
6mo rev
15,493,819
11,937,206
Net inc
b771,152
523,711
Share earns
.06
.06
b-Included an extraordinary credit from early extinguishment of long- term debt of $93,450, or 1 cent a share, for both the quarter and 6 months.


Chiron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chiron Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
17,770,000
9,170,000
Net inc
3,448,000
c4,060,000
Share earns
.20
-
6mo rev
31,966,000
16,551,000
Net loss
b1,228,000
8,979,000
b-Included first quarter 1990 charges totaling $9,798,000, primarily associated with the acquisition of Technology, and other operating expense of $1,033,000 as an accrual for costs resulting from postponement of a planned manufacturing facility.


After Fire, a Rebound Of Sorts on Wall St.
LEAD: As Consolidated Edison workers opened a trench from one end of Wall Street to the other yesterday in an effort to restore power to the downtown area, financial houses and exchanges there returned to business with little lasting damage from Monday's fire at an electrical substation.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
For the Children


Early Return for Reeves
LEAD: Less than a week after he suffered chest pains that required nonsurgical treatment to remove coronary-artery blockages, Dan Reeves, coach of the Denver Broncos, was back at his team's training camp in Greeley, Colo., yesterday after receiving a clean bill of health from doctors at Sequoia Hospital in Redwood City, Calif.


Petroleum Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petroleum Development Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,569,600
1,613,700
Net loss
71,800
548,200
6mo rev
7,245,500
4,816,300
Net inc
153,200
b470,800
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Bond Prices in a Slight Advance
LEAD: Bond prices rose slightly and long-term interest rates dipped yesterday, as credit market participants reacted favorably to a more stable oil market, rumors of institutional purchases of long-term securities and hopes that the meeting tomorrow between President Bush and King Hussein of Jordan may help to defuse tensions in the Middle


Turner Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Turner Broadcasting (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
322,800,000
264,500,000
Net loss
b8,300,000
c5,500,000
6mo rev
613,600,000
496,500,000
Net loss
b4,000,000
c5,100,000
b-Included a tax credit of $2,400,000, or 2 cents a share, and $6,300,000, or 4 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Scintrex Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scintrex Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,538,000
2,539,000
Net loss
329,000
499,000
6mo rev
6,431,000
5,117,000
Net loss
656,000
936,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Kuhlman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kuhlman Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
31,962,000
32,923,000
Net inc
b6,008,000
c1,661,000
Share earns
1.07
.29
6mo sales
59,448,000
62,418,000
Net inc
b6,973,000
c3,493,000
Share earns
1.24
.61
b-After income from discontinued operations of $4,455,000, or 79 cents a share, for the quarter and $4,195,000, or 75 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Ex-K.G.B. Official Is Trying to Sue Soviet Leaders
LEAD: A former K.G.B. counterintelligence chief who has been criticizing the agency publicly in recent weeks is setting his sights on other targets, among them President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Izvestia reported today.


VISX Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VISX Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,710,000
-
Net loss
497,947
305,642
Shares outst
3,373,594
2,267,766
6mo rev
2,060,000
-
Net loss
1,232,780
602,407
Shares outst
3,373,594
2,051,057
The company is a development stage company and had no revenue for the 1989 periods.


A Setback For Trump
LEAD: Appellate judges today rejected Donald J. Trump's request to keep a seal on documents that form the underpinning for his financial restructuring, state regulators said.


What Is Truly Indian?
LEAD: To The Living Section:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A great-grandson of the founder of the Mongolian Republic has made a novel proposal about what to do with a large bronze statue of Joseph Stalin that was toppled earlier this year and is lying on the grounds of the state library in the capital, Ulan Bator.


Ex-County Commissioner Claims Victory in Primary in Colorado
LEAD: Josie Heath claimed victory today in her bid for the United States Senate nomination in the Colorado Democratic primary.


Volunteer Capital reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Volunteer Capital (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
10,095,000
17,213,000
Net inc
b695,000
d13,033,000
Share earns
.17
-
6mo rev
18,692,000
41,160,000
Net inc
c1,044,000
d15,346,000
Share earns
.26
-
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $266,000, or 6 cents a share, which included gains of $208,000 from tax- loss carryforwards and $58,000 from early retirement of debentures.


GR Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GR Foods Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
83,138,000
50,662,000
Net inc
432,000
1,049,000
Share earns
.07
.29
Shares outst
6,465,000
3,605,000
6mo sales
173,908,000
108,313,000
Net inc
1,728,000
1,998,000
Share earns
.27
.56
Shares outst
6,467,000
3,560,000


3 Retailers Report Nets
LEAD: Second-quarter profits at the J. C. Penney Company were down 15 percent, the May Department Stores Company said net income was unchanged, but The Limited Inc. reported a 24 percent gain today.


EQK Green Acres LP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EQK Green Acres LP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,000,000
1,030,000
Share earns
.10
.10
6mo net inc
2,150,000
2,110,000
Share earns
.21
.21


Confrontation in the Gulf;   12 Iraqi Soldiers Reported To Defect to Saudi Arabia
LEAD: At least 12 Iraqi soldiers defected to Saudi Arabia in tanks that they drove across the border from Kuwait, diplomats said today.


Japanese Bankruptcies
LEAD: The number of bankruptcies in Japan fell 12.5 percent in July from a year earlier, the 67th consecutive month of year-on-year declines, the Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research Company said today.
The number of bankruptcies declined 6.6 percent in July from June.
Bankruptcies with debt of less than 10 million yen ($67,000) are not included in the statistics.


Organogenesis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Organogenesis Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
926,375
887,497
Net loss
1,398,104
997,231
Shares outst
7,032,111
6,394,041
6mo rev
1,843,147
1,772,506
Net loss
2,815,944
1,679,019
Shares outst
6,854,526
6,393,931


Science Management reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Science Management (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
15,871,000
20,439,000
Net loss
b569,000
c380,000
6mo sales
32,075,000
39,531,000
Net loss
b1,364,000
c473,000
b-Included a tax credit of $23,000, or 1 cent a share.


Kiddie Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kiddie Products Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,222,018
8,173,453
Net inc
464,963
371,618
Share earns
1.24
.99
6mo sales
17,724,745
15,373,544
Net inc
815,394
604,525
Share earns
2.18
1.61


Reports Conflict on a Liberian Rebel Leader's Fate
LEAD: The Liberian rebel group led by Charles Taylor said today that its forces had killed a rival rebel leader, Prince Johnson, in an ambush.
But Mr.
Johnson was later reported to have appeared at a news conference.


To Eat a Church Supper Is to Want to Cry 'Amen'
LEAD: Last week, Edna Lewis and her sister Jen Ellis drove the gentle thread of asphalt that weaves through the cornfields and pastures of rural central Virginia toward the grocery.
The white-haired women puttered past the brick house where their grandmother had served as a slave, past the meadow where their childhood home once stood and where their brother Lue Stanley Lewis still keeps 18 head of cattle and a pair of pigs.


Augustus D. Clark, 90, A Retired Navy Officer
LEAD: Augustus Dayton Clark, a retired Navy captain who played a significant role in the invasion of Normandy during World War II, died on Sunday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 90 years old and lived in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


Spire Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spire Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,726,000
5,128,000
Net inc
b12,800
130,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo sales
9,563,000
9,180,000
Net inc
b168,000
189,000
Share earns
.05
.05
b-Included pretax charge of $40,000 related to restructuring of an employee benefit plan and a staff reduction.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Mubarak's Stand Against Iraq Wins Praise From His People
LEAD: Seyyed Abdel Rizzak stirred fresh mint leaves into his small glass of steaming tea this afternoon as he said, ''If Hosni Mubarak was not popular among the Egyptians for all these years, now he is a hundred percent, a thousand percent popular among all the sects, left and right.''


Honco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Honco Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
181,000
55,000
Share earns
.07
.02
6mo sales
5,084,000
4,115,000
Net inc
31,000
b324,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss
Results are in Canadian funds.


Dollar In Plunge Vs. Mark
LEAD: The dollar fell yesterday to its lowest level against the West German mark in that currency's 42-year history, breaking through a significant barrier on a decline that economists said should bring it even lower against the mark and other currencies before the end of the year.


An Iranian Director Finds His Way Past A Double Censorship
LEAD: ''Hamoun'' is not a typical Iranian film.


Zambian Leader Warns Democracy Backers
LEAD: President Kenneth D. Kaunda of Zambia, under growing pressure from advocates of democratic change, mounted a campaign today against the revival of a multiparty system in his country.


Diagnostek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostek Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
45,090,000
22,032,000
Net inc
2,058,000
1,403,000
Share earns
.11
.08


Ecogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ecogen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
587,000
1,103,000
Net loss
1,460,000
2,255,000
Shares outst
7,504,000
6,681,000
6mo rev
1,056,000
1,785,000
Net loss
3,341,000
4,087,000
Shares outst
7,166,000
6,681,000


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the Feast of the Assumption, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City today.


Miltope Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miltope Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
28,563,000
24,465,000
Net inc
840,000
1,172,000
Share earns
.14
.20
6mo sales
52,721,000
42,115,000
Net inc
1,178,000
1,262,000
Share earns
.20
.22


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Reporters Finding Access Difficult to Foes in Gulf
LEAD: Ted Koppel, the anchor of the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' yesterday became the first American journalist allowed into Iraq since the invasion of Kuwait, but most other news organizations continued to be frustrated in their attempts to enter either Iraq or Saudi Arabia to report on the crisis in the Persian


Yankees' Maas Living a Dream Day by Day
LEAD: Kevin Maas sat at his locker, rubbed his hands over his face and tried to wipe away his weariness.
There were so many friends calling, so many family members visiting, so many interviews waiting that Maas had begun to look like a candidate on the campaign trail.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Smokers spend more money.


Tenneco Contract
LEAD: The Navy said the Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company, a division of Tenneco Inc., had been awarded a contract worth $1.1 billion for work on overhauling the Navy aircraft carrier Enterprise.
The work will be performed at Newport News, Va., and is expected to be completed in May 1994, the Navy said.


Wykagyl Seeks Black Members
LEAD: Just two weeks after the Shoal Creek Country Club in Alabama granted its first black membership, a club in Westchester County has begun a drive to enroll its first black members.


Barnwell Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnwell Industries Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,060,000
5,840,000
Net inc
1,100,000
b2,330,000
Share earns
.75
1.65
9mo rev
29,360,000
12,150,000
Net inc
6,480,000
b3,260,000
Share earns
4.42
2.32


Why Couples Choose To Have Fewer Kids
LEAD: To the Editor:


Congress Acts to Admit More Skilled Immigrants
LEAD: In a step long favored by free-market economists, Congress is moving to admit more skilled immigrants - scientists, engineers, medical technicians - to compensate for expected labor shortages in the 1990's.


Henley in a Deal To Sell Itel Shares
LEAD: Henley Group Inc. said it had reached a pact for the Itel Corporation to buy for cash or be obligated to underwrite 18.7 million Itel shares now held by Henley in a series of deals with a total value of about $375 million.
Itel will buy within 30 days about 4.68 million of the shares at $18 each and another 4.68 million shares before the end of 1990 at $19.50 a share.


National Media Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Media Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
52,637,300
17,357,000
Net inc
3,076,400
476,500
Share earns
.27
.04
Revenue represented net revenue.


About New York;   For Caring Chefs, Crowning Glory Is the Headgear
LEAD: New York, as a city, wears many hats, but none are in better taste than the toque, the high, white cylinder of headgear to be found in the best, if not the most expensive, kitchens in Manhattan and surrounding arrondissements.
Unlike firefighters, police officers, baseball players, postal workers, waiters and bus drivers who work in full view of audiences, chefs are a backstage lot, only recently accustomed to coming out for a bow as the brandy serves as a coda for their caloric symphonies.


Barrett Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barrett Resources Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,880,000
1,547,000
Net inc
313,000
b317,000
Share earns
.03
.05
Shares outst
9,134,304
6,120,562
9mo rev
6,093,000
5,069,000
Net inc
936,000
b987,000
Share earns
.13
.16
Shares outst
7,217,133
6,120,562


BGS Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BGS Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,304,000
4,638,000
Net inc
1,161,000
810,000
Share earns
.37
.26
6mo rev
10,574,000
9,017,000
Net inc
2,315,000
1,485,000
Share earns
.74
.26


Longs Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Longs Drug Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to July 26
1990
1989
Sales
558,687,000
503,365,000
Net inc
15,660,000
15,248,000
Share earns
.77
.74
6mo sales
1,096,113,000
996,180,000
Net inc
30,461,000
29,680,000
Share earns
1.50
1.45


Rocky Mountain Beverage Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain Beverage Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
275,961
194,918
Net loss
142,690
67,557
Shares outst
7,965,173
5,380,356


May Department Stores Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* May Department Stores Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Revenue
2,213,000,000
2,042,000,000
Net inc
78,000,000
b78,000,000
Share earns
.58
.55
Shares outst
133,700,000
140,100,000
6mo rev
4,410,000,000
4,088,000,000
Net inc
158,000,000
b141,000,000
Share earns
1.16
1.00
Shares outst
133,400,000
140,200,000


Bank in Brooklyn Sets Fall Opening
LEAD: The Community Capital Bank, Brooklyn, said yesterday that it had met its goal of raising $6 million of shareholder capital, and it planned to open for business in November.
The bank, which attracted about a third of its shareholder funds from 41 religious organizations and another third from institutions like the American Express Company and J.


Tele-Communications
LEAD: Tele-Communications Inc., the cable TV and theater company, said yesterday that its loss narrowed in the second quarter to $44 million, compared with a deficit of $64 million a year earlier.
Revenue for the quarter rose 22.6 percent, to $890 million, from $726 million a year earlier.
The loss was attributed to interest expenses resulting from a variety of deals, including the purchase of the TCI/Cooke Systems, and a 42.5 percent indirect interest in SCI Holdings Inc.


Zygo Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zygo Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,775,000
6,174,000
Net inc
469,000
147,000
Share earns
.19
.06
Shares outst
2,505,000
2,486,000
Yr sales
26,461,000
23,843,000
Net inc
935,000
b450,000
Share earns
.37
-
Shares outst
2,520,000
2,461,000


A 'Homeless Co-op Board' As Tough as Park Avenue
LEAD: Ivan Vargas and his wife, Iveliz Ruiz, sat nervously before the six women who would decide if they would get into one of five newly renovated city-owned buildings in the South Bronx.
The couple met the first requirement: They were homeless.
Now, the committee had some questions.


Most Airlines Match Cuts, Delay Rise
LEAD: Several large airlines yesterday postponed for one week a 5.3 percent fuel-related fare increase that was to take effect today, instead matching new, lower fares offered by Eastern Airlines and Trans World Airlines.


Social Security Surplus Won't Spare Taxpayers;   Hearings Scheduled
LEAD: To the Editor:


Protein Databases Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Protein Databases Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
581,774
179,451
Net loss
107,265
336,600
6mo rev
1,040,385
369,076
Net loss
274,181
698,198
The company said revenue included Original Equipment Manufacturers equipment costs of $263,367 and $438,068 in the second quarter and 6 months ended June 30, 1990, respectively, compared with $79,645 and $147,131 of such sales in the second quarter and first 6 months of 1989, respectively.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR THE INTERNATIONAL SEABED AUTHORITY AND FOR THE INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE LAW OF THE SEA - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Toronto Sun Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Toronto Sun Publishing
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,700,000
5,600,000
Share earns
.07
.25
6mo rev
161,800,000
148,700,000
Net inc
3,400,000
8,800,000
Share earns
.15
.39
Results for latest 6 months were lowered by 7 cents a share as a result of the company's decision to discontinue accruing interest income on a $50 million (U.S.) subordinated note receivable due from the purchaser of the Houston Post Co.


BMA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BMA Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
29,843,000
26,041,000
Net inc
b11,290,000
c25,660,000
Share earns
1.18
2.65
6mo rev
55,316,000
48,003,000
Net inc
b21,208,000
c26,819,000
Share earns
2.19
2.77
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $8,036,000, or 84 cents a share, for the quarter and $16,997,000, or $1.75 a share, for the 6 months.


Zymos Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zymos Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,871,000
8,522,000
Net inc
52,000
b324,000
6mo rev
24,074,000
15,270,000
Net inc
281,000
b1,136,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


AFN Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AFN Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,036,741
906,124
Net inc
67,465
b379,955
b-Net loss


Surrogate Mother Sues for Baby's Custody
LEAD: A surrogate mother carrying a couple's baby is suing for custody of the child in a case that could redefine parenthood.


Live Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Live Entertainment (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
144,540,000
82,211,000
Net inc
2,088,000
1,525,000
Share earns
.17
.13
Shares outst
12,237,000
11,860,000
6mo sales
292,794,000
156,830,000
Net inc
3,907,000
3,087,000
Share earns
.32
.25
Shares outst
12,104,000
10,953,000


A Bomb Kills 4 in New Delhi On Eve of Independence Day
LEAD: A bomb killed at least four people in New Delhi on the eve of India's independence day celebrations, news agencies reported today.


Rhone-Poulenc Rorer reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rhone-Poulenc Rorer (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
696,640,000
277,032,000
Net loss
b178,106,000
c12,402,000
Share earns
-
.39
Shares outst
57,968,000
31,929,000
6mo sales
976,563,000
518,201,000
Net loss
b185,794,000
c22,173,000
Share earns
-
.70
Shares outst
47,060,000
31,880,000


Whitman Calls Off Sale of Hussmann
LEAD: The Whitman Corporation said it had discontinued negotiations for the sale of its Hussmann Corporation subsidiary and would pull the refrigeration equipment unit off the sale block.
Whitman said that, after several weeks of negotiations, it had concluded that the proceeds from the best offer for Hussmann would not justify the sale.


Marsh Jeanneret, 73, A Canadian Publisher
LEAD: Marsh Jeanneret, a leading Canadian book publisher, died Friday at his home in King City, Ontario.
He was 73 years old.


Eastern Can Trim Pilots' Pay
LEAD: In a ruling that gives Eastern Airlines some financial relief, a Federal Bankruptcy Court said yesterday that the beleaguered carrier could impose temporary wage and benefits cuts on pilots.
At the same time, the airline reported a $35.6 million loss for the second quarter, an improvement from the period a year earlier.


GV Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GV Medical Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
771,083
1,256,133
Net loss
1,585,928
721,299
6mo rev
1,370,732
2,430,542
Net loss
3,034,762
1,437,636


New Jersey Warns of Ban On Insurer
LEAD: State officials told the ITT Hartford Insurance Group today that if one of its subsidiaries wants to cancel its automobile insurance policies in New Jersey, the giant insurer will be barred from doing any business in the state.


Tiffany &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tiffany &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
107,274,000
85,914,000
Net inc
7,098,000
5,588,000
Share earns
.45
.36
6mo sales
200,501,000
159,163,000
Net inc
12,542,000
9,821,000
Share earns
.80
.63


Maxim Integrated Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxim Integrated Products (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,129,000
11,681,000
Net inc
2,160,000
1,521,000
Share earns
.16
.12
Shares outst
13,381,000
12,666,000
Yr sales
55,960,000
42,063,000
Net inc
7,603,000
5,458,000
Share earns
.58
.44
Shares outst
13,030,000
12,485,000


Royce Labs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royce Labs
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
363,074
228,985
Net loss
b62,548
672,403
Shares outst
7,388,115
6,210,523
6mo sales
760,123
618,288
Net loss
b126,387
1,247,972
Shares outst
7,309,189
6,231,190
b-Included extraordinary gain of $79,818 and $85,485 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, from settlement of indebtedness.


International Remote Imaging Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Remote Imaging Systems Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,143,793
854,071
Net loss
85,945
745,963
6mo rev
2,222,618
1,889,134
Net loss
144,348
1,143,561


Philadelphia Justice System Overwhelmed
LEAD: Violent criminals have so overloaded jails, courts and the police here that city officials say they are routinely setting free thousands of other criminals who repeatedly burglarize houses, snatch purses, steal cars and sell drugs.


Inflation Rise Abroad
LEAD: The International Labor Organization, a United Nations agency, issued a report today showing steadily rising inflation in many nations in the first few months of 1990.
Britain's inflation rate rose to 9.4 percent from 7.7 percent in the comparable period in 1989.


Controller Warns on Philadelphia Funds
LEAD: The city's chief accounting officer said Monday that in nine months Philadelphia might not have enough money to pay its bills, despite plans to borrow heavily this summer.


Matthews &amp; Wright Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matthews &amp; Wright Group Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
698,721
290,111
Net loss
14,946
524,729
6mo rev
1,012,632
683,312
Net loss
334,012
952,493


Gold Prices Decline Slightly As Investors Take Profits
LEAD: Gold futures prices fell slightly yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York, after profit taking erased gains that had brought the market to its highest level in nearly six months.


Lendl Beaten in Upset, Losing to Washington
LEAD: After beating Patrick McEnroe in the first round of the Volvo International tennis tournament on Monday, Malivai Washington of Glen Cove, L.I. - ranked No. 103 in the world - said he would take the court tonight against Ivan Lendl trying ''to imagine he's just another tennis player.''


Charles M. Warren, 77, Created TV Westerns
LEAD: Charles M. Warren, a television and film writer who brought such popular Western successes as ''Gunsmoke'' and ''Rawhide'' to the television screen, died Saturday at Humana Hospital in West Hills, Calif.
He was 77 years old and lived in Agoura Hills, Calif.


A Livery-Cab Driver Is Slain in Manhattan
LEAD: A 38-year-old livery-cab driver was found shot to death last night in upper Manhattan, the police said.
He was the 23d cabdriver slain in New York City this year.


English Going to Dallas
LEAD: The Dallas Mavericks said yesterday that they would announce today the signing of Alex English, the eighth-leading scorer in National Basketball Association history.
English, a forward, is expected to fill the gap left by the loss of Sam Perkins, who signed as a free agent with the Los Angeles Lakers.


Trusting a Chef
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Jogger Jury Still Deliberating
LEAD: The jury in the Central Park jogger trial deliberated yesterday for the sixth day in State Supreme Court in Manhattan without reaching a verdict.
Justice Thomas B. Galligan granted jury requests to review videotaped statements by two of the three youths charged with rape and attempted murder.


American Bankers Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bankers Insurance Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b8,785,000
5,313,000
Share earns
.60
.37
6mo net inc
b12,641,000
12,082,000
Share earns
.87
.84
b-Included a $7.5 million pre-tax gain on the sale of a building and a $1.5 million pre-tax gain on the acquisition of debentures for both the quarter and 6 months.


Equitec Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equitec Financial Group (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,370,000
c3,349,000
6mo net loss
b8,808,000
c4,589,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $1,073,000.
c-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $2,000,000 for both the quarter and 6 months.


Energynorth Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energynorth Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
15,743,000
13,984,000
Net loss
647,000
725,000
9mo rev
71,651,000
65,825,000
Net inc
6,080,000
5,917,000
Share earns
2.36
2.43


TJX Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TJX Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Sales
572,480,000
500,267,000
Net inc
14,431,000
b14,081,000
Share earns
.21
.23
6mo sales
1,086,237,000
966,639,000
Net inc
29,003,000
b39,086,000
Share earns
.42
.65
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $1,942,000, or 3 cents a share, and $7,074,000, or 11 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Crest Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crest Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
25,468,396
20,498,115
Net inc
850,247
1,356,452
Share earns
.42
-
Crest Industries completed its initial public offering in July 1990 so year-ago share data is not available.


Prepaid Legal Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prepaid Legal Services (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,500,000
8,900,000
Net loss
174,000
422,000
6mo rev
13,200,000
18,000,000
Net loss
700,000
605,000


Baruch-Foster Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baruch-Foster Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,668,781
2,300,944
Net loss
114,467
357,167
6mo rev
3,817,357
4,597,081
Net inc
129,880
b219,144
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Chipwich Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chipwich Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,347,602
12,702,213
Net inc
b341,586
c335,123
Share earns
.03
.03
6mo rev
22,980,736
20,323,548
Net inc
b469,974
c386,168
Share earns
.04
.04
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $111,500, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $155,000, or 2 cents a share, for the 6 months.


PanCanadian Petroleum Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PanCanadian Petroleum Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
168,800,000
144,200,000
Net inc
13,700,000
35,900,000
Share earns
.11
.29
6mo rev
395,400,000
389,200,000
Net inc
58,000,000
73,100,000
Share earns
.46
.59


Women as Presidents: Shalala Takes Charge At U. of Wisconsin . . .
LEAD: Experts say the single greatest management challenge a university president can face is a medical school.
It introduces a range of obligations and problems that go far beyond those posed by the basic educational mix of students and teachers.


Iran Offers To Sell More Oil to Japan
LEAD: Iran has offered to increase its exports of crude oil to Japan to cover the loss of supplies from Iraq and Kuwait, a Government official said today.


Charter One Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter One Financial (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,932,000
4,154,000
Share earns
.69
.62
Shares outst
7,102,428
6,058,800
6mo net inc
8,516,000
8,398,000
Share earns
1.19
1.21
Shares outst
7,127,153
6,024,188


Soviet Zone Strives for Sovereignty and Diamonds
LEAD: In the fractured debate over how much control the Soviet Union's constituent parts can claim over their natural resources, diamonds are becoming a true test of sovereignty.


85 More Sri Lanka Villagers Hacked to Death
LEAD: About 85 Tamil villagers were hacked to death in Sri Lanka today, apparently in retaliation for the killings of hundreds of Muslims, residents said.


AT&amp;E Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AT&amp;E Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
495,000
1,131,000
Net loss
9,540,000
5,047,000
6mo rev
1,038,000
1,814,000
Net loss
16,238,000
9,261,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A Georgia O'Keeffe painting has been formally declared lost by the Art Institute of Chicago, 20 years after a search for the misplaced painting began.
JAMES WOODS, director of the museum, said on Monday that its staff had hoped that the work, ''East River from the Shelton,'' would turn up.
But a recent inventory of 1,500 pieces in the museum's department of 20th-century paintings and sculpture made it clear the painting was nowhere to be found.


J.C. Penney Co. reports earnings for 13wks July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* J.C. Penney Co. (NYSE)
13wks July 28
1990
1989
Revenue
3,834,000,000
3,669,000,000
Net inc
83,000,000
98,000,000
Share earns
.63
.74
Shares outst
118,300,000
121,500,000
26wk rev
7,635,000,000
7,244,000,000
Net inc
237,000,000
226,000,000
Share earns
1.84
1.71
Shares outst
119,600,000
122,200,000


Sonesta International Hotels Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonesta International Hotels Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
17,628,000
15,707,000
Net inc
579,000
284,000
Share earns
.20
.10
Shares outst
2,924,000
2,926,000
6mo rev
32,358,000
27,969,000
Net loss
358,000
1,207,000
Shares outst
2,926,000
2,933,000


Columbia S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia S&amp;L
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
136,518,000
b6,384,000
Share earns
-
.16
Shares outst
20,128,313
42,611,135
6mo net loss
429,867,000
b14,297,000
Share earns
-
.36
Shares outst
20,097,998
42,747,592


Big Oil's Sneak Attack on Public Lands
LEAD: A long-cherished goal of the oil industry and its friends in Congress has been to open protected Federal lands for oil and gas development.
For decades, they have failed, but now they're trying again -this time under the cover of the Persian Gulf crisis.


Slugger Polonia Outdoes Yankees
LEAD: The night before, it was Dave Winfield who had a hand in beating the Yankees.
Tonight, Luis Polonia took his turn.


Corcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corcom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,651,000
8,794,000
Net loss
529,000
477,000
6mo sales
15,281,000
17,441,000
Net loss
1,030,000
197,000


Polish Tools Exhibited
LEAD: Looking to the United States market as an opportunity, Polish makers of hand tools are first-time exhibitors this week at the National Hardware Show in Chicago's McCormick Place.
The wares of 10 Polish manufacturers, displayed on a card table, ranged from garden rakes and pruning shears to pliers, screwdrivers and clamps.


New U.S. Operations Chief For Waterford Wedgwood
LEAD: Waterford Wedgwood P.L.C., the British-Irish maker of crystal glassware and china dinnerware, on Wednesday named Christopher J. McGillivary as chief executive for its operations in the United States, where the company has much of its sales.


Sidney Lightstone, Advertising Executive, 94
LEAD: Sidney Lightstone, an advertising executive, died last Wednesday at his home in Flushing, Queens.
He was 94 years old.
He died of cancer, his son John said.
Mr.
Lightstone began in advertising in Detroit with the J. L. Hudson Co.
He became sales promotion manager for Gimbel Brothers in Philadelphia and headed his own business in Manhattan and in


Handy &amp; Harman reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Handy &amp; Harman (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
148,661,000
151,948,000
Net inc
2,494,000
2,478,000
Share earns
.18
.18
Shares outst
13,970,000
13,941,000
6mo sales
289,313,000
313,305,000
Net inc
4,983,000
5,402,000
Share earns
.36
.39
Shares outst
13,964,000
13,935,000


Groupe CGI Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Groupe CGI Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,800,000
13,200,000
Net inc
125,000
542,000
Share earns
.02
.09
9mo rev
43,500,000
42,500,000
Net loss
b580,000
c1,698,000
Share earns
-
.27
b-After an extraordinary loss of $895,000.


Tandy Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandy Brands Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,594,000
18,752,000
Net inc
b768,000
c1,434,000
Share earns
.12
.28
Shares outst
6,292,000
5,101,000
Yr sales
111,743,000
82,939,000
Net inc
b9,855,000
c8,092,000
Share earns
1.76
1.83
Shares outst
5,600,000
4,418,000


Former Nemesis Gets Trump Financial Post
LEAD: The Trump Organization announced yesterday that an executive who once masterminded a deal that thwarted a Trump takeover attempt had agreed to join the real estate and casino company as chief financial officer.


Addington Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Addington Resources Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
70,317,749
50,601,397
Net inc
1,442,514
396,939
Share earns
.10
.03
6mo sales
134,986,892
99,795,300
Net inc
14,298,291
2,194,053
Share earns
.94
.19
Shares outst
15,165,678
11,710,000


With Shuffled Lineup, Mets, Win and Lose
LEAD: The day's experiment had gone up in smoke.
The evening's artless triumph had been followed by the late night's crushing loss.
First place in the National League East had been yielded and second place once more occupied.


Arizona Land Income Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arizona Land Income Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
497,000
1,015,000
Net inc
363,000
755,000
Share earns
.13
.27
6mo rev
1,211,000
1,983,000
Net inc
842,000
1,559,000
Share earns
.30
.56


9 Killed Near Johannesburg
LEAD: Nine people were killed and 35 wounded when squatters attacked a hostel for migrant workers in Thokoza township west of Johannesburg, the police said today.
Witnesses said the attack on Monday was apparently to avenge the death of a squatter over the weekend. ''We ran helter-skelter and those in their rooms had to jump through windows,'' a hostel resident, Mpumuzi Tshabalala, told the South African Press Association.


Federko Retires
LEAD: Bernie Federko, the 16th-highest scorer in National Hockey League history with 1,130 points over 14 seasons with St.
Louis and Detroit, has announced his retirement.
The 34-year-old center, who was a free agent, made the announcement yesterday in Detroit, where last season he was the Red Wings' third-leading scorer with 57 points.


R.P. Scherer reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* R.P. Scherer
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
82,132,000
80,095,000
Net loss
1,943,000
b8,701,000
Shares outst
2,042,891
10,100,830
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $618,000, or 6 cents a share.
Results for year-ago quarter included a restructuring charge of $5.4 million and $9.6 million of non-operating expenses for investment banking, legal, stock option cancellation and other acquisition-related costs.


Economic Scene;   What Price Cleaner Air?
LEAD: Like purer hearts or thinner thighs, cleaner air is an unalloyed virtue.
But like other virtues, cleaner air can only be attained through sacrifice.
And according to Paul R. Portney, an environmental economist at Resources for the Future in Washington, Americans may be on the verge of giving up too much for too little: They are not likely to get their money's worth from the sweeping amendments to the Clean Air Act now being cobbled together by


Jean Philippe Fragrances reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jean Philippe Fragrances (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,444,199
946,903
Net inc
62,410
29,483
Share earns
.02
.01
6mo sales
2,654,340
1,898,424
Net inc
151,785
96,930
Share earns
.05
.03
Results restated to reflect a 1-for-2.5 reverse stock split effective Aug.


Aequitron Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aequitron Medical Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,883,300
6,246,600
Net inc
386,600
295,700
Share earns
.08
.06


Bay Meadows-Calif Jockey reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bay Meadows-Calif Jockey (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,051,000
2,483,000
Net loss
1,187,000
1,304,000
6mo rev
13,428,000
11,254,000
Net loss
437,000
b1,148,000
b-Included a loss from an accounting adjustment of $367,000.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: DEAR Diary:


Loss Posted At Turner Broadcasting
LEAD: Turner Broadcasting System Inc. said today that it lost $44 million on the Goodwill Games, which caused the company to post a second-quarter loss of $8.3 million.


Suspect Arrested in Rabbi's Slaying
LEAD: A 35-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested on Monday and charged with the slaying of a leader of the Satmar Hasidim in February in the Williamsburg section of the borough, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said yesterday.


Marietta Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marietta Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,893,378
13,896,267
Net inc
1,173,849
893,937
Share earns
.31
.36
Shares outst
3,737,915
2,510,604
9mo sales
45,433,736
29,514,738
Net inc
3,138,281
2,042,204
Share earns
.90
.92
Shares outst
3,501,248
2,222,185


Confrontation in the Gulf;   BUSH THREATENS A BLOCKADE OF JORDAN PORT AIDING IRAQ; KING COMES TO U.S. FOR TALKS
LEAD: As truckloads of cargo rolled from the Jordanian port of Aqaba toward Baghdad today, King Hussein of Jordan arrived in Washington for a meeting with President Bush in an apparent attempt to mediate the worsening crisis in the Middle East.


Vishay Intertechnology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vishay Intertechnology (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
113,517,000
106,160,000
Net inc
6,563,000
4,002,000
Share earns
.50
.32
Shares outst
14,677,000
12,383,000
6mo sales
229,382,000
212,170,000
Net inc
12,884,000
8,232,000
Share earns
.99
.66
Shares outst
14,672,000
12,433,000


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Basketball
U.S. Team Closes In on Semifinal
The United States overcame a 13-point deficit with seven minutes to play and beat Australia by 79-78 yesterday at the World Championships at Buenos Aires.
The victory virtually assured the United States of a semifinal berth.
The team would advance to Friday's semifinals if Puerto Rico beat Argentina later last night, or if the Americans beat Puerto Rico today in the last quarterfinal game.


Tokyo's Nikkei Index Up 1,439.59, or 5.4%
LEAD: The Tokyo stock market soared today, with the 225-share Nikkei index climbing 1,439.59 points, or 5.4 percent, to close at 28,112.12.


Phoenix Resources Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phoenix Resources Cos.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,874,000
9,243,000
Net loss
248,000
1,561,000
6mo rev
9,465,000
14,800,000
Net inc
911,000
b3,340,000
b-Net loss
Results are pro forma.
Per share information is not available due to company's reorganization effective in April.


Coeur D'Alene Mine Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coeur D'Alene Mine Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,107,000
18,251,000
Net inc
707,000
2,543,000
Share earns
.07
.25
Shares outst
9,987,204
11,856,504
6mo rev
27,470,000
32,306,000
Net inc
3,149,000
3,171,000
Share earns
.32
.32


Syncor International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syncor International Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
35,800,000
31,000,000
Net inc
b765,000
c107,000
Share earns
.07
.01
Yr sales
129,800,000
113,900,000
Net inc
b3,596,000
c433,000
Share earns
.35
.04
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $384,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary credit of $334,000, or 3 cents a share, for the year.


Willamette Issue Of 10-Year Notes
LEAD: Willamette Industries has offered $150 million worth of 10-year notes through an underwriting syndicate led by Salomon Brothers.


Holnam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Holnam Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
283,112,000
290,294,000
Net loss
2,274,000
b10,067,000
Share earns
-
.10
Shares outst
112,487,000
98,103,000
6mo rev
456,577,000
447,754,000
Net loss
24,318,000
6,109,000
Shares outst
107,242,000
98,103,000


Nowhere Vacations: Beyond TV and Fax
LEAD: AH, to get away from it all: the faxes, the phones, the FedExes, the Filofaxes, the people.
You remember what vacations used to be, before advanced technology made it easier to reach out and touch someone, wherever they may be.
When the average workweek was 40 hours or less and employers wouldn't dream of interrupting your personal or private time, let alone a vacation, unless it were an emergency.


TPI Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TPI Enterprises Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
98,696,000
90,535,000
Net loss
1,064,000
bc2,188,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo rev
205,028,000
170,855,000
Net loss
4,117,000
b242,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $4,128,000, or 18 cents a share, and $4,326,000, or 19 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively; quarter income from discontinued operations included a gain of $4,157,000 from the disposal of operations.


Petrol Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petrol Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
330,991
421,336
Net loss
115,810
b67,482
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
713,422
783,330
Net loss
55,828
b78,679
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income
Revenue represents gross revenue.


Rejecting Claims, Judge Awards Gold Treasure to Its Discoverers
LEAD: A Federal district judge today awarded about three tons of gold, worth perhaps as much as $1 billion, to the salvage group that discovered the sunken treasure off South Carolina three years ago.


Condor Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Condor Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
390,557
356,089
Share earns
.18
.17
6mo net inc
710,576
b551,863
Share earns
.33
.37
b-Pro forma net income represents net income adjusted to include a pro forma provision for income taxes during periods in which the company was an S Corporation and did not provide for income taxes.


Walter J. Lopp 2d, 51, Banker And Corporate Finance Innovator
LEAD: Walter James Lopp 2d, an investment banker and an innovator in corporate financing, died on Friday at his vacation home in Auribeau, France.
Mr.
Lopp, who also lived in Manhattan, was 51 years old.


Dickerson Is Unlikely For the Colts' Opener
LEAD: Dr.
Tom Parr, an orthopedic surgeon treating Eric Dickerson, said yesterday that the star running back of the Indianapolis Colts would probably miss his team's regular-season opener at Buffalo on Sept. 9, but should be ready to play by the end of September.
Parr predicted that Dickerson's injured left hamstring would be almost fully recovered when he returns to the


U.S. Home Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Home Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
135,325,000
164,895,000
Net loss
b15,720,000
c406,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
44,256,899
41,841,549
6mo rev
288,256,000
318,664,000
Net loss
b15,594,000
c827,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
44,144,567
41,480,448


A Sculptor Whose Imagery Is Encyclopedic
LEAD: Ask the sculptor Alice Aycock where she gets the ideas for her -well, visual fictions, and you're off on a dizzying tour of the cultural universe.


Bing King Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bing King Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,833,000
8,823,000
Net inc
406,000
282,000
Share earns
.13
.09
6mo sales
19,438,000
17,096,000
Net inc
756,000
560,000
Share earns
.25
.18


EATING WELL
LEAD: YOU already know you aren't supposed to exceed more than 30 percent of your daily caloric intake of fat.
That's what health professionals keep saying.
The only complication is figuring out just what that means in terms of real food.


Westbridge Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westbridge Capital Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,283,000
13,234,000
Net inc
173,000
128,000
Per share
.04
.03
Shares outst
4,176,000
4,148,000
6mo rev
28,265,000
26,837,000
Net inc
283,000
210,000
Per share
.07
.05
Shares outst
4,210,000
4,148,000


Metro Cable Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Cable Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
26,313
32,349
Net inc
8,000
b73,967
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
2,227,332
2,530,411
b-Included a gain of $73,265 from the sale of securities.


Nature's Bounty reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nature's Bounty
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
17,241,701
16,956,693
Net inc
253,151
b208,769
Share earns
.27
-
Shares outst
927,356
982,773
9mo sales
53,679,931
44,720,352
Net inc
727,596
c98,819
Share earns
.77
.10
Shares outst
940,093
982,968


Social Security Surplus Won't Spare Taxpayers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tucson Defines Its Own Cuisine


All American Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* All American Semiconductor
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
10,000,913
8,864,786
Net inc
5,471
2,444
6mo sales
20,317,893
18,292,836
Net loss
31,628
b178,527
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


Peace Effort Seen Stalling Oil Price Rise
LEAD: A rally in oil prices stalled yesterday amid speculation that the crisis prompted by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait could reach a peaceful conclusion.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Aug. 10
Aug. 3
Aug. 11
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.3
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
2.9
3.0
Gasoline stocks
212.4
218.5
222.9
Distillate stocks
119.3
119.2
114.5
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.6
6.4
Product imports, daily
1.9
2.7
2.4
Crude stocks
375.9
379.7
330.7
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
94.3
94.6
89.2


Sales of U.S. Vehicles Down in Early August
LEAD: Sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks fell 18.8 percent in early August and analysts attributed the decline to the weakness in the United States economy and unusually strong sales a year earlier.


Dyansen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dyansen Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
14,426,000
10,910,000
Net inc
1,212,000
400,000
Share earns
.21
.07
6mo sales
23,611,000
19,920,000
Net inc
1,250,000
650,000
Share earns
.22
.12


Rates Increase At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates rose modestly yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.
Rates had previously declined for four consecutive weeks.


Parametric Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parametric Technology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,740,000
2,996,000
Net inc
1,503,000
b719,000
Share earns
.17
.10
Shares outst
8,986,000
7,355,000
6mo rev
17,512,000
7,008,000
Net inc
3,850,000
b1,322,000
Share earns
.45
.18
Shares outst
8,534,000
7,299,000


Khmer Rouge Was Not a U.S. Creation
LEAD: To the Editor:


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Gamma International Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gamma International Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,642,730
3,503,030
Net loss
b118,487
999,269
Shares outst
1,158,482
1,154,454
6mo sales
7,174,097
4,801,315
Net loss
b156,034
2,324,863
Shares outst
1,156,468
1,154,454


Embassy Gets 5 More Cubans
LEAD: Five Cubans mysteriously slipped through a heavy police guard early today into the grounds of the Belgian Ambassador's residence in Havana in an apparent attempt to join four other Cubans who had sought refuge inside the building, a Belgian Embassy spokesman said.


Cineplex Odeon reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cineplex Odeon (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
150,528,000
137,036,000
Net loss
38,438,000
c38,742,000
6mo rev
290,245,000
265,542,000
Net loss
b50,396,000
c28,027,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $20,177,000, or 42 cents a share, which is comprised of $1,064,000 of income from operations of Film House and $19,113,000 gain on the sale of Film House.


Southland Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southland Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,154,409,000
2,161,785,000
Net loss
58,052,000
c67,012,000
Shares outst
204,964,000
205,042,000
6mo rev
4,092,454,000
4,062,124,000
Net loss
b127,493,000
c236,437,000
Shares outst
205,003,000
205,042,000


Cuomo Asserts Federal Courts Shift Obligation
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo told the country's leading state court judges today that the Federal courts had increasingly ceded the task of protecting basic liberties to the state courts and in the process had abandoned their obligation to address a number of national problems.


Two Days of Jail Guards Pitted Against Everyone
LEAD: The day began with tense and tired correction officers complaining of long hours.
It ended with some of them bruised and bloodied in a melee with inmates, but saying the slowdown they had staged was worth the price.


Medcross Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medcross Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
978,531
1,049,596
Net inc
14,393
b92,745
6mo rev
1,891,721
2,213,229
Net loss
13,510
77,473
b-Net loss


Ambase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ambase Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
770,000,000
911,000,000
Net loss
106,000,000
b30,000,000
Share earns
-
.90
6mo rev
1,547,000,000
1,759,000,000
Net loss
148,000,000
b56,000,000
Share earns
-
1.65


P&amp;F Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* P&amp;F Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,686,366
16,887,449
Net inc
153,863
445,287
Share earns
.02
.13
Shares outst
2,432,884
2,574,844
6mo rev
22,984,862
30,906,300
Net inc
189,022
621,196
Share earns
-
.16
Shares outst
2,470,379
2,472,483


With Hope and a Leash, Dogs Answer a Cattle Call
LEAD: They showed up yesterday morning at Roseland: wire-haired terriers, Yorkies, mutts, more than 100 of them, all with their owners and all vying for that once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a chance to make their Broadway bowwow.


Traders Seek Case Dismissal
LEAD: Lawyers for two traders indicted in the Chicago futures investigation want the charges dismissed because they contend that the former United States Attorney, Anton Valukas, mishandled the grand jury involved with the case.
The two lawyers, Harvey


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Remains at a Loss Trying to Predict Saddam Hussein's Next Move
LEAD: Nearly two weeks after the Iraqi Army seized the desert sheikdom of Kuwait, the United States has little sense of what Saddam Hussein will do next.


Transition at the Top For Goldman, Sachs
LEAD: John L. Weinberg, who has led Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company through one of the greatest and most profitable expansions in the firm's 121-year history, announced yesterday that he would retire in November as senior partner and chairman.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CURTIS MAYFIELD, a rhythm-and-blues musician who performed with the Impressions before going out on his own, was listed in critical but stable condition at Kings County hospital in Brooklyn yesterday after being hurt in an accident at an outdoor concert Monday evening.


Consulier Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consulier Engineering
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
325,592
139,871
Net inc
180,294
b693,944
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
452,941
160,496
Net loss
572,955
1,191,942
b-Net loss
The company attributed losses in the 1989 periods to its automobile business, which was sold on March 31, 1990.


A Car Bombing in Peru Damages Fujimori's Presidential Residence
LEAD: A car bomb exploded next to the government palace as Peru's new President, Alberto Fujimori, was meeting with advisers, injuring four passersby, the police said today.


American Physicians Service Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Physicians Service Group Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,355,000
3,811,000
Net inc
69,000
393,000
Share earns
.01
.08
6mo rev
6,115,000
7,279,000
Net loss
165,000
b810,000
Share earns
-
.16
Shares outst
4,857,000
5,168,000


Henley Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Henley Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
488,000,000
360,000,000
Net loss
49,000,000
b18,000,000
6mo rev
964,000,000
629,000,000
Net loss
104,000,000
b50,000,000
Shares outst
19,700,000
19,900,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $10 million, or 50 cents a share, for the quarter and $12 million, or 60 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Nord Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nord Resources Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
25,416,000
20,125,000
Net inc
663,000
2,305,000
Share earns
.04
.15
6mo rev
47,071,000
45,746,000
Net inc
1,437,000
6,509,000
Share earns
.09
.43


Federal Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
549,974,000
604,666,000
Net inc
2,226,000
10,214,000
Share earns
.02
.36
6mo rev
1,047,622,000
1,113,578,000
Net inc
b1,173,000
b19,068,000
Share earns
-
.67


47 Are Injured as Inmates Rebel Just as Impasse Ends at Rikers I.
LEAD: At least thirty-five inmates and 12 correction officers were injured last night when prisoners shut down most of a Rikers Island jail for two hours.


Two Pirates Protest
LEAD: R. J. Reynolds and Barry Bonds were both fined $1,500 for missing a weekend charity auction sponsored by the Pittsburgh Pirates, but they will appeal the sanction.
The team said it had fined the two Pirate players because the team had voted to make the function mandatory.
Fans at the auction paid an admission fee plus an additional charge depending on the number of autographs they obtained.


Raycomm Transworld IndusFtries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raycomm Transworld IndusFtries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,964,000
12,701,000
Net inc
275,000
158,000
Share earns
.03
.02


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Pack Lotion in Old Kit Bag
LEAD: The local K Mart whipped up a custom-made special over the weekend when the Army called with an order for special supplies to equip soldiers heading to the Middle East from nearby Fort Stewart.


Resort Income Investors reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Resort Income Investors (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,292,314
2,245,068
Per share
.31
.54
6mo net inc
2,587,248
3,727,276
Per share
.62
.90


Review/Music;   A Concert Opens in the Park, And Then Bows to the Rain
LEAD: Despite thunderstorm warnings, the New York Philharmonic made a valiant attempt to deliver on its promise of a free concert on the Great Lawn of Central Park on Monday evening.
In a rising wind and under gray clouds that flickered almost continuously with lightning, the Soviet conductor Valery Gergiev led the Philharmonic in Berlioz's ''Roman Carnival'' Overture (Op.


A Window to Souter's Way of Life
LEAD: The Senate Judiciary Committee today made public a questionnaire completed by Judge David H. Souter, President Bush's nominee to the Supreme Court.


People
LEAD: *
Robert M. Austin 2d, an account supervisor, has been given the additional title of vice president at the Martin Agency, Richmond.


Use the United United Nations
LEAD: The first sour note has sounded in President Bush's exemplary management of the Persian Gulf crisis.
He is faulted for unilaterally ordering naval interdiction of Iraqi ports without waiting for United Nations support.
Though Mr.
Bush acted legally, the criticism is valid.
He can best respond by working with the Security Council to create a joint U.N.


Marina L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marina L.P.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
669,000
639,000
Net inc
291,000
252,000
Share earns
.43
.37
6mo rev
881,000
1,490,000
Net inc
222,000
851,000
Share earns
.33
1.26
The year-ago 6 months' results included gain of $620,000 from the sale of 21 acres in the first quarter of 1989.


Pirates Sweep Braves As Smith Wins Debut
LEAD: Jeff King belted a home run and drove in four runs and Zane Smith won his Pittsburgh debut tonight, leading the Pirates to a 6-4 victory over the Atlanta Braves and a sweep of their doubleheader.


Canadians Clash With Police Near a Mohawk Reservation
LEAD: Canadian police officers firing tear gas and wielding night sticks battled rock-throwing demonstrators late Monday in a second straight day of violent protests against the monthlong blockade of a Montreal bridge by Mohawk Indians.


Sharing Jewish Culture at a Polish Camp
LEAD: WITH her long, wavy dark hair, olive skin and startling black eyes, Magdalena Leciejewska has always been self-conscious in this country of mostly pale blond Slavs.


Angelica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Angelica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Revenue
98,546,000
89,341,000
Net inc
5,235,000
4,455,000
Share earns
.56
.48
6mo rev
200,105,000
179,712,000
Net inc
11,052,000
9,269,000
Share earns
1.18
1.00


Iverson Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iverson Technology Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,620,700
12,750,100
Net inc
87,600
210,000
Share earns
.02
.06
6mo rev
20,244,800
23,991,300
Net loss
922,900
b302,800
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
3,880,000
3,875,000


BUSINESS DIGEST: WEDNESDAY, AUGUST, 15, 1990
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation moved to raise the premiums that banks pay for deposit insurance by $1.1 billion, or 30 percent, next year. [Page A1.]
Sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks fell 18.8 percent in early August. [D2.]  Chrysler began production of its redesigned mini-van.


Limited Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Limited Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Sales
1,154,562,000
990,284,000
Net inc
79,025,000
63,781,000
Share earns
.22
.18
6mo sales
2,261,907,000
1,954,901,000
Net inc
141,340,000
108,970,000
Share earns
.39
.30


Intercargo Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intercargo Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,005,000
5,971,000
Net inc
619,000
534,000
Share earns
.27
.24
6mo rev
12,322,000
11,700,000
Net inc
1,249,000
b1,093,000
Share earns
.54
.48
b-After income of $91,000, or 4 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Corrections
LEAD: A short article in Business Day on Monday by The Associated Press misstated the compensation of Anthony J. F. O'Reilly, chairman and chief executive of the H. J. Heinz Company.
Last year, Mr.
O'Reilly earned $708,117 in cash compensation and $2.6 million in bonuses.


Spear Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spear Financial Services
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,321,346
5,515,171
Net inc
b491,591
c17,505
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
11,685,638
10,105,356
Net inc
b484,251
d43,569
Share earns
.06
.01
b-Included utilization of net operating loss carryforward of $173,925, or 2 cents a share.


Campbell Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Campbell Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,592,000
12,192,000
Net inc
1,189,000
1,322,000
Share earns
.02
.02
6mo rev
25,007,000
23,981,000
Net inc
1,990,000
1,988,000
Share earns
.03
.03
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Circuit Research reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circuit Research
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
808,723
671,618
Net inc
145,562
110,663
Share earns
.03
.02
6mo rev
1,351,646
1,083,465
Net inc
169,002
56,113
Share earns
.03
.01


Comcast Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comcast Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
163,655,000
134,962,000
Net loss
41,796,000
30,589,000
Shares outst
112,872,000
104,232,000
6mo rev
319,000,000
263,677,000
Net loss
87,737,000
71,749,000
Shares outst
112,841,000
102,389,000


To Our Readers
LEAD: Because a service that provides The Associated Press with market data remained without power yesterday after a Monday fire at a Consolidated Edison plant in lower Manhattan, the commodity futures tables today contain only settlement prices and net changes, plus volume and open-interest figures where available.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Goods Reach Iraq Through Jordanian 'Back Door'
LEAD: A line of battered frighters unloaded and picked up cargo today at this Jordanian port, which serves as an outlet to the sea for Iraq.


First Brands Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Brands Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
247,985,000
273,269,000
Net inc
b4,350,000
c863,000
Share earns
.20
.04
Yr sales
1,086,591,000
1,207,090,000
Net inc
b49,606,000
c60,968,000
Share earns
2.36
3.03


New Phone Devices Found Unreliable in Power Failures
LEAD: The latest telephone equipment has a lot of advantages, but reliability during power failures is not among them.


Met Opera Cancels Werner Herzog Staging
LEAD: The Metropolitan Opera and the West German film director Werner Herzog, who was scheduled to make his American opera debut with a new production of Mozart's ''Zauberflote'' on Jan. 10, have agreed to part company - apparently over technical difficulties in realizing Mr.
Herzog's artistic intentions.


WestAir Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WestAir Holdings (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
66,493,000
46,724,000
Net inc
1,422,000
1,459,000
Share earns
.22
.20
Shares outst
6,603,000
7,321,000
6mo rev
126,489,000
87,621,000
Net inc
1,589,000
1,797,000
Share earns
.24
.25
Shares outst
6,589,000
7,320,000


Margaret B. Mark, 86, Ex-Girl Scout Official
LEAD: Margaret B. Mark, a leader in the Girl Scouts of America and in social work organizations, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 86 years old.


New Fiber-Optic Cable Will Expand Calls Abroad, and Defy Sharks
LEAD: Like Brobdingnagian spools of thread, three giant steel cones in the hold of an unusual ship here are wrapped with up to 3,000 miles of cable no thicker than a garden hose.
The cable, composed of six hair-thin strands of glass covered by steel and plastic, can carry 40,000 telephone calls across the ocean floor at a time.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about American policy toward Iraq misstated the year in which the United States removed Iraq from a list of nations that sponsor terrorism.
Iraq was taken off the list in 1982, not 1983.


Much Ado About Pepper
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Total Assets Protection reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Assets Protection (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,518,608
2,088,370
Net loss
77,663
1,749,929
Shares outst
4,159,507
4,147,907
6mo rev
11,125,835
4,702,701
Net loss
69,879
2,915,298
Shares outst
4,153,707
4,147,240


10 Die as Kashmir Militants Fight Indian Security Forces
LEAD: Ten people were killed in separatist attacks on Indian security forces today as major Kashmiri towns marked Pakistan's Independence Day under curfew, police officials said.


Argentine President Takes Peronist Party's Helm
LEAD: President Carlos Saul Menem has increased his domination of the Argentine political scene by taking over formal leadership of the Peronist party, formerly in the hands of his main rival in the organization, Antonio Cafiero.


Omni Films International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Omni Films International
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,032,240
498,408
Net inc
280,819
b150,033
Share earns
.13
-
9mo rev
7,288,063
2,092,241
Net inc
1,097,670
b149,451
Share earns
.49
-
Shares outst
2,243,322
2,143,597


On the Trail of the Tortilla: All Tracks Lead to Tucson
LEAD: THIS beautiful, manageable city, with its crisp, dry, hot climate, desert landscape and pink adobe houses, calls itself the Mexican-food capital of the world - outside of Mexico, one assumes.
The most authentic local cuisine is found in South Tucson, a city built in the 18th century, distinct from but surrounded by Tucson.


Corrections
LEAD: A map of the Middle East that appeared Monday and Tuesday incorrectly located the United States aircraft carrier group headed by the Saratoga.
The group arrived in the Mediterranean Sea only yesterday.


Emergency Generator Fails at Hospital
LEAD: As lower Manhattan began returning to normal after Monday's blackout, the emergency generator feeding power to New York Infirmary-Beekman Downtown Hospital shut down yesterday afternoon, plunging the hospital into total darkness and paralyzing its life-support systems for an hour.


Turn Back the Invasion of the Advertisers
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Avis Inc., Garden City, L.I., named Robert D. Cardillo vice president of sales and marketing.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. May Call Up Some Reservists To Ease the Strain on the Military
LEAD: The Bush Administration is considering the partial mobilization of reserve forces to help deter an attack on Saudi Arabia by Iraq, Pentagon officials said today.


Barbs Don't Faze Commissioner
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent said yesterday that he was not considering further sanctions against George Steinbrenner despite a sudden verbal onslaught from lawyers and associates of the Yankees' principal owner. ''It's a lot of cymbals clanging in the night signifying nothing,'' Vincent said.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   At Border Kibbutz, Tension and Fear
LEAD: The gentle hills a mile or so away create a dramatic backdrop for this riverfront kibbutz just below the Sea of Galilee.


Asa S. Knowles, 81, Ex-President Of Northeastern University, Dies
LEAD: Asa S. Knowles, president of Northeastern University from 1959 to 1975, died Saturday at his home in Boston at the age of 81.


Book Notes
LEAD:
Nicaraguan Author


Syntech International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syntech International (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,022,000
2,136,000
Net loss
1,658,000
2,549,000
Shares outst
5,841,000
5,820,000
9mo rev
12,396,000
7,928,000
Net loss
5,652,000
6,531,000
Shares outst
5,839,000
5,814,000


PC Quote Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PC Quote Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,505,242
2,185,652
Net loss
459,154
166,569
6mo rev
4,970,087
4,235,760
Net loss
697,661
184,630


Sotheby's Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sotheby's Holdings (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
196,000,000
163,000,000
Net inc
64,297,000
51,182,000
Share earns
1.12
.89
Shares outst
57,414,807
57,388,488
6mo rev
257,500,000
212,000,000
Net inc
70,258,000
56,367,000
Share earns
1.22
.99
Shares outst
57,542,276
56,981,974


Alatenn Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alatenn Resources (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,095,000
26,527,000
Net inc
731,000
b115,000
Share earns
.32
.05
6mo rev
46,365,000
81,288,000
Net inc
1,492,000
b698,000
Share earns
.65
.31
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $298,000 for the quarter and $605,000 for the 6 months.


Hadson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hadson Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
106,511,000
130,206,000
Net loss
b146,758,000
c2,698,000
6mo rev
245,004,000
314,638,000
Net loss
b146,325,000
c1,637,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $143,579,000 for the quarter and $144,562,000 for the 6 months; both losses from discontinued operations included a $142,529,000 loss on the pending sale of two subsidiaries.


Scali, McCabe, Sloves Loses Another Client
LEAD: Scali, McCabe, Sloves, the New York agency that has been hit hard by account losses in the last year, lost another yesterday when the Procter &amp; Gamble Company switched its Old Spice and Santa Fe men's toiletries and fragrances to Tatham-Laird &amp; Kudner, Chicago.


Death Toll Up to 8 in 2 Days Of Dominican General Strike
LEAD: The death toll reached eight in a violent general strike protesting the Government's new austerity program after two people died today, police and radio reports said.


Grubb &amp; Ellis R. I. T.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grubb &amp; Ellis R. I. T.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
734,000
646,000
Net inc
341,000
341,000
Share earns
.12
.12
Shares outst
2,850,549
2,750,000
6mo rev
1,490,000
1,282,000
Net inc
719,000
684,000
Share earns
.27
.25
Shares outst
2,676,243
2,750,000


Tele-Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tele-Communications Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
890,000,000
726,000,000
Net loss
44,000,000
64,000,000
6mo rev
1,751,000,000
1,382,000,000
Net loss
101,000,000
115,000,000


Plane Crashes Off Fire Island
LEAD: A plane crashed today in 65 feet of water off Fire Island, the Federal Aviation Administration said.
The pilot, Kevin Heffernan of Milltown, N.J., was the only person aboard the Citabria owned by United Aerial Advertising of Nyack, N.Y.
A search was halted at nightfall.


Elcor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elcor Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
38,783,000
39,545,000
Net loss
b984,000
5,973,000
Yr sales
150,835,000
147,405,000
Net inc
b2,608,000
c5,604,000
Share earns
.37
-
b-Included an extraordinary charge from a reversal of tax-loss carryforward of $417,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary tax credit of $804,000, or 11 cents a share, for the year.


BRT Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BRT Realty Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,683,000
8,507,000
Net inc
b1,164,000
4,096,000
Share earns
.16
.56
9mo rev
24,019,000
25,521,000
Net inc
b6,390,000
c13,327,000
Share earns
.87
1.81
b-Included an extraordinary credit due to gain on the sale of real estate and foreclosed property of $885,000, or 12 cents a share, for both the quarter and 9 months.


Electronics, Missles &amp; ComFmun reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronics, Missles &amp; ComFmun
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,618,136
2,499,943
Net loss
152,341
b234,265
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income and included an extraordinary tax benefit of $79,000, or 2 cents a share.


Thousands of Acres Of Park in California Continue to Burn    ''The situation in some of these areas may get worse before it gets better,'' Gov. George Deukmejian said when he declared a state of emergency for Mariposa County. (Associated Press)


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Palestinians Offer to Fight With Iraq


One Man's Tangles With the Law
LEAD:
June 1, 1989: Juvon Edmunds charged with burglarizing his mother's home in northwest Philadelphia.
As in all of the following instances, except where noted, Mr.
Edmunds was released without bail, under terms of a court-ordered moratorium on admissions to the city's overcrowded jails.
June 22: Failed to appear in court.


John Forsyth Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Forsyth Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,796,000
24,316,000
Net loss
234,000
265,000
6mo sales
42,199,000
55,406,000
Net inc
740,000
521,000
Share earns
.10
.07
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Nymagic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nymagic Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,263,522
21,415,093
Net inc
5,140,542
4,278,279
Share earns
.58
.49
Shares outst
8,803,963
8,709,682
6mo rev
44,846,910
45,961,343
Net inc
10,818,838
10,032,353
Share earns
1.23
1.15
Shares outst
8,807,320
8,707,077


Mildred D. Barlow, 67, Foundation President
LEAD: Mildred Devereux Barlow, founder and president of the International University Foundation, died on Thursday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Mexico Debt Deal Is Denied
LEAD: A senior Treasury official vigorously denied a Congressman's charge today that the Bush Administration had spent $192 million to subsidize Mexico's debt-reduction agreement with commercial banks.


Love Canal Not Fit Now, or in Future, for Human Habitation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nationwide Cellular Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nationwide Cellular Services (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
27,332,853
17,583,583
Net loss
1,990,498
2,869,447
Shares outst
6,274,757
4,930,362
6mo rev
50,104,957
31,282,222
Net loss
4,632,323
4,859,684
Shares outst
6,274,732
4,162,571


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption last Thursday about environmental preservation efforts in the Seychelles Islands misidentified the island shown.
It was Praslin.


MEI Diversified reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MEI Diversified (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
42,196,000
47,872,000
Net loss
b2,279,000
1,350,000
6mo sales
86,865,000
91,781,000
Net loss
b6,820,000
3,717,000
b-Included gain of $1,086,000 on sale of candy and snack group.


WINE TALK
LEAD: There is a water shortage in much of France this summer thanks to a three-year drought, but in Paris it seems that only Badoit is affected.
Badoit is a popular mineral water and since the recent spell of record-breaking heat here, there just has not been enough of it to go around.


Assistant Pro Finds Time To Play a Bit Between Duties
LEAD: He is in his first year as an assistant pro at the Westchester Country Club, but he is so busy working for perhaps the busiest course in the area that Rudy Virga has played the course only three times.


Texaco Signs Pact With Soviet Unit
LEAD: The Texaco Corporation announced yesterday that it had signed an agreement with the Soviet Union's Ministry of Geology to study the feasibility of joint oil production in Arctic oilfields south of the Barents Sea.
Texaco officials said the Soviets had identified reserves of at least five billion barrels of oil in the region.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Troops' Biggest Fight So Far Is With 115-Degree Desert
LEAD: The following report was filed from Saudi Arabia yesterday and was based on the dispatches of a pool of reporters sent there under Defense Department auspices.
The ground rules for the pool prohibit the reporting of exact numbers of troops or weapons, their exact locations and the names of enlisted personnel.


Leisure Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leisure Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,048,000
31,860,000
Net loss
1,764,000
825,000
The company said year-ago figures included $6.6 million in revenue and $1.6 million in gross profit from land sales; no land sales occurred in the latest quarter.


Firstcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstcorp Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
5,500,000
474,000
The company said results in the latest quarter are due principally to its portfolio of troubled assets.
The nonperforming assets costs the company about $6.3 million from interest income foregone, net losses on the sale of real estate, expenses related to selling and managing the troubled assets and some additional reserves.


Clinical Data reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clinical Data (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,627,258
1,968,875
Net inc
b178,659
c144,545
Share earns
.06
-
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $26,000, or 1 cent a share, and a gain of $118,303, or 4 cents a share, from a cumulative effect on prior years of changing the inventory overhead absorption method.


Cavco Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cavco Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,772,476
7,491,313
Net inc
263,735
187,823
Share earns
.24
.17
9mo sales
27,658,613
27,341,304
Net inc
572,392
719,473
Share earns
.52
.65


INSIDE
LEAD:
Tokyo Stocks Up 5.4% On Report From Iraq
The Tokyo stock market soared, with the Nikkei index climbing 1,439.59 points, or 5.4 percent, to close at 28,112.12.
Analysts in Tokyo said that the rise was due in part to an unconfirmed report that Iraq was willing to negotiate a withdrawal.
Page D8.


Czechoslovak Compensation
LEAD: More than 220,000 Czechoslovaks who suffered during 41 years of Communist rule will probably share around $95 million in compensation, officials said today.
Those eligible include people in political trials between the Communist takeover in 1948 and its ousting last year.
Many others who emigrated had their citizenship revoked when they left Czechoslovakia.


SBE Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SBE Inc.
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,433,000
5,090,000
Net inc
667,000
260,000
Share earns
.04
.01
Shares outst
17,932,000
17,890,000
9mo sales
14,570,000
13,515,000
Net inc
1,623,000
355,000
Share earns
.09
.02
Shares outst
17,931,000
17,880,000


Abiomed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abiomed Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,001,000
1,040,000
Net loss
755,000
434,000


Analysts International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysts International (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
28,737,000
24,668,000
Net inc
1,835,000
1,491,000
Share earns
.39
.33
Yr rev
107,843,000
89,852,000
Net inc
5,991,000
4,954,000
Share earns
1.29
1.09


Eastern Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Airlines
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
545,200,000
89,600,000
Net loss
b35,600,000
c129,300,000
6mo rev
1,102,000,000
710,200,000
Net loss
b172,000,000
c384,500,000
b-Included a $114.8 million gain on the sale of assets for both the quarter and 6 months.


Hornbeck Offshore Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hornbeck Offshore Services
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,260,000
611,000
Net inc
1,150,000
b2,094,000
Share earns
.14
-
6mo rev
11,056,000
1,212,000
Net inc
1,867,000
b2,363,000
Share earns
.26
-
b-Net loss and included non-recurring partnership restructuring costs of $2,223,000.


Los Angeles Journal;   In a Smoking Ban, Some See Ashes
LEAD: Just three hours after two City Council committees voted Monday to ban smoking in all restaurants in Los Angeles, Michael Taix was back at Les Freres Taix, his 53-year-old family-run French restaurant on Sunset Boulevard, bemoaning the turn of events.


2 Nicaragua Currencies
LEAD: Two official currencies were in circulation today in Nicaragua, one on par with the United States dollar and the other devalued almost into oblivion.
The central bank announced today that it had devalued the old cordoba 7.2 percent, to 690,000 to the dollar from 640,000.
Black market dealers offered 740,000 old cordobas for $1.


Herbalife International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Herbalife International (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
38,943,000
31,614,000
Net inc
133,000
994,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo sales
72,387,000
67,800,000
Net inc
140,000
4,008,000
Share earns
-
.20


Banister Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banister Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
161,468,000
146,581,000
Net loss
6,254,000
b112,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
327,327,000
237,184,000
Net loss
7,532,000
b286,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


BEIJING THAWING DIPLOMATIC FREEZE
LEAD: Fourteen months after the Army crackdown, the Chinese Government is enjoying a series of diplomatic victories as it breaks through the sanctions initially imposed by the West and wins new friends among countries in the East.


Mobil Increases Australia Stake
LEAD: The Mobil Corporation has agreed to buy an Australian gasoline station network and the stake it does not already own in two refineries there from the Exxon Corporation, the companies said.


Sequa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sequa Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
568,443,000
482,788,000
Net inc
19,663,000
b18,185,000
Share earns
1.94
1.67
Shares outst
9,611,000
10,302,000
6mo rev
1,102,733,000
930,469,000
Net inc
37,986,000
b38,601,000
Share earns
3.72
3.55
Shares outst
9,691,000
10,333,000


C.D. and Bank Fund Yields Are Continuing to Decline
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts declined in the week ended yesterday.
It was the 11th straight weekly drop.


Czechoslovak President Visits Nicaragua


American Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Exploration (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,458,000
13,857,000
Net inc
92,000
3,076,000
Share earns
-
.13
6mo rev
28,358,000
24,134,000
Net loss
622,000
b2,570,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


How to Measure the Rain
LEAD: If the sound of rain falling on a tin roof is the best of all soporifics, then New Yorkers must be the best-rested people anywhere.
In the city, the rainfall drums down instead on air-conditioners, garbage cans, the hoods of cars.
Never mind.
Down it pours and on we sleep.


Taking Budget Offensive, Bush Accuses Democrats of Imperiling Economy
LEAD: Saying the budget impasse at home deserved the same urgent attention as the crisis in the Persian Gulf, President Bush today dropped his gentleman's agreement with the Democratic leaders in Congress and accused them of endangering the economy by playing politics with the Federal deficit.


Biocraft Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biocraft Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,300,000
25,628,000
Net inc
2,244,000
3,560,000
Share earns
.16
.26


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Ashton-Tate Co., Torrance, Calif., a holding company, said its board had authorized the repurchase of up to two million common shares in the open market to provide additional shares for employee stock option plans.


Loss Posted In 2d Quarter At Columbia
LEAD: The Columbia Savings and Loan Association, whose financial troubles have been related primarily to the plummeting value of its ''junk bond'' portfolio, reported a loss in the second quarter because of other factors, including problem real estate, the institution said today.


Retail Sales Up in July, But Outlook Is Negative
LEAD: Retail sales rose one-tenth of 1 percent in July from the month before, the Commerce Department said today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: TAMMY FAYE BAKKER's church in Orlando, Fla., can hold services at its warehouse ministry on Sunday after winning a zoning dispute.
The Orange County Commission on Monday overruled the county zoning board 4 to 1, and said that the site of Mrs.
Bakker's New Covenant Ministries would not be unsafe for church services and a radio-television broadcast studio.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Interest in Gulf High, A News Survey Shows
LEAD: The American public is ''riveted'' by news of the crisis in the Persian Gulf, according to a survey of public opinion by the Times Mirror Center for the Public and the Press.


Rada Electronic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rada Electronic Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,502,000
5,050,000
Net inc
318,000
340,000
Share earns
.05
.05
6mo sales
11,545,000
10,450,000
Net inc
708,000
680,000
Share earns
.11
.11


Freeze Upheld on Manville
LEAD: A Federal appeals panel in New York yesterday affirmed the authority of a Federal judge who has begun to restructure the trust set up by the Manville Corporation to compensate victims of asbestos.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: GRILLED lamb, a staple of Middle Eastern cooking, is one of the most delectable dishes one can make on a barbecue.
The flavors can be varied in many ways, from Provencal (with olive oil, tarragon, garlic and thyme) to North African (cumin) and even Indian (curry and yogurt).
The recipe here for marinated butterflied leg of lamb is


Suspicion Keeps a Hospital From Salvadorans
LEAD: When their television screens showed this city engulfed in house-to-house combat that wounded thousands of civilians during a rebel offensive in November, the people of Webster, Mass., decided to donate all the equipment needed for a 50-bed hospital.


Rexene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rexene Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
115,360,000
158,255,000
Net inc
b3,041,000
c62,675,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo sales
245,556,000
331,961,000
Net inc
b16,262,000
c39,266,000
Share earns
.52
-
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $1,968,000, or 6 cents a share, and $14,879,000, or 47 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively; quarter credit was from settlement of a lawsuit earlier treated as an extraordinary loss.


In New Book, Trump Is on the Attack
LEAD: Two months ahead of schedule, ''Trump: Surviving at the Top'' goes on sale today in bookstores across the United States.
In his new book, Mr.
Trump says that his financial and personal troubles have been compounded by his own mistakes, by a softening economy and by unfair and sensationalized news reports.


American Oil &amp; Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Oil &amp; Gas Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
107,478,000
25,552,000
Net inc
2,847,000
bc3,039,000
Share earns
.07
-
6mo rev
240,473,000
53,182,000
Net inc
3,418,000
b5,222,000
Share earns
.07
-


Immigrants Help Others Lost in Maze
LEAD: Sung Soo Kim, a native of South Korea, does not know Esther Cartagena, formerly of Puerto Rico, or Philippe Wilson Desir, formerly of Haiti.
But in their adopted city, they each serve a similar role: helping to guide compatriots recently arrived from their homelands through the bureaucratic maze that governs social services, the education of their children and how they do business.


Duracell Holdings Corp.  reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duracell Holdings Corp.
Year to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,300,000,000
1,249,000,000
Net inc
6,000,000
b106,000,000
b-Net loss
The company said operating income increased 27 percent to $226 million, compared to $178 million in fiscal 1989, which had been adjusted to exclude the $52 million one-time impact of a nonrecurring inventory purchase accounting adjustment.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bank of America, San Francisco, a subsidiary of BankAmerica Corp., appointed Ed Hall senior vice president and head of marketing for its consumer banking group.
Sheryl L. Bartolucci, the director of human resources of its world banking group, was appointed senior vice president.
Erich Goodbody, director of the Orange County-San Diego region of its real estate industries division, was named executive vice president.


Hector of Jets Scheduled For Surgery on Right Knee
LEAD: When Dick Steinberg took over late last year as head of the Jets' football operations, he uttered a prophetic cliche: ''You can never have too many good football players at any position.''


Foreign Securities Proposal
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today unanimously approved for public comment a new rule that would allow foreign banks and insurance companies to offer their stock and debt securities to American investors.


Federal Agency Moving to Stop Benefits for Dead Veterans
LEAD: The Department of Veterans Affairs is moving to stop payments it made to more than 1,200 deceased veterans, including about 100 who were dead a decade or more.


Healthvest reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthvest (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,002,000
14,958,000
Net loss
2,681,000
b5,378,000
Share earns
-
.48
Shares outst
10,773,000
11,314,000
6mo rev
15,973,000
29,415,000
Net loss
6,844,000
b10,858,000
Share earns
-
.96
Shares outst
10,773,000
11,346,000


Dorothy Mackaill, Actress, 87
LEAD: Dorothy Mackaill, an actress who starred in silent and sound films in the 1920's and 30's, died on Sunday in her room at the Royal Hawaiian Hotel in Honolulu.
She was 87 years old.
She died of liver failure, The Associated Press said.
Miss Mackaill lived in Hawaii for the last 35 years.
She was born in Hull, England, and came to Broadway as a Ziegfeld girl and soon went to Hollywood.


Surgery for Mowatt
LEAD: Zeke Mowatt, the former Giant tight end who was signed in the off season as a Plan B free agent by the New England Patriots, is scheduled to have surgery on a ruptured tendon in his left little finger and may be lost for eight weeks.
The 6-foot-3-inch, 240-pound lineman injured his finger during practice on Monday.


Ellsworth Convertible Growth &amp; Income Fund Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ellsworth Convertible Growth &amp; Income Fund Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
862,000
837,000
Share earns
.14
.14
9mo net inc
2,613,000
3,025,000
Share earns
.43
.51
Shares outst
6,118,443
5,979,645


High Radiation Doses Seen for Soviet Arms Workers
LEAD: American experts who have studied the Soviet nuclear-weapons program say a picture is emerging of extremely intense radioactive contamination and a history of very high doses to production workers.


Cimflex Teknowledge reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cimflex Teknowledge
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,500,000
10,100,000
Net loss
2,300,000
227,000
6mo rev
15,300,000
16,600,000
Net loss
4,400,000
3,000,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING - ADDENDA
LEAD: *
Olympic Airlines, the Government-owned airline of Greece, to Kaufman &amp; Maraffi Inc., New York, with a budget of $1.7 million.


Data Show How Rich Trump Is
LEAD: Donald J. Trump's accountants and bankers have concluded that his empire is worth far less than he contended late last year - and that if he had been forced to sell his assets this spring he might not have realized enough money to get out of debt.


Citizens Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Utilities (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
88,455,000
80,555,000
Net inc
23,265,000
20,638,000
Share earns
.52
.45
6mo rev
176,450,000
158,756,000
Net inc
42,712,000
37,731,000
Share earns
.95
.82


Chemical to Add To Loan Reserves
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation said in a regular quarterly filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday that in the second half of the year it expects to add more to its reserves for loan losses than the $151 million it added in the first half.
After the disclosure, Chemical's stock fell 62.5 cents a share, to $23.625, on the New York Stock


Home Improvement
LEAD: SO-CALLED flat roofs, which almost always slope slightly to facilitate drainage, should be inspected about twice a year.
Routine maintenance and minor repairs usually can be done easily by amateurs, but widespread or major damage should be handled promptly by a licensed roofer.


Mavericks Sign English
LEAD: To help fill the gap left by the loss of Sam Perkins, who signed as a free agent with the Los Angeles Lakers earlier this week, the Dallas Mavericks yesterday announced the signing of Alex English, the eighth-leading career scorer in National Basketball Association history.
English, who had been a free agent, averaged 17.9 points a game with Denver last season.


U.S. Speeding Arms to Arab Allies
LEAD: The United States is expediting large-scale arms sales already negotiated with Egypt and Saudi Arabia and is giving higher priority to new weapons requests from other Middle Eastern allies, the Pentagon said today.


Alamco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alamco Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,105,000
2,688,000
Net inc
b1,372,000
c436,000
Share earns
.53
.17
6mo rev
4,491,000
5,415,000
Net inc
b2,340,000
c1,064,000
Share earns
.91
.41
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $1,332,000, or 51 cents a share, for the quarter, which included gain of $1,395,000 on extinguishment of debt, less reversal of a tax credit of $63,000, and $1,637,000, or 64 cents a share, for the 6 months, which included the $1,395,000 gain on extinguishment of debt and


Pennsylvania Engineering &amp; Mfg reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennsylvania Engineering &amp; Mfg (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,952,000
5,922,000
Net loss
3,733,000
4,009,000
6mo sales
13,945,000
12,090,000
Net loss
7,079,000
7,948,000


Chicago's Getaway: Not the Hamptons. No Way.
LEAD: CALL it romantic, bucolic, rustic, nostalgic, but don't call it Harbor Country. ''I despise that name,'' said Ken Schroeder, an architect, echoing many Chicago cognoscenti who drive an hour and a half - 70 miles from the Loop - to second homes along the woodsy stretch of Lake Michigan shoreline that the regional Chamber of Commerce insisted on christening Harbor


JHM Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JHM Mortgage (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,825,000
6,920,000
Net inc
1,697,000
1,489,000
Share earns
.34
.30
6mo rev
11,540,000
13,765,000
Net inc
b2,159,000
2,196,000
Share earns
.43
.44
b-Included a one-time charge of $926,000 from an accounting change.


Odetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Odetics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
15,914,000
13,361,000
Net inc
206,000
36,000
Share earns
.05
.01


Magadan Lapse Sinks The Mets
LEAD: Dave Magadan broke from first base, snuck a look over his shoulder at the plate and realized he had just stepped into disaster.
Magadan's first steal attempt of the season was a play that was not supposed to happen.


The Latest Accessories Writ Little and Large
LEAD: THIS is the week of the tchochke.
At the New York International Gift Fair, 2,200 exhibitors from North and South America, Europe, Australia, Asia and Africa are showing their latest designs, affectionately known by the decorating world as ''accessories.''


Henry Crown, Industrialist, Dies; Billionaire, 94, Rose From Poverty By JOAN COOK
LEAD: Henry Crown, the billionaire whose life exemplified the Horatio Alger rags-to-riches story of American industrialists, died Tuesday at his Lake Shore Drive apartment in Chicago.
He was 94 years old.


Washington Talk;   Again, a U.S. Surprise Leaves Nations Upset
LEAD: When Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d got a cat-that-swallowed-the-canary look during a Sunday morning talk show and announced an American ''interdiction'' of Iraqi commerce at sea, he set off alarm bells among startled world leaders.


Ameriscribe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameriscribe Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
21,757,000
20,061,000
Net loss
b992,000
c452,000
Share earns
-
.19
6mo sales
43,343,000
38,876,000
Net loss
b446,000
c2,283,000
Share earns
-
.87
Shares outst
3,260,000
2,801,000


Chrysler Extends Sales Incentives
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation extended until Sept. 30 rebates that were to have expired Tuesday and lowered some interest rates on all cars and trucks except convertibles and mini-vans.


Republic Pictures reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Pictures (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,919,000
15,496,000
Net inc
131,000
433,000
Share earns
.03
.10
Shares outst
4,332,000
4,325,000
6mo rev
24,479,000
26,205,000
Net inc
419,000
639,000
Share earns
.10
.15
Shares outst
4,332,000
4,325,000


2 Audits Criticize Parking Bureau For Misuse of Its Computer System
LEAD: State and city officials released audits yesterday showing that New York City's Parking Violations Bureau has been so poorly run that millions of dollars in tickets have been issued to people who do not own cars, people whose cars have been stolen and people who have already paid their fines.


APL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* APL Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
32,365,000
33,176,000
Net loss
b11,480,000
c12,048,000
9mo sales
96,212,000
94,331,000
Net loss
b29,199,000
c29,435,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $5,584,000 for the quarter and $16,335,000 for the 9 months which included $10 million loss on disposal of aluminum doors and windows segment.


Reuter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reuter Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,772,875
4,591,349
Net loss
b840,995
c2,018,160
6mo rev
12,720,662
9,992,112
Net loss
b746,446
c3,614,093
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $556,616, or 23 cents a share, and $562,703, or 22 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


End to Beginning of CBS
LEAD: CBS Inc. said today that it had ended its operations at WCAU-AM in Philadelphia, the radio station with which William S. Paley began the CBS broadcasting network in the 1920's.
The network-owned station switched programming at 1 P.M. without notice to listeners or staff.
About 35 employees were laid off.


Gay Group Seeks More Data On Heat Treatment for AIDS
LEAD: The Gay Men's Health Crisis yesterday urged the National Institutes of Health and two Atlanta doctors who developed an unproven heat treatment for AIDS to make public more information about the experimental procedure, which the doctors say resulted in the recovery of two patients.


PLM International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PLM International Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,792,000
22,287,000
Net inc
5,138,000
3,122,000
Share earns
.33
.31
6mo rev
43,250,000
46,060,000
Net inc
10,311,000
6,171,000
Share earns
.67
.61
Share earnings for 1990 periods are after preferred dividend requirements of $1,760,000 in the quarter and $3,520,000 in the 6 months.


Former Banker Is Indicted
LEAD: A former executive vice president of the Montgomery National Bank was indicted on Tuesday in connection with what prosecutors said was a $10 million fraud that forced the New Jersey bank into receivership in June.


Ex-Officials Admit Drug Guilt
LEAD: Two former state prosecutors pleaded guilty to cocaine charges in Federal court today.
One of them, Michael Trant, a former associate deputy attorney general, pleaded guilty to one count of cocaine possession, and the other, Richard Guida, who headed the state attorney general's criminal division until 1986, admitted one count of cocaine distribution.


Two Fined in Insider Case
LEAD: A print shop worker and a stockbroker were ordered today to repay $28,655 and were fined $37,444 for engaging in a scheme to buy stocks based on articles read in Business Week before the magazine was on the newsstands.


Sunbelt Nursery Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunbelt Nursery Group (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
39,438,000
38,271,000
Net inc
b4,891,000
c11,641,000
Share earns
1.24
-
Shares outst
3,850,000
3,761,000
6mo sales
87,942,000
90,721,000
Net inc
b11,881,000
c6,548,000
Share earns
3.03
-
Shares outst
3,842,000
3,751,000


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: The eating disorders anorexia and bulimia are well known as afflictions of adolescent girls and women.
But experts now say many more boys and men suffer from these problems than doctors or the public realize.


Novo-Nordisk A/S reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Novo-Nordisk A/S (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
320,700,000
276,300,000
Net inc
31,800,000
23,700,000
Share earns
1.00
.75
6mo sales
625,900,000
588,700,000
Net inc
63,500,000
65,700,000
Share earns
2.01
2.08


Cypress Fund Inc. reports earnings for As of June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cypress Fund Inc. (AMEX)
As of June 30
1990
1989
Assets
62,521,267
86,861,207
Share earns
9.75
9.89
Shares outst
6,412,116
8,786,432
Assets represented net assets.


Canadian Manoir Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Manoir Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,447,000
15,575,000
Net loss
b1,346,000
c409,000
6mo sales
17,366,000
26,309,000
Net loss
b2,404,000
c969,000
b-Included a loss of $20,000 for the quarter and income of $6,000 for the 6 months, both from discontinued operations.


Treasury Securities Up Slightly
LEAD: Prices of most Treasury securities inched higher in thin, volatile trading yesterday, as traders nervously reacted to sudden shifts in the foreign exchange and petroleum markets as well as a potpourri of rumors.


Southwest Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest Gas Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
171,744,000
183,378,000
Net loss
6,057,000
b388,000
Shares outst
19,525,000
18,929,000
6mo rev
445,312,000
441,726,000
Net inc
15,273,000
22,858,000
Share earns
.74
1.16
Shares outst
19,452,000
18,865,000


Bush Invokes U.S. Values
LEAD: In a speech to Pentagon employees, President Bush said that ''our way of life'' would be jeopardized if Iraq gained control of Saudi Arabia.
More American forces were dispatched to the gulf. (Page. A14).


MCorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b188,000
c1,429,000
Share earns
-
.03
6mo net inc
b1,275,000
d32,835,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $3,550,000 for the quarter and $3,038,000 for the 6 months.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Look at the people.
They keep coming and coming, just like the movie said they would.''
- Jim Ripley, playing baseball in an Iowa cornfield. [A18:5.]


Velcro Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Velcro Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
28,641,000
25,119,000
Net inc
b4,505,000
c1,235,000
Share earns
1.50
.41
9mo sales
80,442,000
73,655,000
Net inc
b6,734,000
c3,124,000
Share earns
2.24
1.04
b-Included nonrecurring gain of $2,228,000, or 74 cents a share, and $1,228,000, or 41 cents a share, for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


After 7 Days, No Verdict in the Jogger Trial
LEAD: The jury in the Central Park jogger trial was told by the presiding judge last night to get ''a good night's sleep'' and get ready for a ''full day'' today before it retired last night without reaching a verdict.


After Blackout, a Broker Making Do
LEAD: With the power still out yesterday at the Wall Street brokerage firm of County Natwest USA, 50 of its top men and women grabbed their Rolodexes, packed up their briefcases and piled into taxis for the move to their third makeshift office in three days.


Associated Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Communications (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,807,000
7,103,000
Net loss
437,000
1,639,000
6mo rev
16,774,000
12,261,000
Net inc
b17,108,000
c4,305,000
Share earns
.92
-
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $5,900,000, or 32 cents a share.


Forum Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forum Group Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
28,864,000
23,355,000
Net loss
7,013,000
2,734,000


Korean Demonstators Attack U.S. Army Site in the Capital
LEAD: About 60 radical students hurled firebombs and shouted anti-American slogans in an attack today on a United States Army building near downtown Seoul, the police and officials said.


National Income Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Income Realty Trust (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,512,000
7,376,000
Net inc
b2,753,000
c1,346,000
Share earns
.75
-
Shares outst
3,668,826
3,787,356
6mo rev
14,876,000
14,269,000
Net inc
b2,024,000
c2,248,000
Share earns
.55
-
Shares outst
3,692,826
3,787,356


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.12
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.46
7.45
7.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.35
7.34
7.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.50
8.51
8.09
30-YR.


Craftmatic-Contour Indusries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Craftmatic-Contour Indusries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
15,671,000
12,946,000
Net inc
177,000
789,000
Share earns
.01
.21
9mo rev
45,587,000
33,224,000
Net inc
1,077,000
1,736,000
Share earns
.26
.45


American Stores Sells Buttrey Unit
LEAD: The American Stores Company, Salt Lake City, agreed to sell its Buttrey Food and Drug division to an investment group led by the division's management and Freeman, Spogli &amp; Company, a Los Angeles merchant banking firm.
American Stores will receive $180 million in cash and $4 million in the form of the assumption of leases.


Faster Approval of AIDS Drugs Is Urged
LEAD: A Presidential advisory panel said today that the Government should speed up approval of experimental AIDS and cancer drugs by requiring less evidence of the drugs' effectiveness before they are put on the market.


Iran Has Condemned the Iraqi Invasion
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Meaning of Objects
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Border Remains Closed as Seoul Battles Radicals
LEAD: The promise of free travel across the tightly sealed border between North and South Korea faded today as about 10,000 South Korean radicals clashed with riot policemen and the authorities continued to haggle over procedural details.


Mallard Coach Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mallard Coach Co. (OTC)
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Sales
42,517,000
41,228,000
Net inc
948,000
427,000
Share earns
.15
.07
9mo sales
129,318,000
148,437,000
Net inc
2,509,000
3,655,000
Share earns
.40
.58


McGwire's Slam Lifts Athletics
LEAD: Mark McGwire hit a grand slam in the 10th inning today to become the first major league player to hit 30 or more homers in each his first four seasons to lead the Oakland Athletics to a 6-2 victory over the Boston Red Sox.


Cambodian Devaluation
LEAD: Struggling to rebuild its economy amid war and international isolation, Cambodia devalued its currency to 460 riel to the dollar from 360 riel, the official press agency said today.
Cambodia's economy, virtually destroyed during the Khmer Rouge rule of 1975-79, has shown signs of improvement under free-market policies introduced by Prime Minister Hun Sen.


Dyersville Journal;   Just as in the Dreams, They Come to the Field
LEAD: The cars come throughout the day, churning clouds of dust as they bump over the gravel roads, carrying passengers bound like pilgrims for the little baseball diamond cut from the green sea of corn.


Talking Deals;   Loral's Fast Move Wins a Ford Unit
LEAD: WHEN the Loral Corporation beat out giant competitors like Westinghouse Electric and Hughes Aircraft last month in bidding for the aerospace unit of Ford Motor, the victory had the air of David triumphing over Goliath.


Ex-Queens Banker Sentenced to Prison
LEAD: The former president of a Queens savings and loan association was sentenced yesterday to two years in a Federal prison and to pay $100,000 in fines for participating in a multimillion dollar loan fraud.


Unitrode Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unitrode Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Sales
32,575,902
40,099,888
Net inc
152,501
172,580
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo sales
63,447,081
79,877,783
Net loss
3,130,863
b457,511
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Conservation Vessel Rams 2 Ships in Pacific
LEAD: A conservationist vessel deliberately rammed two Japanese fishing boats in the North Pacific on Monday, disabling equipment used to recover drift nets, a crew member said.


Tony Lama Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tony Lama Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,035,000
16,080,000
Net loss
901,000
130,000
6mo sales
29,211,000
34,043,000
Net loss
1,977,000
191,000


Japan Marks Anniversary of End of World War II


Iraq and Atom Bombs
LEAD: In 1981, a small country recognized a deadly danger to its existence.
In a courageous act of self-preservation the country struck out militarily to save itself.
In doing so, that country benefited not only itself but the world.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
'Unpainting' Concrete


Richfood Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 21
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Richfood Holdings Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 21
1990
1989
Sales
237,671,000
246,438,000
Net inc
1,866,000
b366,000
Share earns
.18
-
b-Net loss and included a loss from discontinued operations of $494,000.


To Our Readers
LEAD: Because of continuing data-transmission difficulties as a result of the Monday fire at a Consolidated Edison plant in lower Manhattan, The Associated Press was unable to provide data on trading yesterday in several futures and options contracts.
They are identified in the tables today on page D17.


Facing a Tax Revolt, Florio, on TV, Asks for 'a Little Time'
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio, in his first statewide television address, pleaded with angry taxpayers tonight to give his tax initiatives time to work, and denied that he had lied to them when he said throughout last year's election campaign and right up to the day he took office that no new taxes would be needed.


Pratt Hotel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pratt Hotel Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
70,491,000
62,896,000
Net loss
7,592,000
3,264,000
6mo rev
131,877,000
120,171,000
Net loss
14,212,000
5,141,000


Walter Harris Jr., 65; Headed Dunhill in U.S.
LEAD: Walter E. Harris Jr., a former head of the American subsidiary of Alfred Dunhill, the London tobacco merchant, and earlier an executive at Abraham &amp; Straus in Brooklyn, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Earnings Forecast Is Revised at Saab
LEAD: The president of Saab Automobile A.B. said he was unsure if the Swedish auto maker would break even by the end of next year, contrary to an earlier statement. ''I regret that statement,'' David Herman said in an interview. ''I don't know if it will come true.'' Mr.
Herman made the statement shortly after joining


Reflectone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reflectone Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,534,000
11,906,000
Net loss
589,000
718,000
Shares outst
2,090,086
1,585,791


After Uprising at Rikers, Guards Are Said to Have Beaten Inmates
LEAD: New York City officials are investigating allegations that correction officers lined up and beat inmates with nightsticks in a jailhouse corridor on Rikers Island several hours after subduing a disturbance there on Tuesday night.


Ampal-Amer Israel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ampal-Amer Israel (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
30,097,000
31,377,000
Net inc
714,000
b622,000
Share earns
.03
.03
6mo rev
61,895,000
65,482,000
Net inc
1,815,000
b2,783,000
Share earns
.08
.12
b-Included extraordinary tax credits by subsidiary of $100,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $655,000, or 3 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Nucorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nucorp Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,191,000
1,825,000
Net inc
1,502,000
287,000
Share earns
.17
.06
Shares outst
10,584,571
4,487,672
6mo rev
17,553,000
3,351,000
Net inc
2,586,000
290,000
Share earns
.30
.07
Shares outst
10,438,063
3,868,140


Enter Nederlander; Exit George
LEAD: When the Yankee partners at a meeting yesterday in Cleveland named Robert Nederlander as the general partner of the team to replace George Steinbrenner, the first question was, ''Who?''


Critic's Notebook;   Spike Lee's Jews and the Passage From Benign Cliche Into Bigotry
LEAD: In Spike Lee's ''Do the Right Thing,'' there is a scene he refers to in the published screenplay as ''The Racial Slur Montage.'' One by one, a range of ethnic characters stare into the camera and spit out vicious, stereotypical descriptions of some other ethnic group.
The black man played by Mr.
Lee says, ''Dago, wop, garlic-breath''; an Italian comes back with, ''Gold-chain-wearing, fried-chicken-and-biscuit-eatin' monkey,'' and a Hispanic man sneers at Koreans as ''slanty-eyed, me-no-speak-American, own every fruit and vegetable stand in New York.


Closing of Yosemite Renews Debate Over Fire Policies
LEAD: The closing of Yosemite's most spectacular natural attractions because of fire for the first time in the park's 100-year history has renewed the debate over fire management policies in the nation's protected wilderness areas.


Fleeing Kuwait: An American Tells of Four Hours of Terror
LEAD: Iraqi tanks and trucks sat motionless on the sands of southern Kuwait as a four-wheel-drive vehicle carrying two Westerners drove through 120-degree heat toward the Saudi border.


American Israeli Paper reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Israeli Paper (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
60,595,000
56,839,000
Net inc
2,248,000
268,000
Share earns
.59
.07
6mo sales
123,888,000
117,712,000
Net inc
4,410,000
1,827,000
Share earns
1.16
.48


Vintage Petroleum Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vintage Petroleum Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,600,000
11,000,000
Net inc
500,000
1,300,000
Share earns
.04
.09
6mo rev
21,600,000
22,900,000
Net inc
1,800,000
2,300,000
Share earns
.16
.13


ALC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ALC Communications
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
80,084,000
84,925,000
Net loss
b9,587,000
2,589,000
Shares outst
35,099,000
13,641,000
6mo rev
161,920,000
175,981,000
Net loss
11,571,000
c365,000
Shares outst
24,527,000
13,629,000


Perceptronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perceptronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,172,509
6,731,472
Net inc
b149,539
113,596
Share earns
.04
.03
Shares outst
3,463,633
3,465,741
b-Included a tax credit of $61,500, or 2 cents a share.


Unafraid of Magenta Or Rampant Phloxes
LEAD: MY friend Mary's garden grows very well indeed, and Mary herself is not the least bit contrary.
But her large garden a few blocks from my own does go counter to the conventional wisdom about perennial phlox.


Ninja Influence on Australian Youth
LEAD: Blaming the Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtle craze for an increase in playground aggression, many schools throughout the country have banned the Turtle toys from classrooms and have warned students to leave their Ninja swords, nunchakus and sticks at home.


Brando's Son Released on Bail


Coca Mines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca Mines Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,262,100
6,417,800
Net inc
586,100
b399,700
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
12,525,000
10,530,000
Net inc
1,384,800
b304,800
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss
The company said the 1990 second quarter included a pre-tax gain of $750,000 from the sale of its interest in the luning project in Nevada.


Closings at Ford
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would shut down its plants next week in Atlanta and Kansas City, Mo., because of a shortage of dealer orders.
It said it had closed a plant in Lorain, Ohio, because of a shortage of interior trim materials.
The Atlanta plant produces the Taurus and Sable mid-sized cars, while Kansas City produces Tempo and Topaz compact cars.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: LEARNING how to make friends is one of the most important tasks of childhood.
People assume that a child with many friends has better social skills and is more emotionally mature than a child with few, and that having no friends is a sign of a serious problem.


Lakers Waive Cooper
LEAD: Michael Cooper, the graceful defensive specialist who was a key performer on five National Basketball Association championship teams in the 1980's, parted company with the Los Angeles Lakers yesterday to seek a new basketball career in Italy.


Geoffrey Leon, Actor, 44
LEAD: Geoffrey Leon, an actor and lyricist, died Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44 years old.
He died of complications of AIDS, said a friend, Robert Poterelli.
Mr.
Leon graduated from the University of California at Santa Barbara in 1967 and moved to New York the same year.
He appeared on Broadway in ''Georgy'' and was a founder of a vocal group, Twentieth Century.


Maloney Signs Pact
LEAD: Don Maloney signed a one-year contract yesterday to return to the Islanders, but the pact is contingent upon the 12-year National Hockey League veteran making the team at the conclusion of training camp.


Soybeans Gain Moderately On Reports of Brazil Loans
LEAD: Soybean futures prices posted modest gains yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade in a trading session enlivened by conflicting reports about the size of a Brazilian agricultural loan program.


Global Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Global Natural Resources (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,951,000
8,600,000
Net inc
3,658,000
b777,000
Share earns
.16
-
6mo rev
25,587,000
17,022,000
Net inc
4,625,000
b107,000
Share earns
.21
-
b-Net loss


Charter Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter Medical Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
315,215,000
308,043,000
Net loss
40,653,000
5,107,000
9mo rev
921,600,000
882,467,000
Net loss
118,600,000
20,184,000
The company said operating income for the latest 9 months ended June 30 reflected second fiscal quarter corrections of previously reported contractual allowances, bad debts and expense accruals.


Widow of Gov. Munoz Dies on Island at 82
LEAD: Ines Mendoza de Munoz, the widow of Luis Munoz Marin, the longtime Governor of Puerto Rico, died Monday at a hospital in Rio Piedras, a suburb of San Juan.
She was 82 years old and lived in San Juan.


Y.&amp;R. Buys An Agency In Prague
LEAD: YOUNG &amp; RUBICAM said yesterday that it had bought an agency in Prague, making it the latest American agency to further expand its presence in Eastern Europe.


Oil Prices Stable as Traders Watch OPEC
LEAD: In contrast to their fluctuations in recent days, oil prices were little changed yesterday as the market confronted a lull in news from the Middle East and awaited a decision from OPEC whether it would authorize members to pump more oil.


Thomson Unit's New Chief
LEAD: The Thomson Corporation said yesterday that Robert C. Hall would become chief executive of the company's Information/Publishing Group and a director of Thomson effective next Jan. 1.


Staten Island Ousted From Tournament
LEAD: Michael Nebel, a third baseman who bats leadoff for the South Shore team from Staten Island, stepped anxiously to the plate today and waited for Bob Shannon's first pitch.


'Middle Way' in Chile
LEAD: Can Chile find a ''middle way'' on human rights - a means of establishing and insuring respect for those rights without self-defeating retribution against those who violated them in the past?


Toys 'R' Us Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Toys 'R' Us Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1990
1989
Sales
964,034,000
775,499,000
Net inc
26,494,000
23,482,000
Share earns
.09
.08
Shares outst
296,970,000
293,292,000
6mo sales
1,908,836,000
1,543,160,000
Net inc
59,722,000
50,631,000
Share earns
.20
.17
Shares outst
296,081,000
292,899,000


140 BLACKS SLAIN IN SOUTH AFRICA AS FACTIONS CLASH
LEAD: After three days of increasing factional bloodletting that spilled across black townships east of Johannesburg, the police reported tonight that at least 140 blacks had been shot, stabbed, beaten or burned to death.


Green Tide Rolls In At 'Money Beach'
LEAD: For the second time in two years, money hs washed ashore here, setting off an eager scramble Tuesday afternoon for the bills in denominations of $1, $5, $10 and $20, Police Capt.
James Nickles said.


Baby Trail Is Leading Couples To Peru
LEAD: THEY attract attention on the sidewalks of the Miraflores and San Isidro neighborhoods of Lima - foreign men and women in jeans and jogging outfits, pushing newborn infants in strollers as passers-by stop to ooh and aah.


Abrams Releases Tax Returns
LEAD: State Attorney General Robert Abrams and his wife, Diane Schulder Abrams, earned $206,034 in 1989 and paid more than $50,000 in taxes, according to tax returns made public today.
The couple paid $36,002 in Federal income taxes, $10,719 in New York State taxes and $4,693 in New York City taxes.
The couple earned more than $80,000 in partnerships and interest, $112,457 from his job and $14,904 from Mrs.


United Park City Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Park City Mines (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
385,693
312,580
6mo net loss
927,614
683,298
Shares outst
10,801,301
10,801,462


Robert C. Kilmartin, Retired Marine General, 93
LEAD: Robert C. Kilmartin, a retired brigadier general in the United States Marine Corps, died on Sunday at his home in McLean, Va., at the age of 93.
His family said he died of cardio-pulmonary arrest.


Dollar, at Low Against Mark In Europe, Recovers in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar rose yesterday against the German mark in domestic trading after sinking to an all-time low against the mark in Europe.


Homeless With AIDS Don't Belong in Shelters
LEAD: To the Editor:


Phillies' Mulholland Pitches Season's 8th No-Hitter
LEAD: Terry Mulholland pitched the record eighth no-hitter of the season tonight as the Philadelphia Phillies beat the San Francisco Giants, 6-0.


Oil Price Effect on Japan
LEAD: Higher crude oil prices will damp Japan's economic growth in the fiscal year starting next April 1 but will have little adverse effect in the current year, the Daiwa Institute of Research said in a report today.
If crude oil prices remain at about $25 a barrel after October, the growth of the gross national product in Japan in the 1991-92 fiscal year will shrink to 3.5 percent, the report said.


Sales Up, Inventories Off in June
LEAD: Business sales rose 1 percent in June for the second consecutive month, while inventories declined four-tenths of a percent, the Commerce Department reported today.


Census Report Shows a Rise In Child Care and Its Costs
LEAD: American families are increasingly using child care and paying more for the services being provided to nearly 29 million children, a new Census Bureau report shows.


Plan to Freeze Manila Debt
LEAD: The Philippine Senate approved a resolution today asking President Corazon C. Aquino to negotiate a 30-month moratorium on payments on the country's $26 billion foreign debt.


More States Are Laying School Paddle to Rest
LEAD: The threat of lawsuits, an increased concern about child abuse and new evidence that minority and handicapped children are paddled more often than other students have combined to revive the debate about corporal punishment in schools.
In the last three years the number of states that have banned paddling has nearly doubled.


Metro Matters;   To Borough Chief, Ballroom Issue Is No Waltz
LEAD: For more than a decade as a City Council member with little power and a staff that never exceeded six, Ruth W. Messinger was a thorn in the side of some of the most important people in New York City.


Algebra Bequeathed X
LEAD: To the Editor:


Warehouse Club reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warehouse Club (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
66,311,000
68,042,000
Net loss
56,000
b156,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
200,179,000
204,900,000
Net loss
721,000
b805,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income and included a tax benefit of $244,000, or 3 cents a share for the 9 months.


Applied Materials Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Materials Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1990
1989
Sales
144,244,000
130,194,000
Net inc
9,504,000
12,526,000
Share earns
.55
.74
Shares outst
17,314,000
16,870,000
9mo sales
426,148,000
359,671,000
Net inc
31,079,000
39,943,000
Share earns
1.82
2.39
Shares outst
17,043,000
16,738,000


Dunhill Said To Cut Back Custom Wear
LEAD: Alfred Dunhill of London, the English retail chain that specializes in gifts, clothing and tobacco products for the affluent, will soon close its longtime custom-made men's clothing operations at its New York flagship and Beverly Hills, Calif., stores, clothing industry executives said yesterday.


I.C.H.  Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* I.C.H.  Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
476,184,000
454,761,000
Net inc
6,176,000
7,230,000
Share earns
.13
.15
6mo rev
953,628,000
889,156,000
Net inc
b10,480,000
c11,137,000
Share earns
.22
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $5,644,000, or 12 cents a share, reflecting subsidiary's purchases of $21.5 million in principal amount of the company's 11 1/4 percent senior subordinated notes due 1996.


Nabors Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nabors Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
41,733,000
17,467,000
Net inc
3,893,000
565,000
Share earns
.07
.01
Shares outst
58,750,000
46,688,000
9mo rev
91,568,000
58,239,000
Net inc
8,622,000
3,877,000
Share earns
.17
.08
Shares outst
52,188,000
46,457,000


Household Finance Sells 5-Year Notes
LEAD: The Household Finance Corporation yesterday offered $150 million of five-year notes at competitive bids.


Market Flat, With Dow Up By Only 0.50
LEAD: The stock market ended flat for the second consecutive session, but only after fighting off earlier weaknesses in very choppy trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended the trading session up 0.50, to 2,748.27.


M.D.C. Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* M.D.C. Holdings Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
147,567,000
192,700,000
Net inc
b2,174,000
c5,309,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
19,065,000
15,890,000
6mo rev
279,896,000
348,988,000
Net inc
b5,721,000
c318,000
Share earns
.30
-
Shares outst
19,065,000
15,907,000


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, the name of the book packaging company of which Armand Eisen is the publisher was omitted from the Book Notes column on Aug. 8.
It is Ariel Books.


Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
69,280,000
71,921,000
Net inc
b3,821,000
c22,743,000
Share earns
.21
-
Shares outst
18,384,649
17,967,943
Yr rev
261,927,000
291,570,000
Net loss
34,804,000
d25,125,000


Professor Testifies on Ethics of Bush's Son
LEAD: A Government witness in the conflict of interest case against Neil Bush says the President's son lost his ethical moorings but did not try to deceive anyone while a director of a Denver savings and loan.


New Jerseyan Is Charged as War Criminal
LEAD: The Federal Government today moved to revoke the citizenship of a Somerset man who officials said was a Nazi war criminal known in the concentration camps as the ''black commander.''


Toys 'R' Us Net Rises
LEAD: Increased sales of video game products and non-electronic toys raised the earnings of Toys ''R'' Us by 12.8 percent in the second quarter compared with the corresponding period in 1989, company officials said today.
Net earnings for the quarter ended July 29 were $26.5 million, or 9 cents a share, compared with $23.5 million, or 8 cents a share, for the second quarter of last year.


Carolco Pictures reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolco Pictures (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
80,950,000
34,178,000
Net inc
8,759,000
2,612,000
Share earns
.28
.09
Shares outst
31,117,289
30,211,232
6mo rev
100,192,000
52,546,000
Net inc
6,027,000
812,000
Share earns
.20
.03
Shares outst
30,666,295
30,084,593


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


SSMC Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SSMC Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
150,000,000
139,700,000
Net inc
11,500,000
b43,700,000
6mo rev
295,400,000
278,000,000
Net inc
16,900,000
b45,600,000
b-Net loss and included a loss from discontinued operations of $24,800,000 and $27,000,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Refusal of $17,000 Car Is a Winning Move
LEAD: Because of the automobile she would not take, Pamela Richards has just picked up a free vehicle and is about to receive another.


Hotel Investors Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hotel Investors Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
30,288,000
29,623,000
Net loss
1,096,000
bc144,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
59,581,000
57,110,000
Net loss
2,208,000
c244,000
Shares outst
12,132,000
12,129,000


L.S. Starrett reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* L.S. Starrett (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
53,970,000
47,428,000
Net inc
4,714,000
3,907,000
Share earns
.68
.56
Yr sales
201,625,000
184,317,000
Net inc
18,752,000
16,359,000
Share earns
2.71
2.36


Baby-Sitting Couple Sentenced in Slaying
LEAD: A Manhattan couple who operated a baby-sitting service out of their Upper East Side apartment have been sentenced to up to 25 years in prison for killing a 3-month-old boy who was in their care.


National Patent Development reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Patent Development (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
77,897,000
76,319,000
Net loss
b4,808,000
b195,000
6mo rev
148,740,000
146,907,000
Net loss
b7,786,000
bc563,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $745,000 and $2,152,000 for the latest quarter and 6 months, and $797,000 and $1,241,000 for year-ago periods, respectively, relating to the early extinguishment of debt.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about Pakistan's decision to join the international force in Saudi Arabia misidentified a Saudi envoy who visited Pakistan.
He is Deputy Foreign Minister Abdulaziz Al-Thanyan.


MCM Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCM Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
35,610,000
41,503,000
Net loss
1,280,000
1,476,000
6mo rev
72,491,000
83,173,000
Net loss
1,886,000
1,288,000


Margarine, Too, Is Found to Have the Fat That Adds to Heart Risk
LEAD: Margarine, the spread millions use instead of butter in hopes of preventing heart disease, contains fatty acids formed during processing that actually increase coronary risk, according to a study published yesterday.


Rikers Post-Mortem: Dinkins Style Faulted
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has been criticized in the past for his cautious, deliberate style, was faulted by some correction experts for not moving quickly and forcefully enough this week to end a job action by hundreds of correction officers at Rikers Island.


Twin Star Productions reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Twin Star Productions (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
17,973,408
5,096,890
Net loss
847,749
b7,881
Shares outst
3,211,675
1,700,000
6mo rev
29,632,416
15,588,164
Net loss
241,775
b954,696
Shares outst
2,922,510
1,755,459


Hancock Fabrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hancock Fabrics Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1990
1989
Sales
87,163,000
78,014,000
Net inc
5,824,000
5,174,000
Share earns
.51
.41
Shares outst
11,490,232
12,566,190
6mo sales
181,577,000
162,709,000
Net inc
12,320,000
11,010,000
Share earns
1.07
.86
Shares outst
11,508,845
12,719,793


Marketing Post Filled at Pepsi
LEAD: Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that it had named David Novak as executive vice president of marketing for its soft drink business.


Transcontinental Realty reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transcontinental Realty (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,203,000
8,480,000
Net loss
1,212,000
b1,132,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
12,769,574
12,286,123
6mo rev
13,934,000
16,948,000
Net loss
2,103,000
b1,496,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
12,802,801
12,283,048


Kompong Chhnang Journal;   In a Sad Land, Hide and Seek With Khmer Rouge
LEAD: It is quiet now near the little town of Mnok, on the rail line between Battambang and Phnom Penh.
On July 15, it was the site of one of the worst atrocities of this stage of the 20-year-old Cambodian war.


FARMERS PROTEST IN EAST GERMANY
LEAD: Thousands of East German farmers shook their fists at their first freely elected Government today, protesting against increasingly desperate economic conditions.


Conagra Finishes Deal for Beatrice
LEAD: Conagra Inc. became one of the world's largest food companies when it completed its $1.34 billion acquisition of the Beatrice Company.
The deal, completed Tuesday, unites some of the country's best-known food brands: Beatrice makes Peter Pan peanut butter, Hunt's and Wesson condiments and oils, and Conagra makes Banquet, Armour and Chun King foods.


Crown Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Resources Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,800,000
-
Net loss
830,000
323,000
6mo rev
1,900,000
3,000
Net inc
2,200,000
b618,000
Share earns
.18
-
b-Net loss
The company said net income for the latest 6-month period included a gain of $5 million from sale of option on an interst in mining property.


With Loyalty Split, Arab-Americans Fault Hussein, but Question U.S. Too
LEAD: Since the onset of the Persian Gulf crisis two weeks ago, most prominent Arab-Americans have joined the chorus of denunciation against President Saddam Hussein of Iraq for his invasion and annexation of Kuwait.
Yet at the end of the chorus, Arab-American voices add one word: but.


Genentech and Abbott Pact
LEAD: Genentech Inc. and Abbott Laboratories reached an out-of-court agreement today to drop their respective claims about Abbott's patents on plasminogen activator.


Free Mail by the Bale
LEAD: Representative Bill Clinger, a Pennsylvania Republican, has taken a stand against the election-year avalanche of free mailings by House incumbents.
He's decided not to mail 218,000 newsletters, saving taxpayers $35,000.
Similar restraint cannot be expected from his colleagues, most of whom seem oblivious to the


Slipcovers: Practical but Not Boring
LEAD: SLIPCOVERS, Garance Aufaure said, are in demand. ''Everybody wants them,'' she said.


Manhattan National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manhattan National Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
25,030,000
35,924,000
Net inc
1,138,000
905,000
Share earns
.18
.11
Shares outst
6,317,000
8,520,000
6mo rev
48,996,000
71,573,000
Net inc
682,000
671,000
Share earns
.10
.08
Shares outst
6,770,000
8,523,000


Knowledgeware Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knowledgeware Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
22,323,000
15,473,000
Net inc
3,600,000
3,731,000
Share earns
.29
.41
Shares outst
12,521,000
9,194,000
Yr rev
66,229,000
32,958,000
Net inc
9,764,000
6,322,000
Share earns
.83
.74
Shares outst
11,664,000
8,348,000


First Executive reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Executive (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
440,709,000
570,116,000
Net inc
b30,515,000
c51,013,000
Share earns
.10
.45
Shares outst
84,653,000
98,340,000
6mo rev
995,178,000
1,018,263,000
Net inc
b75,920,000
cd6,889,000
Share earns
.42
.07


Viceroy Homes Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Viceroy Homes Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
18,626,000
22,258,000
Net inc
2,006,000
2,263,000
Share earns
.26
.29
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Navy Jet Crash Kills Crewman
LEAD: One crewman was killed and the second injured this morning when a Navy A-6E attack jet crashed in a wooded area of eastern Virginia, the Pentagon said.
The plane was attached to the Patuxent River Naval Air Station about 25 miles north of the crash site.


Intelligent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intelligent Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
360,564,000
170,670,000
Net inc
7,476,000
2,775,000
Share earns
.52
.27
Shares outst
14,485,000
10,373,000
9mo rev
1,063,260,000
422,934,000
Net inc
20,040,000
5,888,000
Share earns
1.41
.61
Shares outst
14,206,000
9,596,000


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Sports Pages yesterday listing the leading home run hitters among rookies this season misidentified Greg Vaughn's team.
It is the Milwaukee Brewers.


MEM Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MEM Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,695,800
8,947,600
Net loss
1,319,000
1,330,900
6mo sales
12,858,000
17,939,400
Net loss
2,749,900
2,222,400


Benton Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Benton Oil &amp; Gas Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
359,429
91,533
Net loss
452,704
183,552
Shares outst
4,048,774
2,290,734
6mo rev
662,888
103,900
Net loss
680,530
285,730
Shares outst
3,409,064
1,520,106
Year-ago share earnings and shares outstanding are adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split paid in July 1990.


Keating Pays On Mortgage
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr. caught up on late mortgage payments to avert foreclosure and an auction of his million-dollar suburban house that had been scheduled for today, a spokesman said on Tuesday.


Beard Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beard Oil Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,900,000
6,559,000
Net loss
3,256,000
b523,000
Share earns
-
.09
6mo rev
16,540,000
12,847,000
Net loss
5,147,000
b1,023,000
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


LTV Unit Pleads Guilty Over Air Force Contract
LEAD: A military contractor has pleaded guilty to obtaining Defense Department information illegally to win an Air Force contract worth $5.9 million.


Tigera Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tigera Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
705,000
366,000
6mo net loss
1,419,000
54,000
Latest quarter and 6-month results included losses of about $450,000, and $992,000, respectively, from its 35-percent investment in Cinexus Capital Corp.


China Seeks New Image as Asian Games Host
LEAD: At a busy intersection here the other day, a young policeman wheeled around and scolded a knot of bicyclists for stopping in the middle of a crosswalk.
When one of the bewildered cyclists pointed out that there was no crosswalk painted on the newly repaved boulevard, the officer said: ''You know the rules!


On Estimate Board's Agenda, Last Item Is Its Own Demise
LEAD: At 10:30 this morning, in a clean white chamber that looks like a Congregational church, the Board of Estimate, the centerpiece of New York City's government for nearly a century, will come to order to do the business it always does and then do something else.
It will die.


Rentz Leads Met Open By 7 Shots
LEAD: Larry Rentz justified his reputation as one of the longest hitters in the area when he eagled two holes of more than 500 yards today en route to a sizzling seven-under-par 64 in the second round of the 76th Metropolitan Open.
Rentz's total of 132 gave him a seven-shot lead.
Rentz, in his second year as an assistant to Bob Miller at nearby Knollwood Country Club, eagled the 505-yard ninth and the 535-yard 18th to go with birdies on the 2d, 7th, 10th and 14th and a bogey on the 4th, a par 4.


Momentum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Momentum Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
11,165,793
11,696,757
Net loss
21,214
148,661
6mo sales
22,466,108
22,608,963
Net inc
124,830
b251,761
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Love Canal Renamed as Houses Go on Sale


Sysco Corp. reports earnings for 13wks June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sysco Corp. (NYSE)
13wks June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,959,026,000
1,841,988,000
Net inc
38,612,000
31,757,000
Share earns
.42
.35
Shares outst
91,609,456
90,664,542
52wk sales
7,590,568,000
6,851,343,000
Net inc
132,461,000
107,892,000
Share earns
1.45
1.19
Shares outst
91,337,147
90,369,680


Eli Lilly Facing Million-Dollar Suits On Its Antidepressant Drug Prozac
LEAD: As reports mount that the nation's most widely prescribed antidepressant drug may spark violent or suicidal behavior in a fraction of patients, lawyers and former users of the medication are banding together to file multimillion-dollar lawsuits against the drug's maker.


Bridge
LEAD: There have been two Summer National Championships in the last month: Shortly after the American Contract Bridge League concluded its 10 days of play in Boston last month, the smaller American Bridge Association began 11 days of competition in Philadelphia, which ended on Saturday.


Hardware to Make Home More Homey
LEAD: With housing prices way down, the fear at the National Hardware Show, which ended here today, was that retailers and wholesalers would be in no mood to make big purchases.
So manufacturers resorted to the obvious: They displayed products that would allow homeowners to improve and beautify their existing properties.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
The Minority Advertising Intern Program, operated by the American Association of Advertising Agencies, had 54 interns participating at 32 agencies in 6 cities this summer.
The 10-week program, which began in 1973, has sponsored 570 interns to date, with about 25 percent going on to careers in advertising or related fields, the association said.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-17
Iraq appealed for peace with Iran, accepting virtually all of Teheran's conditions to settle the issues remaining from their eight-year war.
The move underscores Baghdad's growing sense of isolation.
Page A1


Snyder Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Snyder Oil Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,353,000
6,227,000
Net inc
1,104,000
2,101,000
Share earns
.05
.19
Shares outst
23,732,000
11,032,000
6mo rev
34,366,000
11,552,000
Net inc
2,293,000
3,511,000
Share earns
.13
.32
Shares outst
17,600,000
11,134,000


Ryan, a Former Jet, To Sign With Browns
LEAD: Pat Ryan, the former Jet quarterback, will sign with the Cleveland Browns today, his agent, Irwin Weiner, said yesterday.


Books of the Times;   A Sojourn in Dante's Wood, and the Path Back
LEAD:
Darkness Visible
A Memoir of Madness
By William Styron
84 pages. Random House. $15.95.


Judge Cuts Big Drexel Fees
LEAD: The bankruptcy court judge presiding over Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s Chapter 11 proceedings yesterday cut the fees paid to lawyers and accountants by $1 million for their first 14 weeks of work.


Rally's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rally's Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
44,880,000
32,676,000
Net inc
1,494,000
b791,000
Share earns
.22
.21
Shares outst
6,864,000
3,882,000
Yr sales
159,837,000
102,164,000
Net inc
3,999,000
b2,002,000
Share earns
.67
.52
Shares outst
5,948,000
3,882,000


Fed Blocks Banks' Merger, Citing Concerns on Capital
LEAD: In the clearest signal yet of the importance the Federal Reserve Board places on banks maintaining high levels of capital, the nation's central bank today rejected a proposal by the Bank of New York to acquire a $2.7 billion Connecticut bank-holding company, citing concerns that the resulting institution would not have sufficient capital reserves.


Zycad Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zycad Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,972,000
7,612,000
Net loss
b17,330,000
66,000
Shares outst
15,137,000
15,284,000
6mo rev
14,203,000
16,162,000
Net loss
b18,672,000
c504,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
15,126,000
15,312,000


Return of an Ex-Wonder Drug
LEAD: After years of false starts, the genetically engineered hormone known as alpha interferon is back on the road toward commercial success.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Scientific-Atlanta Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scientific-Atlanta Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
161,108,000
158,373,000
Net inc
13,310,000
10,708,000
Share earns
.57
.46
Shares outst
23,180,000
23,111,000
Yr sales
614,319,000
546,763,000
Net inc
44,299,000
36,287,000
Share earns
1.90
1.53
Shares outst
23,373,000
23,677,000


Frontier Adjusters of America reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frontier Adjusters of America
Year to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,788,345
3,020,301
Net inc
709,413
474,257
Share earns
.17
.11


Patten Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Patten Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
19,454,000
25,138,000
Net loss
2,267,000
b782,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income and included an accounting adjustment credit of $2,500,000, or 15 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of a change in method of accounting for income taxes.


Thomas McDermott, 65, Producer Who Created 'Father Knows Best'
LEAD: Thomas J. McDermott, an independent television producer who created many popular shows, including ''Father Knows Best'' and the daytime serials ''As the World Turns'' and ''The Edge of Night,'' died on Saturday at his home in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 65 years old.


Man Held in Robbing Of 31 Elderly People
LEAD: An unemployed man was charged yesterday with robbing 31 elderly people during a crime spree that began in January in the Parkchester section of the Bronx, the police said.


Rebel Leader in Liberia Bars West Africans From Leaving
LEAD: About 50 foreigners joined a West German road convoy out of Liberia's ravaged capital today, but diplomats said the leader of one of the country's two rebel factions refused to let West African expatriates flee the country.


Sonora Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonora Gold Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,594,000
10,819,000
Net loss
1,090,000
1,111,000
6mo sales
17,979,000
21,208,000
Net loss
1,912,000
b550,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Telecom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telecom Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,811,000
16,199,000
Net inc
721,000
812,000
Share earns
.20
.22
Shares outst
3,699,000
3,699,000
6mo rev
28,359,000
28,756,000
Net inc
695,000
1,029,000
Share earns
.19
.28
Shares outst
3,699,000
3,699,000


Inmates Are Prey in 'Ultimate Hunt'
LEAD: A senior Texas prison official and two friends joined in the hunt of a prison inmate as part of an exercise to train dogs to track escapees.
Then he ordered jackets embroidered with the slogan ''The Ultimate Hunt'' and sent them to his friends as souvenirs of their adventure.


Triangle Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triangle Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,483,000
17,177,000
Net loss
299,000
b268,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo sales
34,898,000
33,391,000
Net inc
24,000
728,000
Share earns
.01
.27
b-Net income


Industry's Output Flat Last Month
LEAD: Automotive output dropped sharply in July, leaving overall industrial production unchanged from June, the Federal Reserve reported today.
It noted that the economy continued its slow growth in most other areas of manufacturing.


Sun Accord With I.B.M. On Patents
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. said yesterday that it had entered into a cross-licensing agreement with the International Business Machines Corporation, tacitly acknowledging I.B.M.'s claims to having pioneered a popular advanced computer design.


Valspar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valspar Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 27
1990
1989
Sales
160,993,000
146,072,000
Net inc
10,064,000
8,460,000
Share earns
.92
.76
Shares outst
10,935,787
11,154,482
9mo sales
432,455,000
381,009,000
Net inc
19,872,000
17,638,000
Share earns
1.82
1.57
Shares outst
10,930,716
11,203,614


Florence R. Garfunkel, Social Worker, 83
LEAD: Florence Rubin Garfunkel, a social worker and a trustee of the Educational Alliance for 33 years, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 83 years old.


American Integrity reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Integrity (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,479,000
16,004,000
Net loss
687,000
c1,353,000
Share earns
-
.20
6mo rev
45,586,000
30,473,000
Net inc
b3,159,000
2,704,000
Share earns
.46
.40
b-After a gain of $3,400,000, or 50 cents a share, from a cumulative effect of change in accounting principle.


Pilot Alcohol Rule Called Inadequate
LEAD: Federal regulations that prohibit pilots from flying with a blood alcohol level of 0.04 percent or more or within eight hours after drinking an alcoholic beverage are medically inadequate, a new study says.
Studies clearly show that that a pilot can conform to the rules and still be feeling the effects of the liquor while flying, according to research published in Thursday's edition of the New England Journal of


Yanks Help Langston Forget His Troubles
LEAD: The solution to Mark Langston's problems? Simple. Give him the Yankees.


Burmese Rights Abuses Reported
LEAD: An American human-rights group issued a report today accusing the Burmese Government of ''gross human-rights violations.'' It said atrocities had continued despite the Government's defeat in elections in May.


Saudis Are Dismayed by U.S. Servicewomen
LEAD: The following report was filed from Saudi Arabia yesterday and was based on the dispatches of a pool of reporters sent there under Defense Department auspices.
The ground rules prohibit the reporting of exact numbers of troops or weapons, their exact locations or the names of enlisted personnel.


Continental To Cut Fares
LEAD: Continental Airlines said today that it would cut fares for flights after Labor Day, matching reductions already announced by other carriers.


Kill the Fresh Kills Plan
LEAD: New York City's Board of Estimate is likely to reject a Dinkins administration proposal today that would help short-term revenues but hurt long-term garbage disposal capacity.
The board is on the right track; the plan is flawed and the city would be unwise to try to revive it later.


Collins Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collins Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
36,580,000
34,309,000
Net inc
b764,000
c603,000
Share earns
.20
.17
9mo sales
103,617,000
96,589,000
Net inc
b1,681,000
c1,335,000
Share earns
.46
.38
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $291,000, or 7 cents a share, for the quarter and $639,000, or 17 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Critics Say Dinkins Miscalculated Guards' Anger
LEAD: By failing to end this week's correction officers' job action before it mushroomed into a major disturbance at Rikers Island, Mayor David N. Dinkins has fueled further criticism of his cautious, deliberate style.


A Nederlander Is Chosen to Follow Steinbrenner as the Yankees' Boss
LEAD: In a surprise move, Robert E. Nederlander, a member of the prominent New York theatrical family, was named today to replace George Steinbrenner and run the Yankees.


Watch Urged On U.S. Loan Agencies
LEAD: Federal auditors said today that the Government should sharply increase the regulation and supervision of Government-sponsored enterprises that lend money to home buyers and college students or else taxpayers might have to foot the bill in the future.


Close to Home
LEAD: TWO nights after it happened, I saw a nicely dressed young couple laying roses at the foot of the telephone booth.
There are many such shrines to the suddenly-departed all over New York - a name scrawled on a wall, a heap of flowers, a candle or two - but this was the first that I had seen.
The small mound of pink and red blooms was curiously reminiscent of the plaques on Paris buildings that commemorate someone lost to gunfire during the Liberation.


Krug International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Krug International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
25,613,000
20,995,000
Net inc
757,000
361,000
Share earns
.18
.09


Louis Vola, Jazz Bassist, 88
LEAD: Louis Vola, a jazz bassist who was a founding member of the legendary Hot Club Quintet in the 1930's, died last week in a Paris hospital after a long illness, friends announced Tuesday.
He was 88.


Allied Clinical Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Clinical Laboratories
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,222,000
15,048,000
Net inc
870,000
75,000
Share earns
.16
.01
6mo rev
38,445,000
28,954,000
Net inc
1,742,000
b104,000
Share earns
.33
-
b-Net loss


Review/Opera;   Richard Strauss's 'Intermezzo,' at Glimmerglass
LEAD: In an interesting juxtaposition with Dorothy Frank Danner's production of Benjamin Britten's ''Albert Herring'' (unveiled Saturday evening in the Alice Busch Theater), Glimmerglass Opera followed this afternoon with a performance of Leon Major's production of Richard Strauss's ''Intermezzo,'' midway through its run.


Magnetek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magnetek Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
281,264,000
257,412,000
Net inc
11,030,000
b4,789,000
Share earns
.47
.21
Shares outst
23,529,000
18,948,000
Yr sales
1,055,420,000
961,649,000
Net inc
33,228,000
b18,275,000
Share earns
1.40
.83
Shares outst
23,482,000
18,414,000


Academy Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Academy Insurance Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
27,887,000
25,767,000
Net inc
b1,823,000
65,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
55,713,000
51,871,000
Net inc
b3,540,000
c1,871,000
Share earns
.05
.03
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $597,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $1,161,000, or 2 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Reversal of 'Fair Use' Would Harm Authors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Teheran is Pleased
LEAD: Iraq took a dramatic step today to counter its growing international isolation over the invasion of Kuwait, offering to meet almost all of Iran's conditions for settling key issues persisting from their eight-year war.


Ambase Stock Plunges As Payout Is Omitted
LEAD: Stock of the Ambase Corporation, a midsized insurance company that invested heavily in high-risk ''junk bonds,'' plunged more than 63 percent yesterday in active trading after the company canceled a large special dividend it had been expected to pay.


Formal Dinner Is Victor
LEAD: Formal Dinner may be only the second- or third-best 2-year-old in D. Wayne Lukas's stable, but that was good enough to make him an easy winner over a very weak field today in the $92,100 Sanford Stakes at Saratoga Race Track.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing in the calendar on the On Your Own page in SportsMonday this week misstated the site of the Fairfield County Sports Car Club autocross on Aug. 19.
It will be held at Southern Connecticut State University, Lot No. 9, in New Haven.


Millicom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Millicom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
38,392,000
21,886,000
Net loss
8,708,000
10,200,000
Shares outst
15,540,000
13,694,000
6mo sales
76,366,000
41,298,000
Net loss
23,475,000
5,238,000
Shares outst
15,432,000
13,673,000


Yankee Executive Expected to Sue Vincent
LEAD: The chief operating officer of the Yankees will probably file a lawsuit in the next three weeks seeking to block a hearing scheduled before Commissioner Fay Vincent into his involvement in the Howard Spira affair, people close to the executive indicated yesterday.


Malaysia Oil Output Rise
LEAD: The Government-owned National Petroleum Corporation will increase its daily oil production by 10,000 barrels to meet the demand of countries dependent on Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad said today.
The Cabinet decided that half of the additional volume would go to members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the balance to non-oil producing nations.


A Cat May Look at a Cat
LEAD: Over the past 10 years a New Yorker who is less a pet lover than an easy mark has housed five cats.
Not one of them was what the world calls a looker.
No oohs and aahs followed when these cats entered the room.
One with a little black goatee under her chin even evoked laughter.
Another was indistinguishable from every tabby that ever strolled the earth.


CRSS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CRSS Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
121,144,000
155,264,000
Net inc
4,777,000
b5,643,000
Share earns
.32
.47
Shares outst
14,735,000
12,134,000
Yr rev
512,542,000
617,047,000
Net inc
18,082,000
b13,930,000
Share earns
1.31
1.14
Shares outst
13,788,000
12,200,000


McGrath Rentcorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McGrath Rentcorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,278,146
9,378,267
Net inc
2,226,717
1,696,061
Share earns
.59
.45
Shares outst
3,802,958
3,769,332
6mo rev
24,004,256
18,165,665
Net inc
4,530,505
3,288,188
Share earns
1.20
.83
Shares outst
3,790,937
3,965,408


Tribune/Swab-Fox Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tribune/Swab-Fox Cos.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,287,000
18,606,000
Net loss
16,000
261,000
6mo rev
44,399,000
36,174,000
Net loss
539,000
448,000


Energy Ventures Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energy Ventures Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
37,824,000
24,991,000
Net inc
763,000
732,000
Share earns
.08
.08
6mo rev
68,837,000
50,967,000
Net inc
b2,442,000
1,206,000
Share earns
.26
.13
b-Included pre-tax gain of $1,330,000 on the sale of the company's investment in common stock of Galveston- Houston Co., or 8 cents a share after taxes.


Meat Price Decline Seen
LEAD: Consumers will see some relief from record meat prices as production increases next year, the Agriculture Department said today.
Retail pork prices are expected to decline about 1 percent to 3 percent in 1991 from this year's record level, the department's Economic Research Service said.
Poultry prices may be down 4 percent to 6 percent.


Whitehall Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whitehall Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,139,000
8,675,000
Net loss
359,000
b380,000
Share earns
-
.11
Shares outst
3,416,281
3,455,952
6mo sales
8,660,000
12,447,000
Net loss
449,000
730,000
Shares outst
3,421,686
3,456,821


Rouse Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rouse Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
120,466,000
116,934,000
Net loss
3,362,000
b4,103,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
48,006,000
47,880,000
6mo rev
238,943,000
230,045,000
Net loss
3,965,000
b5,341,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
47,995,000
47,867,000


Presidio Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Presidio Oil Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,604,000
18,352,000
Net loss
5,807,000
3,727,000
6mo rev
54,275,000
37,908,000
Net loss
9,615,000
6,981,000


In Cars, Muscle vs. Mileage
LEAD: Experts on automobiles say technologies are readily available to make cars go much farther on a gallon of gasoline, reducing the demand for oil and therefore lessening the impact of events like the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
But a renewed taste for cars with muscle is devouring gains in fuel economy.


Gradco Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gradco Systems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
20,292,000
24,591,000
Net inc
15,517,000
223,000
Share earns
2.02
.04
Shares outst
7,576,000
6,490,000
The company said that net earnings for the latest quarter reflected the previously announced $17.8 million net after-tax gain from the sale of the shares of the company's Japanese subsidiary and operating losses due to the decline in sales of certain copier products to Xerox Corp.


Review/Theater;   An Affectionate Soap-Opera Spoof
LEAD: Early in the second act of ''Quiet on the Set,'' Terrell Anthony's frothy parody of daytime television at the Orpheum Theater, two actresses are discussing that age-old conundrum, ''Do the soaps imitate life, or does life imitate the soaps?'' The answer, they decide, is that ''both imitate commercials.


Syntrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syntrex Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 29
1990
1989
Revenue
21,904,218
11,499,454
Net loss
6,282,458
1,141,131
Shares outst
7,569,226
7,417,962
6mo rev
30,512,224
21,534,204
Net loss
8,416,127
4,448,909
Shares outst
7,578,073
7,386,206


Baby Thrown From Window Is Found in Alley in Queens
LEAD: A newborn baby was found in a Queens alley last night after he was apparently thrown from a second-story window, the police said.
His mother was charged with attempted murder.


Lawyer Challenges Fish Market Complaints
LEAD: A lawyer for businesses at the Fulton Fish Market asserted yesterday that a Federal administrator had invented complaints of racketeering at the market to hold on to his job and to justify his ''enormous'' legal fees.


Easing of Tensions With Iran Gives Iraq New Flexibility in Shifting Troops
LEAD: As Iraq mends its political fences with Iran, Baghdad expects to free some of its large forces along the Iranian border for possible redeployment to the southern part of the country where they would confront United States forces.
But analysts do not believe major Iraqi troop or tank movements are imminent.


GEO International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GEO International Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
40,998,000
42,365,000
Net inc
335,000
b2,060,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
17,121,000
16,593,000
9mo sales
119,626,000
121,932,000
Net inc
672,000
b8,260,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
17,099,000
16,470,000


Philippine Rebel Leader Orders New Attacks
LEAD: Army rebels trying to oust President Corazon C. Aquino threatened today to start a new offensive against Government targets after four bomb attacks in Manila in two days.


Fruit of Loom Stock Is Sold
LEAD: William F. Farley, chairman of Fruit of the Loom Inc., sold 3.75 million Fruit of the Loom class B common shares to a single buyer for $11.50 a share, or more than $43.1 million.


Cook Is Approved On Deak Purchase
LEAD: The Thomas Cook Group was given approval by the Federal Reserve Board to buy the United States retail foreign-exchange operations of Deak International Ltd.
The approval clears the way for Thomas Cook, the British travel-services company, to acquire Deak's North American retail network, which has 72 branches in the United States and 38 in


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
BASKETBALL
Puerto Rico Beats U.S.
Puerto Rico won a battle of unbeaten teams yesterday, defeating the United States by 81-79 at the world championships in Buenos Aires.
Both teams had already qualified for the semifinals tomorrow, in which the United States will play Yugoslavia, and Puerto Rico will play the Soviet Union.


OMI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* OMI Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
62,442,000
44,147,000
Net inc
4,028,000
1,409,000
Share earns
.12
.06
Shares outst
32,264,000
22,548,000
6mo rev
122,018,000
88,797,000
Net inc
8,427,000
b5,055,000
Share earns
.26
.18
Shares outst
32,388,000
22,574,000


Bush Says Iraqi Aggression Threatens 'Our Way of Life'
LEAD: President Bush told Pentagon employees today that American freedom and ''our way of life'' would suffer if President Saddam Hussein of Iraq ever gained control of Saudi Arabia.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Air Products and Chemicals Inc., Allentown, Pa., a maker of industrial gases and chemicals, sold a 50 percent equity interest in a $190 million co-generation project under construction in Cambria County, Pa., to Energy Investors Fund L.P., Boston, for $30 million.


Market Place;   Will Businessland Face a Takeover?
LEAD: WHEN Businessland Inc. shocked Wall Street with a fourth-quarter loss far in excess of any analyst's estimate, its shares immediately lost 58 percent of their value.
Could the big personal computer retailer, which had revenues of $1.35 billion for the fiscal year 1990 but now has a valuation in the $90 million range, be a takeover candidate?


Jail for Crime That Shocked Even the Jaded
LEAD: After a trial that shocked even veteran Bronx prosecutors yet drew scant public attention, a young Bronx man received the maximum prison sentence yesterday for the 1988 murder of an Israeli immigrant who had employed one of his friends.


Western Investment Real EsFtate Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Investment Real EsFtate Trust (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,855,000
6,778,000
Net inc
4,627,000
3,106,000
Share earns
.29
.26
Shares outst
15,969,299
11,969,299
6mo rev
15,549,000
13,334,000
Net inc
9,501,000
6,532,000
Share earns
.59
.55
Shares outst
15,969,299
11,969,299


Bolar Pharmaceutical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolar Pharmaceutical Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
476,629
34,300,348
Net loss
3,056,352
b8,577,673
Share earns
-
.40
6mo sales
8,591,159
69,822,443
Net loss
3,877,175
b16,591,919
Share earns
-
.78
b


From Broadway to the Bronx;   Robert Nederlander Brings Low-Key Management Style to the Yankees
LEAD: He's described as an accomplished athlete and a thoroughgoing sports fan who grew up playing tennis and rooting for the Detroit Tigers, but don't be fooled.
As soon as he and two of his brothers took a small bite of the Big Apple's dominant baseball team in 1973, Robert E. Nederlander let go of the Tiger's tail and switched his allegiance to the New York


Edisto Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Edisto Resources Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
15,221,000
12,563,000
Net inc
3,261,000
b7,297,000
Share earns
.16
-
Shares outst
13,405,000
12,017,000
6mo rev
33,146,000
30,685,000
Net inc
503,000
b36,729,000
Shares outst
12,890,000
12,017,000


ACTV Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ACTV Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
72,681
-
Net loss
781,951
483,708
6mo rev
95,658
-
Net loss
1,489,980
845,242
ACTV is a development stage company and had no revenues in the 1989 periods.


Fully Insure Deposits Of Public Pension Plans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Inc. Magazine Plans A Version for Soviets
LEAD: Bernard A. Goldhirsh, the chairman of the Goldhirsh Publishing Group, said yesterday that a Russian-language version of Inc. magazine would be published in the Soviet Union, beginning in mid-1991.


Harry Leahey, Jazz Guitarist, 54
LEAD: Harry Leahey, a jazz guitarist and teacher, died on Sunday at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 54 years old and lived in North Plainfield, N.J., until last year, when he moved to Iselin, N.J.


False Arguments for Fancy Weapons
LEAD: In the wake of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, some siren voices are inviting Congress to quit cutting the defense budget and restore money for threatened programs like the B-2 bomber and the Osprey transport plane.
That's the way, they say, to maintain an indisputable military edge over third world dictators.


C-Cor Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C-Cor Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
15,675,000
14,384,000
Net inc
1,939,000
1,621,000
Share earns
.45
.37
Yr sales
60,279,000
53,755,000
Net inc
5,520,000
5,195,000
Share earns
1.27
1.21


Similarity To N.H.L. Causes Concern
LEAD: Dwight Gooden, Don Baylor said yesterday, has the mentality of a middle linebacker.


Review/Theater;   Wharton, James and the Morality of Old New York
LEAD: Visitors to the Mount, Edith Wharton's former country house, can receive emanations not only of the resident author but also of her close friend, Henry James.
Together they walked the paths and terraces of this beautiful estate.
It was in 1910, several years after first seeing the Mount, when James wrote that the two novelists ''would be more and more never apart.


Estee Lauder Forms Division
LEAD: The Estee Lauder Companies announced the formation yesterday of a new cosmetics division, Origins Natural Resources Inc., to be headed by William Lauder, representing the third generation of the founding Lauder family.


Some Familiar Faces Will Return To the New York Film Festival
LEAD: Familiar French names and works by directors who have had successes in previous programs will be an important part of the 28th New York Film Festival, which is to open on Sept. 21 at Lincoln Center with ''Miller's Crossing,'' by Joel and Ethan Coen, and close on Oct. 7 with ''The Nasty Girl,'' directed by Michael


Enterprise Stake Sold by Imperial
LEAD: Brokers said that Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. had sold its 25 percent stake in Enterprise Oil P.L.C. on the open market.
Warburg Securities Ltd. and Cazenove &amp; Company said they had bought a block of 113.3 million Enterprise shares from Imperial for $:679.6 million, about $1.29 billion, or 600 pence a share.


Stephen S. Lai, Physician, 61
LEAD: Stephen S. Lai, a physician and a civic leader in Chinatown in Manhattan, died on Saturday at Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 61 years old and lived in Watchung, N.J.


Owens-Illinois Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens-Illinois Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,047,200,000
956,500,000
Net inc
16,800,000
b42,200,000
Share earns
.45
-
6mo rev
2,003,500,000
1,811,900,000
Net inc
4,500,000
b74,500,000
Share earns
.12
-


Moody's Establishes Unit For 'Junk Bond' Companies
LEAD: Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that it had formed a separate unit within its industrials group to focus on the day-to-day analysis of ''junk bond'' companies.


Yields Are Mostly Off
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were generally down for the week ended yesterday.


Associated Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Natural Gas (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
88,173,000
74,694,000
Net inc
982,000
601,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
9,638,000
5,594,000
9mo rev
270,335,000
232,951,000
Net inc
6,410,000
2,993,000
Share earns
.64
.23
Shares outst
8,899,000
5,441,000


Biblical Lawn Care
LEAD: To The Home Section:


TV Dumping Is Charged
LEAD: American color television tube makers and their unions asked the Commerce Department today to impose ''anti-dumping'' duties on color picture tubes assembled into sets in Mexico and sold in the United States at what they contend is less than fair value.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Dirtier Than Chernobyl
American nuclear experts say a Soviet nuclear complex in Siberia is so contaminated with radioactive wastes that it is ''the most polluted spot on the planet.'' Page A3.
Where the Quarry Is Human
Texas prison officials who train dogs to track escapees routinely use inmate volunteers as the hunted.


Iran Has Condemned the Iraqi Invasion;   Creators of a Monster
LEAD: To the Editor:


Solzhenitsyn's Citizenship Likely to Be Restored
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has restored the citizenship of ''some people'' exiled abroad between 1966 and 1988, the official Soviet press agency Tass said today.


Ecuador Debt Talks Snagged
LEAD: Disagreements still exist in talks between Ecuador and creditor banks over a refinancing accord for the nation's foreign debt, President Rodrigo Borja said on Tuesday in his midterm ''state of the nation'' address to the national legislature.


Excerpts From Iraqi Leader's Letter to Iran
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the initiative sent by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq in a letter to President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran, as carried by the official Iraqi press agency and translated by Reuters:


3 States Warn Cuomo to Plan For A-Wastes
LEAD: The three states where New York sends its low-level radioactive waste are threatening to stop taking shipments.


Fines to Begin For Violating Recycling Law
LEAD: Starting today, New Yorkers who violate the city's year-old recycling law face fines that begin at $25 and rise to $10,000.


Castles in the Sand, For Fun and Profit
LEAD: Lucinda Wierenga and Walter McDonald, who live on South Padre Island in Texas, make a living building sand castles.
They aren't rich yet, they admit, but they say they are having a lot of fun.


Equity Panel Head Criticizes 'Saigon' Producer
LEAD: The chairman of the Commission on Racial Equality of Actors' Equity said yesterday that the producer of ''Miss Saigon'' had refused to allow Asian-American actors to compete for the starring role of a Eurasian pimp in a Broadway production of the hit London musical.


Colorado Voters Pick Candidates for Senate Race
LEAD: Josie Heath, a former Boulder County Commissioner, won the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate in a primary on Tuesday, easily defeating an underfinanced candidate whose campaign had centered on his attacks against the savings and loan industry.


Mostly Mozart to Perform 9 Concerts at Tokyo Center
LEAD: Lincoln Center's Mostly Mozart Festival will go to Tokyo next year to perform nine concerts at the Tokyu Bunkamura, a cultural complex that opened last September.


Rush Delivery Sought For Antidote to Gas
LEAD: The Defense Department has asked for rush delivery of kits containing the nerve gas antidote American troops would use in the Middle East, the president of the only American supplier of the antidote said today.


Calendar of Events: Convention of Quilters
LEAD: Patchwork, Student Center at Hofstra University, 1000 Hempstead Turnpike, Hempstead, L.I.; (516) 560-6925.


New Headache for U.S.
LEAD: If it lasts, the peace settlement shaping up today between Iraq and Iran, once its arch-enemy, could significantly prolong the stay of American troops in the Persian Gulf.


Centuri Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centuri Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
53,092,000
44,913,000
Net loss
2,245,000
b21,000
6mo rev
127,400,000
103,663,000
Net loss
3,628,000
b302,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Reds' Jackson Disabled
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds placed the left-hander Danny Jackson on the 15-day disabled list yesterday because of recurring stiffness in his shoulder.


Agnico-Eagle reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Agnico-Eagle (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
17,676,000
9,306,000
Net loss
3,844,000
b5,820,000
Share earns
-
.39
Shares outst
25,965,000
15,108,000
6mo rev
38,873,000
19,147,000
Net loss
2,097,000
b3,925,000
Share earns
-
.26
Shares outst
25,167,000
14,999,000


As New England Goes, So May Go the Nation
LEAD: To the Editor:


When Guards Turn Lawless
LEAD: Nearly everyone connected with this week's ugly turmoil at New York City's Rikers Island jail has something to answer for: the guards, who let their legitimate grievances spill over into destructive lawlessness; the Dinkins administration, for letting the lawlessness drag on so long, and Mr.
Dinkins's predecessor, who allowed conditions at Rikers


People
LEAD: *
Michael V. Howe has been appointed president and chief executive of Young &amp; Rubicam's Detroit office, effective Sept. 1.
He succeeds John Sanders, who has been named chief executive of Wunderman Worldwide, the agency's direct-marketing subsidiary.


Man Indicted In the Slaying Of an Intruder
LEAD: A 19-year-old man who shot a knife-wielding burglar attacking a pregnant woman in an East Harlem apartment has been indicted on charges of second-degree murder and illegal gun possession, the Manhattan District Attorney's office said last night.


A Top Macy Executive Plans Early Retirement
LEAD: Herbert Yalof, the 53-year old president and chief operating officer of R. H. Macy &amp; Company's Northeast division, is giving up those posts and taking early retirement.


Penguin USA's Chief Quits
LEAD: In a move that took employees by surprise, Morton Mint resigned yesterday as the chief executive of Penguin USA.
The company's announcement attributed the move to ''policy differences'' over Penguin's future management.


The G.M. Strike, While Resolved, Reflects Many Workers' Unrest
LEAD: More than 20,000 General Motors Corporation workers are returning to their jobs after a six-day strike at a parts plant in Flint, Mich., that idled 16 other plants across the country.
But labor experts say deep unrest remains among the 300,000-member General Motors work force as its leaders negotiate a three-year contract to replace the one that expires in just a month.


Allis-Chalmers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allis-Chalmers Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,192,000
987,000
Net loss
44,000
b29,000
Shares outst
15,272,000
12,251,000
6mo sales
6,440,000
1,862,000
Net loss
35,000
-
Shares outst
15,272,000
10,699,000
b-Net income


Scor U.S.  Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scor U.S.  Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
50,923,262
58,252,694
Net inc
5,777,069
b4,614,951
Share earns
.33
.26
Shares outst
17,784,688
17,666,105
6mo rev
103,392,908
110,119,920
Net inc
10,077,983
b9,412,402
Share earns
.57
.53
Shares outst
17,792,108
17,652,678


Kuwaiti in U.S. Speaks Of an Exile Leadership
LEAD: The Kuwaiti government-in-exile is directing an underground armed resistance and a wide assortment of public services inside its country, from garbage removal to emergency medical care, senior Kuwaiti officials said today.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a chart in some copies of Sports Pages yesterday about the history of Yankee ownership misstated the period in which Michael Burke ran the team.


New Mission at Energy Dept.: Bomb Makers Turn to Cleanup
LEAD: Less than two years after the Energy Department acknowledged it had caused grave pollution problems at active and inactive nuclear weapons plants in more than 30 states, the department is headed toward becoming the Government's largest environmental agency.


Cellcom reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cellcom
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
36,364,580
20,827,330
Net loss
3,452,410
535,625
Shares outst
11,487,702
10,482,000
9mo rev
99,895,601
51,934,807
Net loss
6,570,710
b1,088,915
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
11,487,702
13,702,000


Tenney Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tenney Engineering (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,342,000
4,876,000
Net loss
514,000
c206,000
6mo rev
8,569,000
9,954,000
Net loss
b784,000
c677,000
b-Included gain on sale of a security of about $150,000.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   News Executives See Pool Hamstrung by Rules of Coverage
LEAD: Some news executives complained yesterday that Pentagon restrictions on the pool of reporters and photographers in Saudi Arabia have significantly limited the pool's effectiveness.


Westmin Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westmin Resources
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
38,284,000
52,771,000
Net loss
657,000
b3,872,000
6mo rev
75,303,000
101,616,000
Net inc
1,288,000
6,145,000
b-Net income
Share earnings are after payment of preferred share dividends.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.18
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.50
7.46
7.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.47
7.35
7.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.64
8.50
8.15
30-YR.


TEHERAN TO BACK SANCTIONS; NEW THREAT MADE IN KUWAIT;   PEACE HOPE FADING
LEAD: President Bush and King Hussein of Jordan failed today to make significant progress toward easing the Middle East crisis, and Mr.
Bush was apparently unable to win ironclad assurances from the King that he would halt shipments to Baghdad through the Jordanian port of Aqaba.


Union Valley Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Valley Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,243,000
26,087,000
Net loss
2,892,000
b536,000
Share earns
-
.11
Shares outst
3,773,746
4,758,667
6mo rev
21,710,000
46,244,000
Net loss
4,439,000
b616,000
Share earns
-
.13
Shares outst
3,773,746
4,758,667


Premdor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premdor Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
61,113,000
35,636,000
Net inc
290,000
288,000
Share earns
.02
.03
6mo sales
130,626,000
71,055,000
Net inc
10,000
b1,569,000
Share earns
-
.17
Shares outst
13,189,292
9,195,320


Carolina Lawmaker Is Casualty Of Federal Inquiry on Corruption
LEAD: A Federal investigation into the possibility of widespread corruption among South Carolina legislators claimed its first political casualty today when a lawmaker who had been identified as a target of the inquiry acknowledged that he was cooperating with Government prosecutors and that his career was over.


Micro Healthsystems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micro Healthsystems
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,705,000
1,627,000
Net inc
452,000
219,000
Share earns
.22
.12
Shares outst
2,099,000
1,833,000


Suspension &amp; Parts IndusFtries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suspension &amp; Parts IndusFtries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,714,883
3,812,502
Net loss
85,686
1,059,919
6mo sales
8,607,542
8,182,401
Net loss
428,960
1,248,648


More lawyers are less happy at their work, a survey finds.
LEAD: An American Bar Association survey has corroborated what has become increasingly apparent to lawyers, legal recruiters and psychiatrists: job dissatisfaction among lawyers is widespread, profound and growing worse.


Liberian Rebel Leader Hurt in Crash
LEAD: The leader of one of Liberia's rebel factions, Charles Taylor, was injured in an automobile accident today while traveling to meet a group of West African leaders to discuss a cease-fire in Liberia's civil war, a rebel spokesman said.
The talks were postponed.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


B&amp;H Ocean Carriers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* B&amp;H Ocean Carriers Ltd.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,681,399
8,587,976
Net inc
1,014,402
2,203,589
Share earns
.25
.54
6mo rev
17,542,377
17,147,014
Net inc
4,140,415
4,636,186
Share earns
1.01
1.14


Phillips Cables Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phillips Cables Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
78,345,000
87,700,000
Net inc
4,094,000
4,043,000
Share earns
.51
.51
6mo sales
159,167,000
183,954,000
Net inc
8,754,000
7,870,000
Share earns
1.09
.98
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Philip Morris Names 2 Leaders at Suchard
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that it had selected the new leadership of Jacobs Suchard AG, the Swiss candy and coffee company that it recently acquired.


Steinbrenner on the Ban
LEAD: Speaking publicly for the first time on his agreement with Commissioner Fay Vincent to yield control of the Yankees permanently, George Steinbrenner said he had rejected a two-year suspension because he could not have accepted it ''and continue to do the one thing that means most to me right now, and that is the U.S.


Hawaii Faces Biggest Fish Cookout in History
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bloodstains Support Claims of Guards' Violence
LEAD: A Rikers Island jailhouse is said to have been found splattered with well over a dozen bloodstains, including palm and finger prints - evidence that strengthens allegations that correction officers retaliated against prisoners in the wake of an uprising on Tuesday night.


Ex-Leader of Kashmir Accuses Army of Brutality
LEAD: In a blistering speech that condemned successive Indian Governments for creating ''a crisis of understanding'' in Kashmir, the former elected Chief Minister of the state accused Indian security forces today of repression, brutality and corruption in their efforts to end an uprising there.


Quiet, Please! Air Traffic Rerouted From U.S. Open
LEAD: As a result of the intercession of New York City's No. 1 tennis fan, players at this year's United States Open are less likely to be thrown off their games by the incessant roar of departing airplanes.
Fans at the National Tennis Center should benefit, too, by hearing the distinct thwock of each serve and volley, not to mention the full range of Monica Seles's grunts and Andre Agassi's groans.


Hopper Soliday Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hopper Soliday Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,907,697
10,858,093
Net loss
77,662
b222,117
Share earns
-
.11
6mo rev
15,639,536
20,567,617
Net loss
2,081,267
b377,483
Share earns
-
.19
b-Net income


Rentz Breezes to Win the Met by 6 Shots
LEAD: After Larry Rentz posted a seven-under-par 64 in the second round, the only question that remained unanswered going into the final day the Metropolitan Open was whether the 30-year-old from the nearby Knollwood Country Club would beat himself.


Inner-Ear Malady Doesn't Half Explain van Gogh's Behavior
LEAD: To the Editor:


Empire Federal Sells Auto Loans
LEAD: Empire Federal Savings of America has sold its $900 million portfolio of automobile loans to a General Electric Company subsidiary as part of the Federal Government's restructuring of the seized savings institution.
The purchase is GE Capital Auto Financial Services' first significant push into the business of holding and servicing auto loans, a GE Capital spokesman said.


Land's End Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Land's End Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 3
1990
1989
Sales
117,088,000
104,235,000
Net loss
2,201,000
b2,184,000
Share earns
-
.11
Shares outst
19,863,000
20,050,000
6mo sales
229,279,000
212,333,000
Net loss
500,000
b6,887,000
Share earns
-
.34
Shares outst
19,870,000
20,047,000


Acton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acton Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
45,180,000
49,084,000
Net inc
681,000
b6,991,000
Share earns
.11
2.50
6mo rev
80,086,000
101,812,000
Net inc
418,000
b21,677,000
Share earns
-
7.93
b-Included extraordinary credits of $2,300,000, or 87 cents a share, for the quarter and $8,086,000, or $3.07 a share, for the 6 months.


Flextronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flextronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
28,956,000
46,585,000
Net inc
b10,013,000
c2,277,000
Share earns
1.07
-
b-Included a pretax gain of $15,196,000 on the recapitalization of Asian operations.
c-Net loss


Mapplethorpe's Photos Now an F.C.C. Issue
LEAD: Robert Mapplethorpe's sexually explicit photographs have drawn the attention of the Federal Communications Commission, which is investigating complaints against a public television station that broadcast some of the pictures.


Aspen Music Festival Appoints New Director
LEAD: Lawrence Foster has been appointed music director of the Aspen Music Festival and School for a three-year term beginning in October.
Mr.
Foster, who also recently became the music director of the Jerusalem Symphony Orchestra, will be responsible for planning the programs of the nine-week Aspen Music Festival.


Reader's Digest Profits Up
LEAD: Reader's Digest Association Inc. said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings nearly doubled from a year ago and that its full-year profit rose 16.2 percent as its revenues surpassed $2 billion for the first time.


The Judge Not Chosen and Hustler Case;   Souter Etymologized
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hewlett-Packard Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hewlett-Packard Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,242,000,000
3,001,000,000
Net inc
178,000,000
187,000,000
Share earns
.73
.79
Shares outst
242,000,000
236,000,000
9mo rev
9,653,000,000
8,522,000,000
Net inc
537,000,000
583,000,000
Share earns
2.23
2.48
Shares outst
241,000,000
235,000,000


50 Hurt as Ship Rams Barge Housing Workers
LEAD: An 842-foot tanker crashed into a floating motel for river workers near the mouth of the Mississippi south of here Wednesday night, injuring 50 people.


Review/Music;   Spivakov And Moscow Virtuosi
LEAD: What Vladimir Spivakov and his Moscow Virtuosi do, they do extraordinarily well.
Yet listening to the Soviet violinist conducting his chamber ensemble at the Mostly Mozart concert on Sunday night, one could admire and still ask an uncomfortable question: why are they doing it?
Enjoying this program of Mozart, Haydn and Vivaldi at Avery Fisher


Lassonde Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lassonde Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
26,759,000
22,647,000
Net inc
918,000
573,000
Share earns
.14
.09
6mo sales
49,927,000
45,304,000
Net inc
1,774,000
1,031,000
Share earns
.27
.15
Results are in Canadian funds.


Entertainment Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entertainment Publishing (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,309,000
7,582,000
Net inc
2,484,000
3,016,000
Yr rev
85,456,000
74,399,000
Net inc
9,087,000
b4,247,000
Share earns
1.62
.82
b-After a loss from an accounting adjustment of $835,000.


Julius Lipsett, Executive, 82, Dies; Owned Large Demolition Concern
LEAD: Julius Lipsett, owner of Lipsett Inc., the demolition and salvage company responsible for tearing down the old Pennsylvania Station, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old.


Dresser Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dresser Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,181,500,000
1,004,100,000
Net inc
b47,500,000
42,400,000
Share earns
.70
.62
9mo rev
3,107,700,000
2,868,400,000
Net inc
b110,500,000
c102,100,000
Share earns
1.63
1.51


ASA International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ASA International Ltd.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,059,000
5,642,000
Net loss
240,000
b239,000
Share earns
-
.06
6mo rev
9,822,000
11,412,000
Net inc
662,000
310,000
Share earns
.17
.08
b-Net income


Federal Reserve Coping With Power Problems
LEAD: The emergency power systems that kept the banking system in business after Monday's power failure in the financial district in Manhattan are showing signs of wear, causing a new round of problems.


Christie's to Sell Philippine Artworks
LEAD: Christie's has been asked to sell major collections of Old Master paintings and 18th- and early 19th-century English silver owned by the Philippine Government, to benefit the needs of the Philippine people.


Amerihealth Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerihealth Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,229,000
15,603,000
Net inc
b75,000
d276,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
31,368,000
30,233,000
Net inc
b192,000
cd628,000
b-Included extraordinary tax benefits of $31,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $77,000, or 2 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Ralph's Grocery Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 15
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ralph's Grocery Co.
Qtr to July 15
1990
1989
Sales
622,700,000
588,200,000
Net loss
b6,500,000
5,600,000
6mo sales
1,243,600,000
1,160,700,000
Net loss
b10,500,000
12,600,000
b-Included charges of $1.3 million in the quarter and $2.6 million in the 6 months for amortization of intangibles previously allocated to goodwill.


Hearns's Manager Is Facing Some Uncertainty
LEAD: One man who is taking seriously the rumors that Thomas Hearns may defect from Emanuel Steward, the only manager and trainer he has had since turning pro in 1977, is Steward himself.


The Frantic Shuffle in Air Fares
LEAD: The fast and furious ''fare of the day'' game played by airlines in the last two weeks reflects how the industry is caught between the rising cost of fuel and depressed travel caused by a soft economy.


Chester Zardis, Player Of Jazz Bass, Dies at 90
LEAD: Chester Zardis, an original slap-style string bass player who most recently appeared with the Preservation Hall Jazz Band in New Orleans, La., on July 16, died Tuesday at Charity Hospital in New Orleans.
He was 90 years old and lived in New Orleans.


International Power Machines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Power Machines (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,434,000
12,851,000
Net loss
483,000
b206,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
24,049,000
23,132,000
Net loss
417,000
b398,000
Share earns
-
.07
b


Metalclad Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metalclad Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,512,948
9,283,524
Net loss
176,873
b208,732
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
12,155,672
16,525,570
Net loss
149,174
b515,488
Share earns
-
.12
b-Net income


Landmark Land Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Land Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
103,124,000
154,531,000
Net loss
36,844,000
b18,047,000
Share earns
-
2.21
6mo rev
208,283,000
263,834,000
Net loss
49,628,000
b9,404,000
Share earns
-
1.15


Ironstone Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ironstone Group
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
62,996,000
63,587,000
Net loss
b4,543,000
1,419,000
6mo rev
122,508,000
120,074,000
Net loss
b5,741,000
4,657,000
b-Reflected special provision for restructuring of $3,473,000 related to the current management program to impove cash flow through the disposition of unprofitable branches at Iron-Oak Supply Corp., its wholesale distribution operation.


At the Brahms Festival, the Man and the Music
LEAD: As most of the summer festivals in the area are winding down for the season and presenting their final weeks of events, Bard College, in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., is about to inaugurate what its president, Leon Botstein, says he hopes will be an annual series at the school.


Farm Credit System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farm Credit System
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
171,000,000
180,000,000
6mo net inc
362,000,000
356,000,000
Year-ago results are restated to include Insurance Fund.
This restatement reflects the fact that the FCA accounting bulletin mandating exclusion of the Insurance Fund, which bulletin was issued in mid-1989, was subsequently set aside by order of a U.S.


Adelphia Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adelphia Communications
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
64,400,000
57,455,000
Net loss
33,818,000
36,229,000


Refac Technology DevelopFment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Refac Technology DevelopFment (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,707,000
3,116,000
Net loss
314,000
b993,000
Share earns
-
.18
6mo rev
2,922,000
5,246,000
Net loss
105,000
b1,650,000
Share earns
-
.30
b-Net income


Deadline Is Nearing For Jets' Quarterbacks
LEAD: The Jets' quarterback - whoever that will be - has two games remaining to win the starting job.


Insurer in Switch On Jersey Policies
LEAD: The ITT Hartford Insurance Group said it would continue to write automobile insurance policies, bowing to a threat from New Jersey state officials.
In January, shortly before the state passed a law intended to reduce driver premiums, Hartford's Twin City Fire Insurance Company unit said it would stop writing policies in New


Small Fire at Rodin Museum
LEAD: A small fire of suspicious origin broke out today in the loft of the Rodin Museum, but caused little damage.
The museum, a branch of the Philadelphia Museum of Art, houses the world's largest single collection outside Franceof the sculptor's works.
A piece of cloth apparently caught fire and set off an alarm, a museum spokeswoman said.


13 Are Charged In Theft of Data From Computers
LEAD: Thirteen people, including a 14-year-old boy who is a suspect in a computer break-in at the office of the Secretary of the Air Force, were arrested yesterday and charged with breaking into and stealing information from a variety of computers, the New York State Police said.


MacNeal-Schwendler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MacNeal-Schwendler Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
13,430,000
11,259,000
Net inc
2,579,000
2,579,000
Share earns
.22
.21
Shares outst
11,969,000
12,024,000
6mo rev
26,236,000
21,949,000
Net inc
5,166,000
4,863,000
Share earns
.43
.40
Shares outst
11,981,000
12,024,000


Wasatch Education Sys reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wasatch Education Sys
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,061,999
2,188,500
Net loss
365,595
b5,319
6mo rev
5,359,665
3,233,735
Net loss
572,093
990,675
b-Net income


Pacesetter Business ProperFties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacesetter Business ProperFties
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,178,000
2,172,000
Net loss
812,000
1,312,000
6mo rev
4,302,000
4,245,000
Net loss
1,371,000
1,858,000
Results for 1989 periods included a reserve which increased the loss by $899,000.


Bowmar Instrument Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bowmar Instrument Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,706,000
7,532,000
Net loss
b146,000
c380,000
9mo sales
22,035,000
20,646,000
Net loss
b1,014,000
c1,440,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $819,000, or 14 cents a share, for the quarter and $556,000, or 9 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Alternative Metal


James River Plans A Restructuring
LEAD: The James River Corporation said it would restructure its operations, including the sale or shutdown of $1.3 billion in operations that have not been profitable.
The company said the move would increase the resources available for expansion and ''allow the company to simplify its structure so that it can concentrate on global growth opportunities.


Hugh Gladstone Koehler, Investment Banker, 60
LEAD: Hugo Gladstone Koehler, an investment banker, died on Tuesday at a friend's home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old and lived in Manhattan and in Cos Cob, Conn.


Mail Boxes Coast to Coast reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mail Boxes Coast to Coast
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
151,386
102,327
Net inc
b105,412
c203,939
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
377,975
181,890
Net inc
b63,432
c425,243
Share earns
.01
-
b-Primarily attributable to the sale in June of its Long Island, N.Y., Mail Boxes Etc.


Starstream Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Starstream Communications
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
355,538
780,166
Net inc
101,795
b200,490
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
977,375
1,568,297
Net inc
167,277
b394,551
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From TV Interview With Iraqi Official
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an interview by Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz of Iraq with Ted Koppel on the ABC News program ''Nightline'' Wednesday, as transcribed by Journal Graphics.


Pacesetter Homes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacesetter Homes Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,135,000
13,466,000
Net inc
108,000
7,000
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
23,491,000
23,387,000
Net loss
357,000
b219,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-Net income


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 525 money market mutual funds increased $2.38 billion, to $404.48 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 169 institutional funds increased by $829.3 million, to $101.11 billion.
The assets of the 252 general-purpose funds were up by $469.9 million, to $140.4 billion.


An Editor Is Appointed At Esquire
LEAD: The Hearst Corporation yesterday announced the appointment of Terry McDonell, the founder and editor in chief of Smart magazine, to be the new editor of Esquire, the venerable men's magazine that helped establish both the ''new journalism'' of the 1960's and the ''new man'' of the 1980's.


New Orleans In New York As 2 Bands Share a Stage
LEAD: Music defines the cultural life of New Orleans, perhaps more than it does in any other city in the United States.
Whether it's a tribe of Mardi Gras Indians leading hundreds of people, singing and dancing, down the city's side streets, or Sunday brass bands that get entire neighborhoods to supply percussion accompaniment with bottles and cans, live music is part of the city's everyday existence.


Xytronyx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xytronyx Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
64,962,000
20,368,000
Net loss
374,734
330,006
Shares outst
2,920,520
1,594,699


Vandal Vessels Invade the Atlantic
LEAD: International outrage has squeezed drift-net fishing fleets out of the South Pacific and forced them to accept supervision in the North Pacific.
But there are signs that these vandal vessels are now shifting to Atlantic waters.
The fleets' host nations, Taiwan in particular, need to monitor their boats' behavior much more closely.


Oncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oncor Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
928,968
621,487
Net loss
299,045
488,495
Shares outst
7,093,000
5,191,000
6mo rev
1,613,402
1,339,550
Net loss
775,327
854,506
Shares outst
7,093,000
5,191,000


Strober Organization Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Strober Organization Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
28,769,000
34,017,000
Net loss
507,000
b237,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo sales
54,514,000
63,548,000
Net loss
1,574,000
b353,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


Lyme Disease Is Now Linked To Stroke in 20-Year-Old G.I.
LEAD: Two neurologists have reported that a 20-year-old man suffered a stroke as a result of meningitis brought on by Lyme disease.
Eleven similar cases have been documented in Europe, they say.


Salem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salem Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
28,908,000
29,834,000
Net inc
337,000
304,000
Share earns
.27
.24
6mo rev
53,932,000
55,090,000
Net inc
552,000
746,000
Share earns
.42
.60
Revenue represents gross revenue.


Flexsteel Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flexsteel Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
44,551,339
44,664,179
Net inc
1,343,718
c1,693,050
Share earns
.19
.24
Yr sales
173,546,725
172,515,190
Net inc
b6,390,444
c7,003,542
Share earns
.90
.98


Are Police at the Front In the War on Crime?
LEAD: With the New York City Police Department stretched thin by budget cuts and rising crime, many New Yorkers are asking, ''Where are the police?''
The new Police Commissioner, Lee


TV Weekend;   Betraying the I.R.A. And Trying to Survive
LEAD: One of the mysteries about ''Act of Betrayal'' is why it should take four hours to tell so simple a tale.
The story, which begins tonight at 9 and concludes tomorrow night at the same time on the Arts &amp; Entertainment cable network, has to do with the tracking down of a former officer in the Irish Republican Army named Michael M


Ex-Official Pleads Guilty to Dumping Body
LEAD: A former assistant city commissioner pleaded guilty yesterday to illegally dumping the body of a woman who died in his apartment four months ago, the Manhattan District Attorney's office said.


Sax, Like Yankees, in Summer Slump
LEAD: The numbers aren't what they used to be.
Steve Sax's batting average has fallen 61 points from a season ago, and his on-base percentage has tumbled.
He isn't even breaking batting helmets with the same frequency: two this year, six in 1989. ''That's because they're making them tougher,'' he said.
The summer of Sax's discontent has paralleled the Yankees' dismal and unending slide.


The Judge Not Chosen and Hustler Case
LEAD: To the Editor:


Study Finds the U.S. Lags In Communications Goods
LEAD: A study of the nation's telecommunications equipment industry, released yesterday by the Commerce Department, has found that the United States is no longer competitive in markets for consumer products like telephones and facsimile machines and is losing ground in markets for business and telephone company equipment.


Housing Starts Fell 2.6% in July
LEAD: Construction of new homes fell for the sixth straight month in July, cutting building activity to its weakest pace in nearly eight years, the Government said today.


Owner of Disabled Car Finds Market Sluggish
LEAD: To the Editor:


Letter;   Now Here's the Deal With the Oil Moguls
LEAD: To the Editor:


Our Towns;   Of Adult Homes, This One Ranks Among the Worst
LEAD: The Commission on Quality Care for the Mentally Disabled recently released a list of the state's 14 worst adult homes.
Their residents are mainly former mental patients or poor people unable to care for themselves.
Inspectors noted that many homes resembled old back wards of state hospitals.


Solzhenitsyn Cool as Moscow Confirms Offer
LEAD: Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and 22 other exiled literary, scientific and cultural figures are on a list of people whose citizenship has been restored by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, officials said today.


Membership Policies Become Popular Topics
LEAD: Willie Mays of New York took a train and a cab here today to enjoy the day and the Ladies Professional Golf Association tournament at Wykagyl Country Club.


Infodata Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Infodata Systems
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,008,439
2,608,811
Net inc
b48,515
c658,831
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
6,072,186
5,395,084
Net inc
b98,516
c1,090,249
Share earns
.02
-
b-After net operating loss carryforwards of $9,143, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $23,950, or 2 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Marshall Steel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marshall Steel
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
28,296,000
31,866,000
Net loss
209,000
1,170,000
6mo sales
5,853,000
61,036,000
Net loss
923,000
2,419,000
Results are in Canadian funds.


Medical Data Reread to Jury In Jogger Rape
LEAD: The jury in the Central Park jogger case deliberated for an eighth day without reaching a verdict yesterday - another day of steadily rising tension, reread testimony and a confusing flurry of notes to the judge.


Columbia Expects Loss on 'Junk' Sale
LEAD: The Columbia Savings and Loan Association said in a filing with regulators that it would lose about $50 million on the proposed sale of its nearly $3 billion portfolio of high-risk ''junk bonds.''


Uni-Select Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Uni-Select Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
65,741,000
49,226,000
Net inc
796,000
731,000
Share earns
.19
.18
6mo sales
129,447,000
93,141,000
Net inc
1,276,000
1,156,000
Share earns
.31
.29
Figures are in Canadian funds.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
CHINA AT THE FRICK


Wood Gundy Cuts Staff
LEAD: Wood Gundy Inc., a big Canadian brokerage, cut 21 workers today from its investment banking staff, reflecting a slump among investment firms in Canada.
Both retail and corporate investors have turned away from stocks in favor of more conservative investments after the stock market crash in October 1987 and decline in October 1989, analysts said.


B&amp;H Bulk Carriers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* B&amp;H Bulk Carriers Ltd.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,707,256
11,941,923
Net loss
657,947
b9,265,715
Share earns
-
4.54
6mo rev
5,275,434
16,293,834
Net loss
985,373
b10,640,124
Share earns
-
5.21
b-Net income


Precision Aerotech reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Aerotech (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
18,908,000
16,604,000
Net loss
b2,391,000
c1,248,000
Yr sales
71,923,000
53,984,000
Net loss
b9,856,000
c4,444,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $209,000 and $5,775,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


'Good Samaritan' Victim Said to Have Fled Attack
LEAD: A slaying in a so-called good Samaritan case in East Harlem took on a sharply different cast yesterday, as a prosecutor described the victim not as a knife-wielding burglar - as the neighbor who shot him had said - but as a terrified man fleeing some unknown danger.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-12


Judge in Barry's Trial Is Criticized In Debate Over Dismissal of the Jury
LEAD: The drug and perjury trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. is over, but the legal debate lingers over whether Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson moved too hastily in declaring a mistrial and dismissing the jury.


Prime Financial Partnership reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Financial Partnership (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
446,056
482,680
6mo net loss
592,814
851,603


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Tankers Stalled at Gulf As Sanctions Take Hold
LEAD: An unusually large number of commercial ships are anchored outside the Strait of Hormuz entrance to the Persian Gulf, tanker rates for the gulf have fallen and most Iraqi-owned ships are not trying to pick up or unload cargoes in ports around the world, shipping experts said here today.


Comcoa Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to July 15
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comcoa Inc. (OTC)
12wks to July 15
1990
1989
Revenue
12,520,722
10
Net inc
907,500
c599,864
Share earns
.18
.12
24wk rev
24,852,089
20,527,997
Net inc
b2,157,993
c1,053,953
Share earns
.43
.21
Shares outst
4,990,236
5,118,899


New Generation Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Generation Foods (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,534,000
1,379,000
Net loss
17,000
114,000
Shares outst
12,263,000
10,711,000
6mo sales
2,663,000
1,942,000
Net loss
107,000
521,000
Shares outst
12,244,000
10,498,000


Confrontation in the Gulf: Washington at Work;   Military Chief: Man of Action And of Politics
LEAD: At 8 o'clock on the morning after Kuwait fell, Gen.
Colin L. Powell strode into the White House crisis meeting.
Armed with maps, charts and intelligence reports, people who were there say, he outlined a massive Iraqi onslaught that left the President convinced that military response was inevitable.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on July 20 about a condominium project in Glendale, Queens, misidentified the original owner of a converted house on Fresh Pond Road.
He was Henry E. Pflug, not Philip


Rates Surge to Three-Month High
LEAD: Treasury bond prices plummeted yesterday and long-term interest rates rose to their highest levels since early May, as traders reacted with alarm to a disappointing report on inflation and heightened tensions in the Middle East.


Westbridge Computer reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westbridge Computer
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
28,502,000
35,423,000
Net loss
58,000
b2,148,000
Share earns
-
.28
b-Net income and included a loss from discontinued operations of $63,000.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


New Retail Concepts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Retail Concepts Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,770,235
1,412,955
Net inc
100,484
332,895
Share earns
.02
.06
Revenue represented net revenue.
The company said that the increase in revenues is primarily attributable to the commencement by the company on Nov.


Critical Industries Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Critical Industries Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
10,788,399
12,944,713
Net loss
72,908
b615,518
Share earns
-
.10
6mo sales
18,852,572
20,950,238
Net loss
254,103
b562,710
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


As New York Crime Rises, Police Officers Contend With Many Other Chores
LEAD: With the New York City Police Department stretched thin by budget cuts and rising crime, New Yorkers from politicians to beleaguered shopkeepers to worried parents are asking the same question: Where are the police?


Criticare Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Criticare Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,527,390
3,610,587
Net inc
243,123
b446,183
Share earns
.03
-
Yr sales
18,206,372
13,809,074
Net inc
338,963
b254,006
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
6,285,291
5,806,028


Oil Prices Resume Rise as Tensions Grow
LEAD: Oil prices resumed their climb yesterday, as a nervous market contemplated the continuing loss of Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude, the heightened tensions in the Middle East and a delay by OPEC members in increasing their oil production.


PCL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PCL Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
22,938,000
25,433,000
Net inc
b1,420,000
c946,000
Share earns
.19
.14
6mo sales
45,393,000
51,458,000
Net inc
b1,577,000
c1,317,000
Share earns
.21
.20
b-Included a $2,408,000 gain on the sale of the furniture and equipment rental businesses.


G.E. Aircraft Engines Will Cut 1,500 Jobs
LEAD: The General Electric Company's aircraft engines division said today that it planned to eliminate 1,500 jobs in its American operations by 1992 because of cuts in military spending.


Auctions
LEAD: In 1988, Habsburg, Feldman, a little-known Geneva-based auction house with lofty ambitions, opened a New York City office in a grand town house on the Upper East Side.


Warrentech Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warrentech Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,308,269
4,140,828
Net inc
322,913
154,125
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
129,242,692
121,135,123
Share earnings are adjusted to reflect a 1-for-10 reverse stock split on Aug.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Jazz With a Grin


Mobile America Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mobile America Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,906,879
4,689,240
Net inc
1,101,228
551,165
Share earns
.70
.35
Shares outst
1,573,873
1,574,428
6mo rev
13,358,590
8,788,710
Net inc
2,186,537
937,895
Share earns
1.38
.60
Shares outst
1,573,873
1,574,428


John Adams Life Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Adams Life Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,070,906
1,259,962
Net loss
41,467
117,894
6mo rev
2,240,659
3,431,713
Net loss
150,199
354,376


Audit Shows Railroads Are Remiss on Payroll Tax
LEAD: A number of the country's major railroads and railroad-related businesses are failing to pay large amounts of payroll taxes to the Federal Government to finance the unemployment, retirement and medical benefits for the industry's workers, an audit indicates.


TRW to Shut Plant
LEAD: TRW Inc. said it would close its electronic products plant here and lay off 190 employees.
Up to 40 workers could be transferred to TRW plants in Colorado Springs or San Diego within five months.
TRW said its avionics and surveillance group, which includes the electronics plant, had consolidated because of declining military spending and increased competition.


Franklin Ebaugh, 68, V.A. Medical Official
LEAD: Franklin G. Ebaugh Jr., chief of staff at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Palo Alto, Calif., and a former dean of two medical schools, died on Aug. 7 at his home in Stanford, Calif.
He was 68 years old.


5 Months Later, Youth Set Afire Returns Home
LEAD: Five months after he was set on fire and almost burned to death, 12-year-old David Opont said yesterday, as he went to his family's new home in Brooklyn for the first time, that he was ''angry but not a lot'' at the older boy who the police say inflicted the agony.


Equity Reverses 'Saigon' Vote And Welcomes English Star
LEAD: Actors' Equity changed its mind yesterday and voted to permit the English actor Jonathan Pryce to come to Broadway to re-create his prize-winning portrayal of a Eurasian pimp in the hit London musical ''Miss Saigon.''


Budd Canada Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Budd Canada Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
68,500,000
74,800,000
Net inc
6,500,000
6,500,000
Share earns
1.74
1.75
9mo sales
187,300,000
216,500,000
Net inc
13,800,000
19,700,000
Share earns
3.67
5.26
Latest share earnings for 9 months included 85 cents a share from price adjustments arising from the sale of warehouse surplus.


Clutch Hits Help Mets Defeat Dodgers
LEAD: The pitching was sharp and stingy.
The hits were clutch; the runs they produced both stylish and sufficient.
The defense was occasionally extraordinary and otherwise thoroughly adequate.


Ames Will Close Office in Syracuse
LEAD: Ames Department Stores Inc. said it would close its regional accounting office here in a companywide plan to consolidate jobs and cut costs.
The closing of the Ames downtown Syracuse office will put nearly 160 people out of work, a company spokesman, Bill Roberts, said.


Bumble Bee to Cut Jobs in Puerto Rico
LEAD: Bumble Bee Seafoods Inc., the nation's third-largest tuna canner, said it would cut 800 jobs at a plant in Puerto Rico as it reduces its production of light-meat tuna.
Bumble Bee said its plant in Mayaguez, P.R., would continue operating with more than 1,000 employees although a second shift would be eliminated.


Note to Readers
LEAD: The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Tours of Manhattan: The Facts and the Fiction
LEAD: IT is not difficult to come to New York City and go away believing that Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis lives in a town house on ''Beekman Hill'' overlooking the East River, that the rules of baseball were made up in a building called the ''Republican Club'' at 62d Street and Fifth Avenue, that Mount Sinai Hospital is known for the face lifts it performs on movie stars, and that whites abandoned Harlem en masse in 1901 because somebody built factories across the river in New Jersey that year.


Family Steak Houses of FlorFida reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Family Steak Houses of FlorFida (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
12,316,100
11,459,500
Net inc
b176,000
c220,400
Share earns
.02
.02
6mo sales
25,240,400
23,142,300
Net inc
b571,100
c716,800
Share earns
.05
.07


Adage Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adage Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
21,049,000
20,168,000
Net inc
325,000
578,000
Share earns
.02
.05
Shares outst
20,524,953
10,954,488
6mo sales
47,717,000
40,892,000
Net inc
443,000
1,096,000
Share earns
.03
.10
Shares outst
17,605,838
10,945,488


Reader's Digest Association Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reader's Digest Association Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
479,879,000
419,516,000
Net inc
19,994,000
10,391,000
Share earns
.16
.09
Shares outst
119,325,000
117,782,000
Yr rev
2,009,704,000
1,832,013,000
Net inc
176,020,000
151,548,000
Share earns
1.48
1.28
Shares outst
118,343,000
117,796,000


Orient-Express Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orient-Express Hotels (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,360,000
16,667,000
Net inc
954,000
1,611,000
Share earns
.10
.17
6mo rev
29,307,000
26,101,000
Net inc
15,402,000
b1,492,000
Share earns
1.58
-
b-Net loss and included income from discontinued operations of $1,500,000, or 15 cents a share.


Amoco Canada Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoco Canada Petroleum
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
850,000,000
828,000,000
Net loss
59,000,000
71,000,000
6mo rev
1,854,000,000
1,664,000,000
Net loss
87,000,000
127,000,000
Amoco Canada is a unit of Amoco Corp.


Rauch Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rauch Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,840,000
2,430,000
Net loss
270,000
b535,000
6mo sales
2,700,000
3,400,000
Net loss
700,000
934,000
b-Included extraordinary charge of 20 cents a share in connection with the settlement of litigation.


Young Giants' Defenders Making Good Impressions
LEAD: Mike Fox, Clint James and Greg Mark are growing increasingly important to the Giants.
That's because Erik Howard and Leonard Marshall, who represent two-thirds of the Giants' proposed starting defensive line, continue to be absent from training camp.


Coin Grading Complaint
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission filed a civil action and consent decree yesterday charging that Professional Coin Grading Service Inc. had made false and misleading advertising claims.


Harry B. Freeman Jr., Investment Banker, 64
LEAD: Harry B. Freeman Jr., an investment banker, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhatan.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Intertan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intertan Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
145,201,000
130,822,000
Net inc
b724,000
c4,816,000
Share earns
.08
.55
Yr sales
683,835,000
644,130,000
Net inc
b28,899,000
c40,341,000
Share earns
3.26
4.56
b-After an extraordinary loss of $1,068,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary credit of $1,235,000, or 14 cents a share, for the year.


Move by Ambase Spurs Holder Suit
LEAD: A stockholder of the Ambase Corporation sued the insurer, contending that Ambase had misled investors into believing it would pay a special dividend upon the sale of its Home Insurance Company unit.
David Shuchat, who filed the lawsuit in Federal District Court in Manhattan, said the case was brought on behalf of all investors who bought Ambase stock between May 14 and


Dundee Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dundee Capital
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,240,000
6,481,000
Net inc
3,613,000
638,000
Share earns
.29
.05
6mo rev
17,774,000
14,078,000
Net inc
4,943,000
1,904,000
Share earns
.40
.15
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Toreador Royalty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Toreador Royalty Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
242,950
197,214
Net loss
33,404
91,558
Shares outst
4,524,300
4,457,633
6mo rev
438,672
321,751
Net loss
137,717
117,432
Shares outst
4,524,300
4,457,633


Hewlett In Move To France
LEAD: In a move reflecting the growing importance of the European market, the Hewlett-Packard Company said today that it was moving the headquarters of its personal computer group from Sunnyvale, Calif., to Grenoble, France.


Books of The Times;   One Part Humor, 2 Parts Whining
LEAD:
Natural Selection
By Frederick Barthelme
212 pages. Viking. $18.95.


ON STAGE
LEAD:
The Schedule-Making Season


Economic Scene;   A Hard Transition For the Germanys
LEAD: THE wedding of their economies will create a boom for the two Germanys, but it also means worrisome strains for both of them.


Stateswest Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stateswest Airlines
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,187,106
1,439,330
Net loss
1,073,858
577,467
Shares outst
4,350,651
2,997,910
6mo rev
5,486,028
3,895,218
Net loss
2,684,279
1,821,380
Shares outst
4,350,543
2,738,065


Dataram Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataram Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,845,000
3,814,000
Net inc
377,000
415,000
Share earns
.30
.21
Shares outst
1,271,000
1,949,000


Editorial Notebook;   Hong Kong's Formula for Hope
LEAD: Capitalists have recovered their confidence in Hong Kong.
The British colony's stock market, sustained by fresh infusions of foreign capital, has now wiped out the heavy losses that followed last year's Tiananmen Square massacre.


Review/Photography;   Amid Train Data, Images Of Danger and Intrigue
LEAD: Placing art in public places is a tricky business.
To be successful, the work must be sufficiently provocative to engage an audience that is busy going about its own business.
Yet if the art's assault on the senses is too great, it can backfire - witness Richard Serra's much-criticized and now dismantled sculpture ''Tilted Arc.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I suppose one has to have hope. Without hope you can't get anywhere.''
- King Hussein of Jordan.
[A10:2.]


After Long Decline, Teen Births Are Up
LEAD: An 18-year-long decline in teen-age birth rates has reversed itself abruptly, with the sharpest increase among mothers 15 to 17 years old, the Federal Government reports.


Review/Film;   An Adman, His Filofax And a Thief
LEAD: The working title of ''Taking Care of Business'' was ''Filofax,'' a word that reeks of yesterday's yuppies.
But being a year or so behind the social curve is the least of this hoary comedy's problems.
The screenplay was written by Jill Mazursky, the 25-year-old daughter of the director Paul Mazursky (who is this film's executive producer), and Jeffrey Abrams, who is 24.


Xscribe Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xscribe Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,736,000
3,319,000
Net loss
930,000
765,000
Shares outst
6,647,000
6,222,000


Democracy Betrayed in Myanmar
LEAD: It seemed like a fairy-tale ending to 28 years of ruinous military dictatorship in Myanmar, formerly Burma.
In May, in the country's first free election since 1962, an overwhelming majority voted for a party of persecuted opposition democrats, the National League for Democracy.


Cache Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cache Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
11,814,000
8,677,000
Net inc
338,000
510,000
Share earns
.01
.02
Shares outst
34,422,000
33,853,000
6mo sales
20,319,000
15,648,000
Net inc
6,000
267,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
34,257,000
33,801,000


William A. Grier, Lawyer, 78
LEAD: William A. Grier, a retired lawyer in Manhattan for the General Motors Corporation, died last Friday at a nursing home in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 78 years old and lived in Vero Beach.


Bankers Trust
LEAD: The Bankers Trust New York Corporation said in a filing to the Securities and Exchange Commission that in light of current economic conditions, its problem loans might continue to rise in the rest of 1990.
In the first half of 1990, Bankers Trust's non-refinancing country cash basis loans rose $122 million, to $772 million.


Stocks Fall To 3-Month Low Point
LEAD: The stock market tumbled yesterday to its lowest close in more than three months after being pummeled throughout the day by a worse-than-expected inflation report, falling bond prices, higher oil prices and unsettling news from the Middle East.


Backing for Germans
LEAD: The possible merger of the East and West German Olympic teams is a matter for Germans to decide and any agreement will be accepted by the International Olympic Committee, Juan Antonio Samaranch, the I.O.C. president, said yesterday.


Burlington Industries Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Industries Capital
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
589,376,000
651,565,000
Net loss
b20,654,000
c2,393,000
Share earns
-
.18
9mo sales
1,729,485,000
1,835,602,000
Net loss
b64,003,000
13,218,000
Shares outst
16,436,000
13,247,000


Dollar General reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dollar General (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
153,012,000
147,608,000
Net inc
2,548,000
2,756,000
Share earns
.14
.15
6mo sales
286,778,000
277,495,000
Net inc
2,938,000
2,336,000
Share earns
.16
.13


Workout for Dorsett
LEAD: Tony Dorsett, 36 years old and six months into retirement, took his first major step toward a comeback by working out Wednesday for the Dallas Cowboys' director of pro personnel, John Wooten.


Berry Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Berry Petroleum (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,440,000
11,883,000
Net inc
2,416,000
3,500,000
Share earns
.11
.20
Shares outst
21,491,000
17,896,000
6mo rev
26,174,000
21,168,000
Net inc
6,811,000
5,799,000
Share earns
.32
.32
Shares outst
21,498,000
17,896,000


Louis Barron, 71, Dies; Barnes &amp; Noble Editor
LEAD: Louis Barron, editor in chief of Barnes &amp; Noble Books, died on Monday at the Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan while undergoing surgery for renal failure, his family said.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan and Downsville, N.Y.


3 Arrested in Brooklyn In Kidnapping of Child
LEAD: Two men and a woman were arrested and a 2-year-old child was recovered unharmed last night in Brooklyn Heights in what the police said was a kidnapping.


21 Hurt as Two City Buses Collide in Upper Manhattan


What to See And When To
LEAD: Movies in the 1990 Festival Latino Film series, sponsored by the New York Shakespeare Festival Public Theater, are to be shown starting today at the Worldwide Cinemas, 50th Street, between Eighth and Ninth Avenues.
Shorts and documentaries are to be shown at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, next Friday to Aug.


Further Decline Posted By Trump's 3 Casinos
LEAD: The performance of Donald J. Trump's Atlantic City casinos deteriorated further in the second quarter, according to documents filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Quarex Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quarex Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
50,622,044
50,502,000
Net inc
604,992
544,767
Share earns
.17
.15
6mo sales
98,502,553
94,491,615
Net inc
949,120
697,245
Share earns
.27
.20
The company said it reported combined sales and earnings for the 1990 second quarter prepared on a pro forma combined basis with the sales and earnings reported by PSL Foods Inc.


American Healthcare Mgmt reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Healthcare Mgmt (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
120,614,000
122,407,000
Net inc
b95,000
c1,370,000
Share earns
.01
.11
6mo rev
248,050,000
247,863,000
Net inc
b941,000
c8,432,000
Share earns
.06
.70
Shares outst
15,160,000
11,962,000


Van Slyke's Homer in Ninth Lifts Pirates
LEAD: Andy Van Slyke hit a home run in the ninth inning today as Pittsburgh beat the Atlanta Braves, 4-3, keeping the Pirates in first place in the National League East.


Chrysler Unit Sets $751 Million Offer
LEAD: United States Auto Receivables Trust, a financing vehicle for the Chrysler Corporation, yesterday offered about $751 million of securities backed by car loan payments through an underwriting syndicate led by the First Boston Corporation.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraqi's Belligerence Touches Pride and Old Wounds of Arabs
LEAD: Throughout the Middle East, the defiant stance of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is inspiring a surge of deep, conflicting emotions and reflection on the old, troubling question of Arab identity.


Cartier Sues On Imitations
LEAD: The French fashion house Cartier, saying its image was being ruined by imitations of its luxury merchandise, took eight Indonesian companies to court today.


Mall Building Has Slowed
LEAD: Reflecting a cutback in lending by commercial banks, the number of new shopping-center starts in the United States fell sharply in the first half of 1990, according to the International Council of Shopping Centers, a trade group based in New York.


Stock Plan Backed At Western Union
LEAD: Shareholders of the Western Union Corporation approved the reclassification of the company's preferred stock into common.
The vote, at the company's annual meeting, ''put us through the first step of a planned recapitalization,'' the company's president, Robert J. Amman, said.
The next step is Western Union's offer to exchange cash, common stock and new notes for the company's outstanding 19.25 percent and 16 percent notes.


Lawrence A. Frost, 83, Podiatrist and Author
LEAD: Dr.
Lawrence A. Frost, a podiatrist and a historian who published several books on Gen.
George A. Custer, died on Tuesday at Mercy Memorial Hospital in Monroe, Mich.
He was 83 years old and lived in Monroe.
His family said he died of cardiac arrest.


Republic Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Waste Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,400,000
3,060,000
Net inc
973,000
b92,000
Share earns
.13
-
Shares outst
7,510,000
3,686,000
6mo rev
12,900,000
6,053,000
Net inc
1,176,000
b63,000
Share earns
.20
-
Shares outst
5,972,000
3,586,000


American Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
127,897,000
156,906,000
Net loss
b3,766,000
16,485,000
6mo rev
260,658,000
318,214,000
Net loss
b8,265,000
18,129,000
Shares outst
20,295,908
17,814,715


Rose Is Working In Prison Machine Shop
LEAD: Pete Rose is earning 11 cents an hour working in a prison machine shop and isn't playing for the inmates' softball team yet, the assistant warden said yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article by The Associated Press on Tuesday about a meeting that included discussion of an anti-abortion campaign being financed by the National Conference of Catholic Bishops incorrectly described attendance at the meeting.
Those attending the meeting, convened by the conference's Secretariat for Pro-Life Activities, were mainly priests, nuns and members of the laity who are directors of


Wofford Kreth Smith, Campus Chaplain, 62
LEAD: The Rev.
Wofford Kreth Smith, an Episcopal priest who was chaplain at the University of Mississippi during the turbulent era of integration, died on Aug. 10 at his home in College Park, Md.
He was 62 years old.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Another Ollie's


Dollar at an All-Time Low Against Mark in New York
LEAD: The dollar tumbled to an all-time low against the German mark during domestic trading as heightened tensions in the Middle East and signs of United States economic weakness spurred a wave of selling.


Emulex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emulex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
32,512,000
36,905,000
Net inc
1,001,000
2,216,000
Share earns
.10
.20
Shares outst
10,348,794
11,254,177
Yr sales
120,483,000
148,659,000
Net loss
1,037,000
b13,267,000
Share earns
-
1.15
Shares outst
10,578,316
11,527,551


Rocky Mountain UndergarFment reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain UndergarFment (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
4,845,000
8,730,000
Net loss
175,000
b1,728,000
Share earns
-
.51
Shares outst
3,010,711
3,352,418
6mo sales
9,096,000
18,188,000
Net loss
248,000
b1,783,000
Share earns
-
.53
Shares outst
3,047,564
3,350,046


Drug Suspension For Bax of Bucs
LEAD: Carl Bax of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, sentenced to one year of probation after pleading guilty to two charges of steroid importation, was suspended today from the first three games of the National Football League regular season.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From 'Open Letter' To Bush by President of Iraq
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Saddam Hussein's ''open letter'' to President Bush today, as transmitted by the official Iraqi press agency and translated by Reuters:


E-Z-EM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Z-EM Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Sales
21,299,000
22,796,000
Net loss
7,573,000
b2,396,000
Share earns
-
.30
Yr sales
79,371,000
77,694,000
Net loss
3,475,000
b7,963,000
Share earns
-
1.00
b-Net income


Review/Film;   Sibling Rivalries, Old and New
LEAD: In ''Daddy's Dyin' . . .
Who's Got the Will?'' the children of a Texas farmer return to the homestead to relive old enmities and fight over their inheritances.


Lew DeWitt, 52, Tenor With Statler Brothers
LEAD: Lew DeWitt, the tenor and guitarist of the Statler Brothers country-music group for 20 years, died on Wednesday at his home in Waynesboro, Va.
His death resulted from heart and kidney disease, his mother said.
He was 52 years old.


Steinbrenner Planning Changes
LEAD: George Steinbrenner has told his partners that he plans to name a new general manager before he yields control of the Yankees next week, according to partners who attended the ownership meeting in Cleveland on Wednesday.


Onex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Onex Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
575,000,000
464,000,000
Net inc
6,500,000
10,400,000
Share earns
.25
.44
6mo rev
1,100,000,000
896,000,000
Net inc
9,400,000
b18,700,000
Share earns
.41
.31
b-Included non-operating gains of $2.3 million.


Winston Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winston Resources (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,470,369
5,532,877
Net loss
259,687
90,195
Shares outst
2,931,896
3,000,000
6mo rev
11,041,244
11,001,604
Net loss
360,190
62,539
Shares outst
2,937,376
3,000,000


Medical Action Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Action Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,592,158
6,044,615
Net inc
33,259
b137,261
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
5,020,400
5,067,934
b-Net loss


Carriage Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carriage Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
34,320,000
28,851,000
Net inc
1,820,000
47,000
Share earns
.44
.01
Shares outst
4,100,000
4,984,000
Yr sales
117,182,000
102,895,000
Net inc
2,055,000
1,617,000
Share earns
.44
.33


Riverside Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Riverside Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
996,000
2,238,000
Per share
.18
.40
Shares outst
5,594,930
5,594,000
6mo net inc
2,107,000
4,014,000
Per share
.37
.72


Sports of The Times;   Three Years Too Harsh for Upsala
LEAD: Dr.
Robert Karsten has been a Lutheran clergyman much longer than he has been president of Upsala College, so it is no surprise that he quotes the Bible more readily than the rule book of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.


Market Place;   On Phasing Out Stock Certificates
LEAD: WITH support from regulators, and having found what it hopes to be a way around state laws, the securities industry is moving toward doing away with the majority of stock certificates.


Quixote Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quixote Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
25,464,000
15,202,000
Net loss
b4,567,000
c890,000
Share earns
-
.12
Yr sales
65,775,000
56,178,000
Net loss
b3,675,000
c2,158,000
Share earns
-
.28
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $6,319,000 and $8,714,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and both losses from discontinued operations included a loss provision of $5,400,000 against future losses on the operations and the disposition of Source Scientific.


American Real Estate PartFners reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Real Estate PartFners (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,868,269
14,629,642
Net inc
4,035,004
7,379,532
Share earns
.28
.50
6mo rev
29,863,923
29,079,943
Net inc
10,402,049
13,648,157
Share earns
.70
.91


Atwater Condition Worsens, Republican Officials Report
LEAD: The Republican National Chairman, Lee Atwater, has received additional radiation treatment as an inoperable brain tumor has worsened, party officials said today.


Advest Buyback
LEAD: The board of Advest Group Inc. approved a plan to buy back up to two million shares, or about 20 percent of the company's common stock.
The intermittent purchases will be conducted in the open market, Advest said.
The company is a regional brokerage based in Hartford.
Its shares closed today at $3.75, up 50 cents each, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Banc One Notes
LEAD: The Banc One Corporation offered $200 million of 20-year notes through an underwriting syndicate led by Salomon Brothers.
The 10 percent notes, which are noncallable for life, mature Aug. 15, 2010.
They were priced at $99.875, to yield 10.25 percent, 1.40 percentage points over the prevailing yield on the Treasury's benchmark 8 3/4 percent 30-year bonds of 2020 at the time of pricing.


U.S. Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Gold Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
802,178
3,167,989
Net loss
b846,947
c728,119
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
47,633,235
47,392,261
6mo rev
2,001,312
6,391,217
Net inc
b10,133,910
1,190,618
Share earns
.21
.03
Shares outst
47,713,647
47,434,998


Automatic Data reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automatic Data (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
425,827,000
418,054,000
Net inc
59,670,000
53,010,000
Share earns
.81
.73
Shares outst
73,804,000
72,826,000
Yr rev
1,714,041,000
1,677,688,000
Net inc
211,710,000
187,570,000
Share earns
2.88
2.53
Shares outst
73,584,000
74,224,000


British Wages Up 10%
LEAD: Average earnings of British workers rose 10 percent in the fiscal year ended in June despite Government appeals to employers to hold down wages to fight inflation, official figures showed today.
In addition, unemployment increased by a seasonally adjusted 10,900 in July, to 1.63 million, or 5.7 percent of the work force.


For Children
LEAD:
SHOWS, NATURE, MUSEUMS
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Friday (until 8 P.M. on Tuesday) and 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on weekends; gift shop and cafeteria are open the same hours.
Admission: children under 3, free; ages 3 to 12, 25 cents; 65 and older, 50 cents; others, $1.
Information: 861-6030.


South Korean Riot Police Block Students Seeking to Open Border
LEAD: South Korean students gathered today near the border with North Korea and fought with riot police blocking their way to the North.


Gap Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gap Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Sales
405,000,000
326,000,000
Net inc
19,200,000
14,100,000
Share earns
.54
.40
6mo sales
807,000,000
636,000,000
Net inc
40,300,000
29,200,000
Share earns
1.14
.83


Insituform of North America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insituform of North America Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,184,870
5,560,412
Net inc
617,892
1,052,129
Share earns
.08
.13
6mo rev
10,311,198
10,397,410
Net inc
978,356
1,565,358
Share earns
.13
.20


Canadian Banks Cut Prime Rate
LEAD: Leading Canadian banks cut their prime lending rates half a percentage point today to 14.25 percent.
It was the first drop in the rate in almost three years.


Jury Weighs Drunken Flying Charge
LEAD: In the first criminal trial of airline pilots charged with flying under the influence of alcohol, a jury in Federal District Court today began deliberating the case of three pilots who flew a Northwest Airlines jetliner after a night of heavy drinking.


Study Says Alzheimer's Medicine Is Useless
LEAD: A study made public today concludes that the only medication approved by the Government for treating Alzheimer's disease is useless and may actually make the disease worse.


Pemex Adopts a Corporate Tone
LEAD: Since Iraq's occupation of Kuwait, many industrialized nations have looked nervously to countries like Mexico, one of the largest producers of oil outside the Middle East.
But Mexico's state-owned oil company, long past the glory days of the early 1980's when prices were high, will probably not be much help.


Aifs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aifs Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
36,730,000
28,513,000
Net inc
1,542,000
446,000
Share earns
.45
.13
9mo rev
69,764,000
62,782,000
Net loss
b1,227,000
c255,000
b-Included an after-tax charge of $488,000 on the writedown of an investment.


People
LEAD: *
Carol Lee Kelliher, the director of broadcast production at the San Francisco office of Hal Riney &amp; Partners, has been given the additional title of senior vice president and director of creative services.
Jan Carpenter, its vice president and controller, has been promoted to senior vice president and director of finance and administration.


Time Suspends Fortune France
LEAD: Time Warner Inc. has suspended publication of Fortune France, the French-language version of Fortune magazine that it has published since early 1988 in partnership with the Hachette Filipacchi Group.


His Enemy Is the World
LEAD: Saddam Hussein is squirming, but there's cruel logic in his harassment of foreigners captive in Kuwait, his bellicose threats to Washington and his startling overture to his archenemy, Iran.
He seeks to Americanize the confrontation in the Persian Gulf.
By pitting himself against President Bush, he plays shrewdly to Arab hunger for a heroic paladin of Arab grievances.


Lima Journal;   A Shantytown in Shock: Meat Is 'for Looking At'
LEAD: When Juana Sanchez Gonzalez listened to a Government official outline Peru's new economic program on television the other night, she thought she was ''in a dream.''


Sea Containers Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sea Containers Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
90,415,000
238,967,000
Net inc
b141,780,000
16,437,000
Share earns
24.50
1.22
Shares outst
5,453,759
10,386,852
6mo rev
189,111,000
417,451,000
Net inc
c315,280,000
10,747,000
Share earns
36.89
.18
Shares outst
8,397,196
10,812,495


Power Is Back at Beekman
LEAD: The staff and patients cheered at New York Infirmary-Beekman Downtown Hospital yesterday as electricity was restored 3 1/2 days after a blackout in lower Manhattan forced it to rely on generators.
Consolidated Edison also restored power to street lamps and some traffic lights in the 30-block area around the South Street Seaport, said a utility spokesman.


Plenum Publishing Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plenum Publishing Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,311,929
12,749,844
Net inc
b4,382,020
c3,784,248
Share earns
.81
.68
Shares outst
5,429,177
5,534,969
6mo rev
26,043,873
24,111,034
Net inc
b4,051,824
c9,292,762
Share earns
.74
1.68
Shares outst
5,457,677
5,535,969


Trial By Crucible
LEAD: The last time the King of Jordan bore a message from Saddam Hussein to another chief of state, according to Kuwait's now-deposed Emir, it was this: Do not mobilize your troops lest you provoke Iraq.


Tom Brown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tom Brown Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,005,000
5,799,000
Net loss
990,000
b341,000
Share earns
-
.17
b-Net income
Results for 1989 have been restated.


Bubbles and Catcalls for Estimate Board
LEAD: With a champagne toast amid a chorus of catcalls and clicking cameras, the New York City Board of Estimate opened its last meeting yesterday and held hearings on a number of big development projects but, as it usually does, put off most of the big decisions.


Bank Faults Merger Plan
LEAD: Northeast Bancorp Inc. accused the Bank of New York Company yesterday of wrecking a planned merger between the two banks by failing to file a complete application with the Federal Reserve Board.


New Jersey May Scrap Tax on Trucks as Sales Plunge
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio, who has thus far resisted pressure to change any part of his $2.8 billion tax program, is prepared to rescind the sales tax on heavy trucks if the Legislature can find other sources for the $44 million in revenue that the tax was expected to produce, administration officials and legislative leaders say.


Unimed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unimed Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,208,000
1,249,000
Net loss
343,000
494,000
6mo rev
3,330,000
3,214,000
Net loss
1,293,000
1,458,000


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about New York's efforts to dispose of low-level radioactive waste described two companies incorrectly.
The companies, NDL Organization in Peekskill and Radiac Research in Brooklyn, are the state's two largest brokers of the waste, arranging for its transportation and disposal.


Banner Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banner Aerospace (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
66,274,000
47,325,000
Net inc
5,766,000
3,276,000
Share earns
.32
.18
Year-ago results are on a pro forma basis, as the company was previously a unit of Banner Industries Inc.


Billboard Ridiculing Helms Is Removed by Company
LEAD: The controversy over artistic freedom and Senator Jesse Helms has now expanded to billboards.
A huge billboard rented by an artist to heap ridicule on the North Carolina Republican was taken down today by the billboard's owner, a subsidiary of Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing in St.
Paul.


I.R.S. Seeks $7 Billion From Exxon
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation said yesterday that it had received a bill from the Internal Revenue Service for nearly $7 billion for the years 1979 through 1982.
It said, however, that the amount in serious dispute was $2 billion, which grew out of an argument over how it priced oil it bought from Saudi Arabia during the oil crisis in that period.


Vincent Going to Italy
LEAD: Jay Vincent, a nine-year veteran of the National Basketball Association and a member of the Los Angeles Lakers last season, has signed a one-year contract worth $700,000 with Philips Milan of the Italian League, the team announced yesterday.
Vincent, 31 years old, played for five teams in his N.B.A.


Review/Film;   Having Mother For Dinner
LEAD: Raul Ruiz's 1981 film, ''The Territory,'' takes a theme that has haunted modern literature from ''The Heart of Darkness'' to ''Lord of the Flies'' - the savagery bubbling beneath the veneer of civilization - and gives it a bizarre comic twist.
In this variation, two American families on vacation in Europe metamorphose from sophisticated picture-perfect tourists into cannibals without much fuss during a camping trip in the South of


Big Cities Lag in Clean Air, U.S. Says
LEAD: More than half of all Americans live in cities that have too much ground-level ozone, the chief factor in the creation of smog, and a third live in areas with dangerously high carbon monoxide, the Environmental Protection Agency said today.


Mestek reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mestek (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
42,692,000
41,908,000
Net inc
1,878,000
1,511,000
Share earns
.19
.16
Shares outst
9,464,000
9,381,000
6mo sales
87,836,000
84,766,000
Net inc
4,239,000
3,595,000
Share earns
.43
.38
Shares outst
9,463,000
9,355,000


Gap Earnings Rise to Record
LEAD: Buoyed by strong sales gains in all of its divisions, the Gap Inc. reported record revenues and earnings for its second quarter.
For the three months ended


Prosecutor Goes to Pennsylvania For Etan Patz Lead, Official Says
LEAD: An assistant United States attorney from New York has taken the unusual step of becoming a prosecutor in a Pennsylvania child-molestation case because he believes the man charged is an important suspect in the disappearance of Etan Patz, a Pennsylvania law-enforcement official said last night.


Connecticut Natural Gas reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Connecticut Natural Gas (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
230,319,000
199,320,000
Net inc
b13,741,000
b9,644,000
Share earns
1.66
1.24
Shares outst
8,255,958
7,715,744
b-After a loss of $444,000 for the latest 12 months and income of $133,000, or 1 cent a share, for the year-earlier period, both from discontinued operations.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Navy Begins Blockade Enforcing Iraq Embargo
LEAD: The United States said today that its naval forces in the Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Oman and the Red Sea had begun their blockade of vessels carrying oil, food and other supplies to and from Iraq and Iraqi-controlled Kuwait.


Results Plus
LEAD:
LITTLE LEAGUE
Jersey Team Eliminated
Jim Smith's bases-loaded single in the bottom of the eighth inning yesterday gave the Shippensburg team from Pennsylvania a 3-2 victory over Brick National of New Jersey in a semifinal game of the 1990 Eastern Regional Tournament at Bristol, Conn.
In the regional final tomorrow, Shippensburg will play Delaware, which beat Augusta (Me.) by 11-5.


Another Prized Theater For Art Films Is Closing
LEAD: The Bleecker Street Cinema, a popular Greenwich Village theater that has shown foreign and avant-garde films since 1962, will shut down on Aug. 30 because of a sharp rent increase, its owner said yesterday.


Biko's Friend Returns For South Africa Visit
LEAD: Donald Woods, a former newspaper editor who escaped from South Africa in 1977 after being banned for challenging the police account of the 1977 death of Stephen Biko, returned from exile today.


14 Take a Shot at Travers - and 13 at Go and Go
LEAD: Obviously, no one is afraid of the Irish horse.


Rose's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rose's Stores (OTC)
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Sales
352,116,000
347,291,000
Net inc
b481,000
c1,751,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
19,303,000
19,707,000
6mo sales
705,427,000
674,781,000
Net inc
b2,554,000
c505,000
Share earns
.13
-
Shares outst
19,478,000
19,712,000


Williams-Sonoma Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams-Sonoma Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1990
1989
Sales
57,319,000
43,892,000
Net inc
526,000
129,000
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
10,179,000
9,904,000
6mo sales
114,004,000
88,259,000
Net inc
974,000
493,000
Share earns
.10
.05
Shares outst
9,883,000
9,803,000


Elsinore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elsinore Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
17,538,000
16,406,000
Net inc
961,000
b4,199,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
60,339,752
30,138,810
6mo rev
33,984,000
33,288,000
Net inc
816,000
b7,845,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
60,331,548
30,115,044


Baby's Death Renews Move To End Common Law Rule
LEAD: An infant who was shaken into a coma when she was 3 1/2 months old died 18 months later, in February 1989.
Because the girl stayed alive that long, murder charges against her father were thrown out this month.


Regal International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regal International (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,438,000
2,257,000
Net inc
9,000
b671,000
Shares outst
14,539,000
14,493,000
6mo rev
5,016,000
4,714,000
Net inc
375,000
b1,242,000
Shares outst
14,524,000
14,491,000


Hearing on Eligibility
LEAD: During a 90-minute hearing in Federal court in South Bend, Ind., yesterday, Braxston Banks, a former Notre Dame running back, began his challenge of National Collegiate Athletic Association eligibility rules.
Judge Robert Miller Jr. said he would rule on the case this morning.


Longview Fibre reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Longview Fibre (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
172,627,000
177,849,000
Net inc
18,185,000
18,097,000
Share earns
.34
.33
Shares outst
54,185,000
55,080,000
9mo sales
502,822,000
516,329,000
Net inc
46,652,000
52,909,000
Share earns
.86
.96
Shares outst
54,436,000
55,157,000


Tooter Scooter Favored
LEAD: A field of 10 evenly rated 2-year-old pacers will be in speedy pursuit of a $195,125 first-place purse at the Meadowlands tonight in the $1,043,500 Woodrow Wilson Pace, the richest event on a Million Dollar Babies program that also features the $766,000 Sweetheart for 2-year-old pacing fillies and the $350,000 Mistletoe


D.O.C. Optics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* D.O.C. Optics Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
14,467,000
13,004,000
Net inc
52,000
331,000
Share earns
.02
.15
6mo sales
28,440,000
25,549,000
Net inc
340,000
900,000
Share earns
.15
.39


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR THE INTERNATIONAL SEA-BED AUTHORITY AND FOR THE INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE LAW OF THE SEA - 10 A.M.


Telesphere Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telesphere Communications (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
62,446,000
44,218,000
Net inc
688,000
90,000
Share earns
.03
.01
Shares outst
30,101,000
17,989,000
6mo rev
128,403,000
78,931,000
Net inc
1,967,000
b2,603,000
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
28,887,000
17,292,000


Corcap Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corcap Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,646,000
22,294,000
Net inc
b492,000
c849,000
Share earns
.17
-
6mo sales
39,285,000
45,743,000
Net inc
b481,000
c915,000
Share earns
.16
-
b-Included income of $29,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and a loss of $119,000 for the 6 months, both from discontinued operations.


Kentucky Law Officials Are Arrested in Drug Sting
LEAD: The sheriffs of four counties in the eastern Kentucky hills were arrested by Federal agents today on allegations that they took money to protect people they believed were drug traffickers shipping cocaine through the state.


Poloron Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poloron Products Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,691,000
6,494,000
Net loss
351,000
338,000
Shares outst
3,586,693
3,626,517
6mo sales
7,396,000
9,912,000
Net loss
1,201,000
952,000
Shares outst
3,586,906
3,626,517


Information International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Information International (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,672,336
9,912,831
Net inc
69,178
b490,349
Share earns
.03
.22
Shares outst
2,308,386
2,276,286
b-Included pre-tax gain of $1,250,000 from the settlement of a lawsuit.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Teen-Age Birth Rate on Rise
A two-decade decline in birth rates among American teen-agers has abruptly reversed itself, with the sharpest increase among mothers who are 15 to 17 years old.
Page A14.
The Disillusioned Lawyer
A new survey shows what many lawyers have long suspected: More and more of them are unhappy in their work, a trend especially strong among women.


Gemco National Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gemco National Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
369,000
b811,000
6mo net loss
634,000
b800,000
b-After a loss of $750,000 from settlement of two lawsuits.


At the Movies
LEAD: ''She's a wild little tidbit.'' That's Laura Dern talking about Lula Pace Fortune, the character she plays in David Lynch's ''Wild at Heart,'' which opens today.


Gomez Loses Poise, Tie Breaker, and Contest
LEAD: Andres Gomez lost his composure in a crucial tie breaker against Christo Van Rensburg today, and this may have cost him a berth in the quarterfinals - and perhaps even the final - of the Volvo International tournament.


New England Bank Weighs Bond Swap
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation is considering an exchange of all or part of its $700 million in bonds, which could reduce the value of its present shareholders' interest in the company, the company said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing.


Sale of Co-ops for Late Payments Is Upheld
LEAD: In a court decision that may strengthen the hand of cooperative apartment owners in financially troubled buildings, a New York State Supreme Court judge yesterday upheld the right of the owners of a Greenwich Village building to auction off 106 apartments owned by a sponsor who is far behind in his maintenance payments.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the India Day Parade, Lexington Avenue will be closed on Sunday between 26th and 47th Streets from 1:30 to 4 P.M.
For a related street fair, Madison Avenue will be closed between 23d and 26th Streets from noon to 8 P.M.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   For Blood Donations, the Pentagon Is a Supplier


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The Consumer Price Index rose four-tenths of 1 percent last month, a higher-than-expected gain that came despite a sharp drop in energy prices just before the Middle East crisis.
The increase was a sign of inflation's persistent grip on the economy. [Page A1.]
Housing starts fell 2.6 percent last month from June, the sixth straight monthly decline, cutting building activity to its weakest pace in nearly eight years, the Government said.


Paul M. Bernstein, 60, Partner in a Law Firm
LEAD: Paul M. Bernstein, senior partner of the Manhattan law firm of Bernstein Litowitz Berger &amp; Grossman, died on Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old and lived in Belmore, L.I.


TEHERAN TO BACK SANCTIONS; NEW THREAT MADE IN KUWAIT;   FOREIGNERS WARNED
LEAD: The Iraqi occupation authorities today ordered 6,500 American and British citizens trapped in Kuwait to assemble at two hotels in the Kuwaiti capital and threatened to remove the foreign residents forcibly from their homes if they refused.


Technology Research reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology Research
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,379,998
1,953,046
Net loss
394,525
10,436
Shares outst
11,612,663
9,308,689


Restaurants
LEAD: In recent years, the Ambassador Grill, a cosmopolitan French restaurant next to the United Nations, has been a favorite haunt of people in the diplomatic community.
With its commodious setting, agreeable food and remarkably low prices, it has been an underappreciated find in this otherwise barren gastronomic domain.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Apple Bank for Savings, New York, a subsidiary of Apple Bancorp Inc., appointed Thomas S. Fiumefreddo, an assistant vice president and mortgage appraiser, as vice president and chief appraiser of its commercial mortgage division.


CONSUMER PRICES ROSE LAST MONTH BY A SHARP 0.4%
LEAD: In a sign of inflation's persistent grip on the economy, the Labor Department said today that the Consumer Price Index rose by four-tenths of 1 percent last month, a higher-than-expected increase that came despite a sharp drop in energy prices just before the Middle East crisis.


Navistar International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Navistar International (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
972,000,000
1,083,000,000
Net inc
6,000,000
28,000,000
Share earns
-
.08
9mo rev
2,883,000,000
3,230,000,000
Net loss
4,000,000
b100,000,000
Share earns
-
.31


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.N. CHIEF ARGUES BLOCKADE IS HASTY
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations warned the United States today that unilateral action by American warships in the gulf to enforce sanctions against Iraq would breach the United Nations Charter, reports from Lima, Peru, said.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Alta Gold Co., Salt Lake City, signed a letter, along with Magma Copper Co., San Manuel, Ariz., a copper mining concern, to buy an 12,000-acre mine in Ely, Nev., for $20 million.
The seller is Kennecott, a unit of Britain's RTZ Corp.
P.L.C.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Aug. 7 about Rollerblade Inc., a Minneapolis company that makes a roller skate with a single row of wheels, misstated the former jobs held by the two founders of First Team Sports, a Rollerblade competitor.
David G. Soderquist previously was an independent salesman of sporting equipment, and John J.


Valley Forge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Forge Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,767,000
8,312,000
Net inc
b1,060,000
c637,000
Share earns
.60
.34
Shares outst
1,762,000
1,876,000
6mo rev
18,877,000
16,545,000
Net inc
b1,776,000
c1,348,000
Share earns
1.00
.72
Shares outst
1,771,000
1,868,000


Review/Theater;   Denzel Washington Portrays Shakespeare's Top Schemer
LEAD: THE tragedy of ''Richard III'' is in the title character's perverted brilliance.
In a world of dissemblers, he appears to be the only one with a comprehension of the abuses of politics, as he manipulates his way to the crown and, inevitably, falls to his doom.
Any actor attempting this awesome role must be able to convey


Cetus Chief Executive Quits, Fueling Takeover Rumors
LEAD: The chief executive of the Cetus Corporation has resigned in the wake of a severe blow from the Food and Drug Administration that has clouded the company's future.


Fortis Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fortis Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
76,053,000
68,265,000
Net inc
8,642,000
7,517,000
Share earns
.93
.82
6mo rev
170,996,000
160,175,000
Net inc
17,286,000
16,442,000
Share earns
1.87
1.82
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Homecoming for Young Victim Set Afire in Attack


International Banknote Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Banknote Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,517,000
18,474,000
Net loss
491,000
2,303,000
6mo sales
34,227,000
38,287,000
Net loss
6,217,000
b8,011,000
Share earns
-
.43
b-Net income
Merger-related expenses for the latest 6 months consisted of a loss of about $4.7 million on the sale of substantially all of the assets of the securities printing business conducted by a subsidiary at leased facilities in Ramapo, N.Y., to resolve certain issues raised by the Antitrust division of the


In Golf Too, a Pioneer Role for Jackie Robinson
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pool Energy Services Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pool Energy Services Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
72,083,000
57,478,000
Net inc
1,586,000
1,090,000
Share earns
.12
.08
6mo rev
139,722,000
113,783,000
Net inc
2,734,000
1,296,000
Share earns
.20
.10


Baltek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltek Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,347,823
10,623,518
Net inc
324,352
911,528
Share earns
.13
.36
6mo rev
18,373,212
20,385,618
Net inc
847,219
1,919,276
Share earns
.34
.76


Critic's Choice
LEAD: Jazz dance was once a distinctly poor relative to ballet and modern dance.
But it has got a much better name in recent years, thanks in part to the artistry of the Hubbard Street Dance Company.
This weekend, East Coast audiences will have their first chance to see the results of the Tharp Project, a collaboration of Hubbard Street and the noted modern dance choreographer Twyla Tharp, at the Ted Shawn Theater of the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival in Becket,


Gold Prices Are Up Sharply As Investors Seek Security
LEAD: The prices of gold futures surged yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York as developments in the Persian Gulf initiated a rally in oil prices, a dive in the stock market and a renewal of inflation fears.


Empire of Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire of Carolina (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
62,262,000
6,001,000
Net inc
b1,646,000
c4,753,000
Share earns
.16
-
6mo sales
114,061,000
13,045,000
Net inc
b2,099,000
c11,867,000
Share earns
.20
-
b-Included extraordinary credits of $79,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $1,121,000, or 11 cents a share, for the 6 months, and the 6 months also included a loss from discontinued operations of $326,000.


Vari-Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vari-Care Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,967,000
11,897,000
Net inc
217,000
360,000
Share earns
.04
.06
9mo rev
36,247,000
34,729,000
Net inc
801,000
1,131,000
Share earns
.15
.21


Review/Film;   In the Eerie Cosmos Of David Lynch, Reality Is Reeling
LEAD: DAVID LYNCH'S work is all a matter of disorienting scale, of emphases that are out of kilter.
The same object can as easily be the surface of the moon, seen in a long shot, or a shriveled, pock-marked basketball photographed in close-up.


Wavetech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wavetech Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
346,273
311,402
Net loss
2,217
166,568
9mo rev
990,741
814,232
Net inc
85,455
b582,167
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Surrealism Meets Politics in Festival Latino Film
LEAD: In ''Gentile Alouette'' (''The Colonel's Star''), one of the most intriguing features to be shown in the 1990 Festival Latino Film series, Geraldine Chaplin portrays a Hispanic movie actress working in Paris who is stalked by a colonel of the secret police of an unnamed Latin American country.


Compudyne Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compudyne Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,267,000
11,503,000
Net inc
b46,000
c936,000
6mo sales
18,986,000
23,526,000
Net inc
b89,000
c1,493,000
b-Included income of $29,000, or 3 cents a share, for the quarter and a loss of $119,000 for the 6 months, both from discontinued operations.


Wells American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells American Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
64,260
2,559,560
Net loss
1,298,300
735,250
The company said the decrease in sales was due to continued suspension of production that began in January 1990.
Latest quarter loss also included start-up costs and research and development expenses associated with company's new Megamac product line, as well as write-downs of about $473,000 related to discontinued product lines.


Yankees Partners Sue Baseball Commissioner
LEAD: Two part owners of the Yankees did yesterday what George Steinbrenner, the principal owner, cannot do.
They sued the baseball commissioner.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Inc., Oakland, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, San Francisco, for its entire line of products, with a budget of $8 million to $10 million.
This is the second new account for Goldberg Moser O'Neill, which was formed in June in a buyout of Chiat/ Day/Mojo's San Francisco office by the managers.


Galactic Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galactic Resources (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,374,000
11,156,000
Net loss
630,000
1,364,000
Shares outst
42,419,305
35,136,452
6mo rev
20,726,000
23,010,000
Net inc
b6,879,000
451,000
Share earns
.16
.01
Shares outst
41,780,243
35,134,913


Changes in China Offer Lessons for East Europe
LEAD: When China specialists think about how Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union can reorganize their economies, they tend to agree on one point: transforming socialist countries into market competitors will be a far more complex and painful task than is often acknowledged.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraqi, Calling Bush 'a Liar,' Warns of U.S. Combat Toll
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq called President Bush ''a liar'' tonight and warned that thousands of American soldiers could ''go home shrouded in sad coffins.''


Woman Says Atlanta Archbishop Performed Their Own Wedding
LEAD: In her first public comment since her affair with the Roman Catholic Archbishop here led to his resignation, a Georgia woman said today that their relationship had been formalized in a wedding ceremony he performed.


Review/Film;   Adapting to Being Gay Without Sturm und Drang
LEAD: Buddy Fields is full of desperation but too full of good humor to blame others.
Though in his 20's, Buddy still lives at home with his parents and younger sister in a small town in central New York State.
He feels trapped.
He doesn't even have the privacy in which to peruse his copy of Playgirl.
When he wants to masturbate without interruption, he has to get into the family's aluminum rowboat and go to the middle of the lake.


Kelley Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kelley Oil Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,470,000
7,187,000
Net inc
326,000
b56,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
12,139,000
10,966,000
6mo rev
27,057,000
16,888,000
Net inc
644,000
b83,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
12,081,000
10,900,000


Photronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
9,656,658
7,313,359
Net inc
995,713
273,612
Share earns
.26
.09
Shares outst
3,885,849
3,189,000
9mo sales
27,003,377
19,851,028
Net inc
b2,643,029
372,149
Share earns
.74
.12
Shares outst
3,560,227
3,189,321


MacKenzie Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MacKenzie Financial
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
41,830,065
34,877,839
Net inc
8,121,997
8,763,144
Share earns
.15
.16
Results included the operations of wholly owned MacKenzie Investment Management Inc., which reported losses of $766,417, compared with $1,116,710 for year-ago period.


14 Die in Soweto as Rival Groups Clash
LEAD: Hand-to-hand fighting between rival black groups spread to Soweto today after three days of bloodletting east of Johannesburg while conservative whites tried to break up a meeting that was to be addressed by President F. W. de Klerk.


C3 Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C3 Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
24,067,000
9,559,000
Net loss
2,682,000
6,320,000
r


Confrontation in the Gulf;   At Saudi Base, G.I.'s on Move and Others on Edge
LEAD: Maj.
Gen.
William G. Pagonis keeps his gas mask and protective clothes in a bag by his feet as he surveys senior officers inside the Saudi Air Force Base at Dhahran, where they are directing the largest American troop deployment since the Vietnam War.


Legion Post Bars a Black Man
LEAD: A Vietnam veteran was denied membership in an all-white American Legion post here last month because he is black, and the incident has led the organization's national headquarters to call for an investigation.


Oakland Journal;   For AIDS Sufferers, A Center Of Support
LEAD: On the sagging porch of a gray shingle house here, an unlikely cast of characters gathers each afternoon to pass the time of day.


Ex-Farah Head Loses Contest
LEAD: William F. Farah, the former chairman and chief executive of Farah Inc., lost his bid yesterday to unseat a majority of the directors and was himself removed from the board, as a result of voting at a special stockholders meeting last Friday.
Farah Inc., based in El Paso, is a leading maker of men's apparel.


J. D. Power's Big Problem: Popularity
LEAD: THE advertising industry has a curious problem: It has discovered an automotive selling tool that may be working too well.


Digital Metcom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Metcom Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,479,989
2,906,556
Net inc
171,991
253,182
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo sales
7,481,230
5,355,679
Net inc
358,744
419,792
Share earns
.02
.02


Galtaco reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galtaco
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,360,000
20,273,000
Net loss
463,000
b4,863,000
9mo sales
55,412,000
59,095,000
Net loss
852,000
b5,044,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $5,588,000 for the quarter and $7,153,000 for the 9 months.


Two Stage Triumphs
LEAD: Actors' Equity showed good sense and good grace in admitting that it was wrong to ban the British star of the musical ''Miss Saigon'' from playing his mixed-race role on Broadway.
All who love theater can rejoice in a victory for artistic freedom.
But protesters who demanded more opportunity for Asian performers can be satisfied, too; their legitimate complaint has now been heard worldwide.


Guerrero Suspended
LEAD: Acting with the swiftness of a high hard one, Bill White, the National League president, yesterday suspended Pedro Guerrero of the St.
Louis Cardinals for one game for Guerrero's involvement in a fight during a game Thursday night with Houston.


Education Chief's Remarks On English Draw Criticism
LEAD: Education Secretary Lauro F. Cavazos told educators from this area along the Mexican border today that students who do not speak English are not ready to learn, and he drew swift criticism.


USA Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USA Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
1,128,000
b556,000
Per share
-
.22
6mo net loss
1,074,000
b1,219,000
Per share
-
.48
b-Net income


Refugees from Kuwait Choose Life Over Money    Relief and Tears
LEAD: ''Mommy, it's Stephanie,'' she said as tears began to swell in her eyes. ''I got out.
I am in Saudi Arabia.''


Imagine Films Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imagine Films Entertainment
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,515,000
5,900,000
Net inc
420,000
b231,000
Share earns
.08
-
9mo rev
36,743,000
10,980,000
Net inc
1,882,000
b865,000
Share earns
.36
-
b-Net loss


FCS Laboratories Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FCS Laboratories Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,058,641
1,133,098
Net loss
146,815
70,232
9mo sales
3,096,387
3,315,738
Net loss
378,504
384,524


Delaware Otsego reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delaware Otsego
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,651,000
27,102,000
Net inc
b252,000
b423,000
Share earns
.19
.32
6mo rev
23,807,000
51,520,000
Net inc
340,000
454,000
Share earns
.26
.34
b-Included gains from the sales of real estate of $61,000 for the latest quarter and $708,000 for the year-ago period.


Cellular Information Sys reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cellular Information Sys (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,703,217
1,792,605
Net loss
6,965,986
4,060,419
6mo rev
7,036,258
2,828,266
Net loss
13,830,384
7,145,084


Milwaukee Journal;   Bambi Is on the Run, And Some Are Cheering
LEAD: The furor over one of Wisconsin's most sensational murder cases had just about died down.
And then Bambi broke out of prison.
Bambi is the nickname of Lawrencia Bembenek, a former Milwaukee policewoman and Playboy Club bunny who was convicted in 1982 of murdering her husband's ex-wife.
Since July 15, when she slipped out of the Taycheedah Correctional


Resorts Plan Is Approved
LEAD: A bankruptcy court and the New Jersey Casino Control Commission today approved Resorts International Inc.'s reorganization plan that will make the casino group a public company and infuse it with $26 million in cash.


Little Prince Productions reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Little Prince Productions
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,432
18,100
Net loss
35,678
37,640


Cellular Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cellular Products Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
438,559
830,668
Net loss
117,317
81,962
Shares outst
8,237,213
7,981,718


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Plant Care From Afar
LEAD:
When you're away from home, the least of your worries should be house plants.
While the ideal is to have someone come in once or twice a week to check on plants, they can care for themselves if set up properly.
And though they are not being fed, that just slows their growth until you return.


GMI Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GMI Group Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,179,000
4,026,000
Net loss
577,000
3,292,000
6mo rev
7,471,000
7,851,000
Net loss
882,000
3,479,000


Taiwan's Indirect Trade
LEAD: Taiwan's trade with China grew nearly 5 percent in the first half of the year, the Government's Board of Foreign Trade said this week.
According to official figures, indirect trade routed through Hong Kong reached $1.83 billion in the first six months of 1990, up 4.7 percent over the corresponding period last year.


In New York: Crimes of Punishment
LEAD: There are many reasons for dismay, even anger, over this week's New York City jail guards' strike at Rikers Island.
Mayor Dinkins's deliberate early response may have made a bad situation worse, and his eventual capitulation to the strikers' demands sends a quavering signal to other municipal unions, just as contract talks begin.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, AUGUST, 18, 1990


U.S. Inquiry On Pennzoil
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission is investigating whether the Pennzoil Company violated Federal law in its purchase of an 8.8 percent stake in the Chevron Corporation in December 1989.
The investigation was disclosed today by Pennzoil in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


American Shared Hospital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Shared Hospital (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
15,501,000
13,015,000
Net loss
391,000
b52,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
30,676,000
23,571,000
Net loss
377,000
b77,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Exploring Both Sides of Irving Berlin
LEAD: When people in the theater or the music business talk about Irving Berlin, the words most often heard are likely to be recluse, miser, temperamental and, of course, genius.


Atratech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atratech Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,089,288
709,917
Net inc
355,766
25,470
Share earns
.05
-
6mo sales
6,645,402
1,855,967
Net inc
703,630
24,646
Share earns
.09
-


EQK Realty Investors I reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EQK Realty Investors I (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
1,340,000
460,000
6mo net loss
2,620,000
1,040,000


Dollar, Generally Down, Hits A New Low Against Mark
LEAD: The dollar sank to another record low yesterday against the German mark and fell against all other major currencies except the Japanese yen, reflecting continuing pessimism about the state of the American economy.


New York's Guard Feeling Mideast Ripples
LEAD: For Sgt.
Michael Bruce, a paramedic in the 105th Military Airlift Group of the National Guard here, the hardest part of the Persian Gulf crisis has been explaining the possible mobilization of the American reserves to his 7-year-old son, Christopher.


Aftermath of Forest Fires at Yosemite


McFarland Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McFarland Energy Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,934,000
4,082,000
Net inc
45,000
466,000
Share earns
.01
.09
Shares outst
5,199,359
5,196,276
6mo rev
8,911,000
7,799,000
Net inc
776,000
850,000
Share earns
.15
.16
Shares outst
5,199,359
5,195,942


Beliefs
LEAD: John Henry Newman was one of the great mentors of English intellectual life in the last century.
In one paperback anthology of Victorian prose near at hand, there are more selections from Newman than from Charles Dickens, John Stuart Mill, George Eliot or John Ruskin.


H &amp; H Oil Tool Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* H &amp; H Oil Tool Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,684,000
5,016,000
Net inc
394,000
b41,000
Share earns
.12
-
Shares outst
3,252,472
3,218,000
6mo rev
10,811,000
7,760,000
Net inc
402,000
b531,000
Share earns
.12
-
Shares outst
3,242,748
3,218,000


F.T.C. Is Monitoring Oil Company Ads
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission is monitoring oil company advertisements offering explanations for higher gasoline prices in an effort to stop any misrepresentation.


Brooklyn Man Kills Landlady, Authorities Say
LEAD: A Brooklyn man defending his family against eviction from a crowded, illegally converted Brownsville boarding house shot and killed his landlady and her cousin Thursday night after they kicked in his door and pulled guns, the police said.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the India Day Parade, Lexington Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 26th and 47th Streets from 1:30 to 4 P.M.
For a related street fair, Madison Avenue will be closed between 23d and 26th Streets from noon to 8 P.M.


Unfair Labor Charges Settled by Nordstrom
LEAD: Nordstrom Inc., the Seattle-based retailer whose image for excellence has been tarnished in recent months by labor disputes, said today that it had settled unfair labor practice charges in an agreement with the National Labor Relations Board.


Williams &amp; Clarissa Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams &amp; Clarissa Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,906,300
73,200
Net loss
2,968,600
375,700
Shares outst
3,257,000
2,250,000
6mo sales
2,882,400
116,900
Net loss
4,689,900
646,700
Shares outst
3,257,000
2,250,000


Bralorne Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bralorne Resources (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,179,000
3,022,000
Net loss
b13,197,000
c297,000
6mo net loss
b12,546,000
c1,005,000
b-Included $13.6 million write-down of its oil and gas assets to estimated realizable value for both the quarter and 6 months.


Sizeler Property Investors reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sizeler Property Investors (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,810,000
2,851,000
Net inc
696,000
806,000
Share earns
.20
.22
Shares outst
3,454,000
3,715,000
6mo rev
5,615,000
5,641,000
Net inc
1,017,000
1,680,000
Share earns
.29
.45
Shares outst
3,504,000
3,715,900


Transcisco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transcisco Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,828,000
12,361,000
Net inc
134,000
1,156,000
Share earns
.03
.26
Shares outst
4,431,635
4,453,633
6mo rev
12,994,000
21,128,000
Net inc
249,000
1,531,000
Share earns
.06
.35
Shares outst
4,471,394
4,405,799


PCC Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PCC Group Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
18,820,675
-
Net inc
356,343
-
Share earns
.16
-
9mo rev
61,009,970
-
Net inc
959,165
-
Share earns
.43
-
Figures for 1989 are unavailable; the company's initial public offering was in October 1989.


Durham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Durham Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,118,000
b3,544,000
Share earns
.61
.42
6mo net inc
7,601,000
b4,354,000
Share earns
.90
.52
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $1,944,000 for the quarter and $2,677,000 for the 6 months.


Claire's Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Claire's Stores Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Sales
55,210,000
38,003,000
Net inc
3,415,000
2,393,000
Share earns
.17
.12
Shares outst
20,290,000
19,995,000
6mo sales
108,730,000
72,328,000
Net inc
6,620,000
4,300,000
Share earns
.33
.22
Shares outst
20,280,000
19,995,000


ATS Money Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ATS Money Systems
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
820,400
1,036,900
Net loss
121,500
b204,600
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
1,526,900
2,126,300
Net loss
330,400
b394,200
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income and included extraordinary tax credits of $79,800 and $111,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Charter's Curbs on Party Leaders Are Struck Down
LEAD: In the first successful legal challenge to New York City's new charter, a provision curbing the role of party leaders in government was declared unconstitutional by a Brooklyn judge yesterday.


Germania Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germania Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
25,682,000
441,000
6mo net loss
31,710,000
334,000
Germania said the second-quarter loss was primarily attributable to $23.8 million in accounting adjustments required by the Resolution Trust Corp., which was appointed conservator of the bank by federal regulators in June 1990.


Star Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Star Technologies Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,758,000
10,155,000
Net inc
31,000
118,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
16,629,000
16,134,000


Dart Drug Stores Set to Liquidate
LEAD: Dart Drug Stores Inc., which operates Fantle's drugstores, announced it would liquidate because the company had been unable to develop a plan acceptable to creditors that would allow it to remain in business.
The company said it would start a going-out-of-business sale as soon as it obtained bankruptcy court approval and completed inventories.


Biomechanics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biomechanics Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
346,164
521,038
Net loss
227,091
b41,910
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
5,560,085
2,576,904
6mo rev
834,276
930,912
Net loss
185,942
b49,283
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
5,072,531
2,576,904


Golden Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Oil Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
485,542
174,564
Net loss
186,627
143,305
Shares outst
7,172,738
2,406,164
6mo rev
1,022,046
324,834
Net loss
297,071
331,348
Shares outst
7,148,149
2,402,285


35 Americans Are Removed From Their Baghdad Hotel
LEAD: The Iraqi authorities have moved 35 Americans from a Baghdad hotel where they had been held under armed guard and apparently took them to another hotel where their communications with American diplomats in the Iraqi capital were cut off, the State Department said today.


North East Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North East Insurance Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,872,931
5,598,464
Net inc
b119,728
c243,606
Share earns
.05
.08
9mo rev
5,552,229
10,512,067
Net inc
b493,674
c622,666
Share earns
.17
.21
b-After reduction of income taxes arising from carryforward of prior operating losses of $29,249, or 2 cents a share, for the quarter and $161,249, or 6 cents a share, for the 9 months.


First Federal S &amp; L-S. C.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal S &amp; L-S. C.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,731,000
1,204,000
Per share
.37
.26
Shares outst
4,687,000
4,708,000
12mo net inc
4,027,000
5,005,000
Per share
.85
1.06
Shares outst
4,723,000
4,717,000


Mayor Backs His Handling Of Jail Melee
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that inflammatory remarks by the president of the correction officers union may have fomented this week's bloody disturbance at Rikers Island.


Some Soviet Items Aren't Scarce: Crime, Strikes, Fighting, Pollution
LEAD: The cracks in Soviet society are so visible these days that they have become part of the landscape like the gaping ruts that line Moscow's streets.


Etz Lavud Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Etz Lavud Ltd.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
22,684,000
18,079,000
Net inc
954,000
b127,000
Share earns
.59
-
6mo sales
44,745,000
37,121,000
Net inc
1,467,000
b57,000
Share earns
.91
-
b-Net loss


Gerhard Wagner, Austrian Banker, 56
LEAD: Gerhard Wagner, chairman of the Osterreichische Landerbank in Vienna, which ranks 164th among world banks, died Thursday while cycling in a province of lower Austria, where he was on vacation.
He was 56 years old and lived in Vienna.


Comnet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comnet Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,682,000
5,466,000
Net inc
462,000
361,000
Share earns
.16
.14


Noverco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noverco Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
210,029,000
190,267,000
Net inc
5,353,000
2,921,000
Share earns
.10
.06
9mo rev
869,801,000
834,799,000
Net inc
76,506,000
b85,500,000
Share earns
1.45
1.63
b-After an extraordinary credit of $12,522,000, or 24 cents a share.


First Fincorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fincorp Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
482,000
420,000
Per share
.20
.17
6mo net inc
1,090,000
899,000
Per share
.45
.37


Gerber Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gerber Scientific (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
66,609,000
74,670,000
Net inc
2,733,000
7,721,000
Share earns
.12
.32


Avery Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avery Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
161,000
bc5,448,000
6mo net loss
438,000
c16,535,000
Shares outst
55,365,000
12,147,000
b-Net loss
c-Included losses from discontinued operations of $4,423,000 for the quarter and $519,000 for the 6 months.


Wilder Proposes Plan to Reduce Virginia Deficit
LEAD: Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder told Virginians in a televised address on Thursday night that he would freeze the salaries of state employees and cut spending by $375 million to help close the state's budget deficit.
He said he would also propose eliminating some agencies.


Azocar Helps Yankees End Six-Game Slump
LEAD: Oscar Azocar, who swings at just about everything, consequently looks at just about nothing.
Above all else, he never looks back.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The Miss America Pageant Organization has ordered Texas pageant officials to investigate allegations that B. DON MAGNESS, their longtime chief executive, has a history of making lewd remarks to contestants, The Atlantic City Press reported yesterday.


Interior Department Says 357 Pieces Are Missing From Its Art Collection
LEAD: An internal investigation at the Interior Department has found that hundreds of pieces of valuable artwork from the department's collection are missing.


Alfred M. Vinton, Banker, 84
LEAD: Alfred M. Vinton, a retired senior vice president of Citibank, died on Thursday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 84 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.


Equipment Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equipment Co. of America
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
5,011,000
5,136,000
Net loss
321,000
c65,000
6mo sales
10,353,000
10,746,000
Net loss
343,000
bc11,000
Shares outst
4,415,000
2,894,000
b-Net income
c-Included an extraordinary tax charge of $23,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary tax credit of $3,000 for the 6 months.


North Coast Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Coast Energy Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,046,678
951,108
Net loss
104,319
155,072


Election With Hispanic District Is Postponed
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has stayed a judge's order that a special election be held in Los Angeles County in November to remedy what the judge found to be discrimination against the Hispanic population in the districts of the county's Board of Supervisors.


Brookfield Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brookfield Bancshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
855,046
478,064
6mo net loss
462,954
1,108,674


Daxor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Daxor Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,425,368
b630,818
Net inc
583,907
b1,406,727
Share earns
.11
-
6mo rev
2,950,864
1,138,921
Net inc
1,490,832
b314,497
Share earns
.28
-
b-Net loss


J.A.M.  Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* J.A.M.  Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
640,599
563,512
Net inc
2,378
b107,511
6mo sales
1,133,850
915,650
Net inc
3,214
b326,449
b-Net loss


Plunge in Cattle Prices Seen Following Feedlot Report
LEAD: Livestock analysts yesterday predicted a sharp drop in prices of cattle futures after a Government report showed far more cattle were placed on feedlots last month than the market had expected.


Acme Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,811,000
24,104,000
Net inc
1,115,000
1,242,000
Share earns
.23
.27
Yr sales
90,589,000
90,962,000
Net inc
3,690,000
b3,925,000
Share earns
.78
.85
b-Included a gain from a cumulative effect of an accounting change of $443,000, or 10 cents a share.


U.S. TRADE DEFICIT LOWEST IN 7 YEARS
LEAD: The nation's trade deficit narrowed a surprising 35 percent in June, to $5.07 billion, its lowest level in seven years.
Exports surged to a record and a slowing economy at home cut imports sharply.
But economists expect rising oil prices and other factors to push the deficit back up again.


Writing Like a Man Just Come in From a Walk
LEAD:
Masquerade
And Other Stories
By Robert Walser
Translated by Susan Bernofsky. 202 pages.
Johns Hopkins University Press. $35 ($12.95 paper).


Security Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Capital Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
519,000
1,076,000
Net loss
b208,000
c1,300,000
Shares outst
8,727,000
5,781,000
9mo rev
1,738,000
4,437,000
Net loss
b2,274,000
c39,143,000
Shares outst
9,970,000
5,576,000


Bush and Sullivan Meet to Discuss Civil Rights Bill


Montclair Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Montclair Bancorp
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Net inc
621,000
961,000
Per share
.26
.39
9mo net inc
2,122,000
3,304,000
Per share
.86
1.34


Patents;   A New Bacteria Strain To Produce Proteins
LEAD: The Repligen Corporation, a biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass., obtained a patent this week for a new strain of bacteria that was genetically engineered to produce valuable proteins more efficiently.


Columbia First Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia First Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b352,000
c865,000
Per share
.01
.19
Shares outst
2,901,988
2,751,333
9mo net inc
b3,276,000
1,449,000
Per share
.81
.17
Shares outst
2,914,723
2,695,407
b-After an extraordinary after-tax gain from early retirement of debt of $619,000, or 21 cents a share.


Sage Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sage Software Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,381,000
4,817,000
Net inc
201,000
150,000
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
6,708,000
6,201,000


Data I/O Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data I/O Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 28
1990
1989
Sales
14,863,000
15,425,000
Net inc
66,000
400,000
Share earns
.01
.06
6mo sales
28,690,000
29,996,000
Net inc
707,000
1,051,000
Share earns
.11
.16
The company said second quarter net income was impacted by about $540,000 in one-time pretax charges and by about $240,000 in income tax expenses in excess of its planned 40 percent effective rate.


Golf;   Discussion With an Artist Helps Green Find Groove
LEAD: A conversation with Leroy Neiman at the pro-am party for the JAL Big Apple Classic tournament here this week has helped Tammy Green with her game, she says.


Central Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Capital
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,026,000
24,868,000
Share earns
.02
.34
6mo rev
1,260,579,000
1,060,474,000
Net inc
16,073,000
53,060,000
Share earns
.13
.72
Shares outst
64,707,000
66,201,000


College Directors Seek Strong Managers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hunter Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hunter Environmental
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
243,000
b158,000
Shares outst
13,192,000
11,066,000
b-After income of $857,000, or 8 cents a share, from discontinued operations


Patents;   Cookie That 'Erupts' in Microwave
LEAD: Researchers at Nabisco Brands Inc. obtained a patent this week for a cookie that they say erupts like a volcano, spewing flavored filling out the top and down the sides when it is heated in a microwave oven.


Patents;   Time-Release Method For a Contraceptive Pill
LEAD: The Alza Corporation of Palo Alto, Calif., best known for developing drug patches that deliver medication by osmosis through the skin, won patent approval this week for a controlled-release contraceptive pill.


In Brooklyn, People Say, 'I Grew Up at McCarren Park Pool';   Landmark Status Due
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brock Exploration Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brock Exploration Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,900,000
2,400,000
Net inc
81,000
209,000
Share earns
.02
.05
The company is listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange.


Slater Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Slater Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
97,221,000
105,283,000
Net inc
559,000
2,814,000
Share earns
.06
.34
6mo sales
194,842,000
206,839,000
Net inc
b942,000
c8,091,000
Share earns
.10
.98
b-Included a one-time after-tax charge of $840,000 on the downsizing of the Toronto office and other divisional restructuring.


Protests Close Refinery
LEAD: Student protesters today forced an important oil refinery in India's northeast state of Assam to close and choked supplies of crude to three others, a state official said.
The Assam Chief Secretary, S. R. Sarwan, said in New Delhi that picketing by the All Assam Students Union in six state oilfields had forced the state-owned refinery in the state capital, Guwahati, to close.


MMI Medical reports earnings for Qtr to July 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MMI Medical (OTC)
Qtr to July 27
1990
1989
Revenue
9,437,000
9,324,000
Net inc
54,000
576,000
Share earns
.02
.21


Revlon Will Discontinue the Halston Label
LEAD: The Halston name in women's apparel, once the most glamorous designer label in America, will soon disappear almost entirely from sales racks in this country.


Health Equity Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Equity Properties (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
306,442
bc164,215
Share earns
-
.05
6mo net loss
781,549
c328,018
b-Net income
c-After an extraordinary credit of $492,001 for both periods.


GERMANS ARRESTED ON IRAQI EXPORTS
LEAD: The West German police arrested seven people today on suspicion of supplying Iraq with industrial components used to produce poison gas, the Darmstadt prosecutor's office said.


Guardians Named for Children in Marrow Suit
LEAD: A judge has appointed guardians for a leukemia-stricken boy and his two young half-siblings, whom the sick boy's father wants tested as potential bone-marrow donors.


31 Dead as Soweto Clashes Continue
LEAD: Fighting between rival black factions swirled through parts of Soweto for a second successive day today as the leaders of major black groups failed to agree on the date and location of a meeting to settle their differences.


Home Federal Savings (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal Savings (Ga.)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
158,905
187,809
Per share
.08
.10
6mo net inc
350,482
458,489
Per share
.19
.25


Par Pharmaceutical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Par Pharmaceutical Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,693,000
27,588,000
Net loss
b5,208,000
1,773,000
Shares outst
11,302,000
11,103,000
9mo sales
41,948,000
85,650,000
Net loss
b10,840,000
c3,743,000
Share earns
-
.34
Shares outst
11,190,000
11,147,000


Put the Old U.&amp; D. Back on Track
LEAD: Imagine you are seated in a rustic railroad passenger car, near a majestic river.
The whistle blows, and you're under way - behind the nostalgic chuffing of steam power.
Shortly, the level track gives way to a stiff climb, and the little engine must really work to get you up the grade.
You emerge alongside the shore of a pristine reservoir, surrounded by wooded mountains, and skirt its banks for several miles.


Cisco Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cisco Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1990
1989
Sales
21,783,000
10,251,000
Net inc
4,630,000
1,576,000
Share earns
.30
.12
Shares outst
15,454,000
12,691,000
Yr sales
69,776,000
27,664,000
Net inc
13,904,000
4,178,000
Share earns
1.00
.34
Shares outst
13,877,000
12,293,000


Anangel-American ShipholdFings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anangel-American ShipholdFings (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,289,000
9,877,000
Net inc
6,844,000
6,634,000
Share earns
.37
.65
Shares outst
16,756,000
9,645,000
Yr rev
56,879,000
32,589,000
Net inc
37,681,000
29,776,000
Share earns
2.15
3.18
Shares outst
16,666,995
8,833,673


SPACECRAFT'S LINK TO EARTH LAPSES
LEAD: NASA engineers struggled today to stay in touch with the Magellan spacecraft after it sent back detailed pictures of old lava flows, volcanic cinder cones and faults that show quakes wrack the planet.


Dorothea Bennett, 60, Geneticist and Teacher
LEAD: Dorothea Bennett, a geneticist and educator known for her work in early mammalian development, died Thursday at the M. D. Anderson Hospital in Houston.
She was 60 years old and lived in Austin, Tex.


Home Federal Savings (Indina) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal Savings (Indina)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
513,000
257,000
Per share
.55
.28
Yr net inc
2,052,000
1,824,000
Per share
2.22
1.98


CONSUMER'S WORLD : Coping;   With Garden Photography
LEAD: As the backyard gardener's long labors take shape in the form of row after row of summer flowers, the urge to get out the camera often becomes irresistible.
What better subjects, after all, than the colors and shapes of some of nature's most beautiful productions?


How Safe Is Children's Sleepwear?
LEAD: A growing consumer preference for natural fabrics is colliding with longstanding safety requirements that children's sleepwear be made from flame-resistant materials.


U.S. Bioscience reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Bioscience (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,036,257
41,136
Net loss
833,053
1,509,494
Shares outst
16,863,199
10,288,489
6mo rev
1,292,564
82,442
Net loss
2,513,694
2,706,348
Shares outst
15,762,404
10,187,303


Microscience International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microscience International Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
22,867,000
23,618,000
Net inc
b527,000
c659,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
64,938,000
14,994,000
6mo rev
50,025,000
43,379,000
Net inc
b9,672,000
c1,537,000
Share earns
.15
-
Shares outst
64,952,000
14,988,000


Dr. John Walker, 81, President Bush's Uncle
LEAD: Dr.
John M. Walker, a physician and investment banker, died on Thursday at Southern Maine Medical Center in Biddeford, Me.
He was 81 years old and lived in Easton, Md.


Dress Business Owner and Friend Are Fatally Stabbed in Apartment
LEAD: A 60-year-old woman who sold dresses out of her home and a friend who was visiting her were stabbed to death early yesterday by an assailant she apparently let into her Washington Heights apartment, the police said.


Discus reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Discus
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
3,985,000
4,127,000
Net loss
94,000
b39,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
8,164,000
8,245,000
Net loss
239,000
b18,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Favored Go and Go Knows Traffic Congestion
LEAD: If Go and Go can win the $1 million Travers Stakes at Saratoga Race Track on Saturday, his trainer said, it will be an even greater achievement than his victory in the Belmont Stakes on June 9.


Japan Considers a Role in Gulf Force
LEAD: In what would be Japan's boldest involvement in a possible military confrontation since World War II, the Japanese Government indicated today that it was considering sending nonmilitary support personnel to back American and other forces opposing Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.


BellSouth Project In New Zealand
LEAD: The BellSouth Corporation announced it was proceeding with its plans to develop an advanced cellular telephone network in New Zealand after approval from that nation's Commerce Commission.
A BellSouth spokeswoman, Carlton Hill, said the Atlanta-based company plans to spend $100 million over 10 years to develop the network and will begin offering cellular phone service to New


Lionel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lionel Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
69,747,000
67,488,000
Net loss
4,703,000
3,492,000
6mo sales
135,616,000
128,739,000
Net loss
10,685,000
7,088,000
The latest quarter included a gain of $1.5 million from termination of a retirement plan.


Wholesale Club reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wholesale Club (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Sales
177,281,000
134,580,000
Net inc
558,000
1,262,000
Share earns
.07
.15
Shares outst
8,160,000
5,517,000
6mo sales
329,570,000
241,959,000
Net inc
1,345,000
1,042,000
Share earns
.17
.03
Shares outst
8,118,000
5,115,000


American Toxxic Control reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Toxxic Control (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,630,000
5,685,000
Net inc
133,000
b524,000
b-Included $489,000 gain on the disposal of discontinued operations.


Property Capital Trust reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Property Capital Trust (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b144,000
4,024,000
Per share
.01
.37
Shares outst
9,876,000
10,869,000
Yr net inc
b20,816,000
19,166,000
Per share
2.02
1.83
Shares outst
10,328,000
10,472,000


Speedboat Fleet To Make Waves On the Hudson
LEAD: The 40 national powerboat teams expected to compete today in the Ultra Slim-Fast New York Offshore Grand Prix will probably open their racing machines full throttle on the relatively calm, but potentially menacing, Hudson River.


Visual Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Visual Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,595,175
7,112,861
Net loss
57,771
75,509


Welch Wins 20th Game


Arrest in Death of Child Struck by a Stray Bullet
LEAD: A man answering a gun charge in a Brooklyn courtroom yesterday was arrested and charged with the slaying of a man and his 1-year-old daughter on July 24.


Summit National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit National Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
701,945
b209,217
Per share
-
.37
6mo net loss
1,593,934
b435,180
Per share
-
.63
b-Net income


Synthetech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synthetech Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
274,435
490,310
Net loss
76,358
b171,304
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
10,813,361
10,521,778
b-Net income and included an extraordinary credit of $65,096.


Prime Motor Inns L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Motor Inns L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,365,000
4,381,000
Net inc
1,055,000
1,091,000
Share earns
.26
.27
6mo rev
8,629,000
8,643,000
Net inc
2,014,000
2,060,000
Share earns
.50
.51
Share earnings are in units.


NASA Says Correcting Telescope May Be Simple
LEAD: A thin washer may have caused the flaw in the main mirror of the Hubble Space Telescope, officials of the space agency said, and they said they could compensate for much of the resulting focusing problems simply by replacing a camera on the telescope.


Tele-Optics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tele-Optics Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,265,939
2,225,172
Net loss
114,870
b178,962
Share earns
-
.11
6mo sales
3,096,713
2,696,589
Net loss
52,809
286,114
b-Net income


Canada Malting Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canada Malting Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
108,990,000
105,179,000
Net inc
6,593,000
5,570,000
Share earns
.55
.59
6mo sales
204,607,000
161,204,000
Net inc
10,203,000
8,961,000
Share earns
.95
.95
Shares outst
12,721,134
9,393,904


Centennial Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centennial Savings Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
202,600
86,100
Per share
.32
.14
9mo net inc
489,000
380,500
Per share
.78
.61


SPORTS PEOPLE: COLLEGE BASKETBALL;


Inamed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inamed Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
10,129,441
7,091,113
Net inc
535,888
414,496
Share earns
.07
.06
Shares outst
7,975,873
7,422,256
6mo sales
17,843,038
12,850,451
Net inc
656,036
928,173
Share earns
.08
.13
Shares outst
7,977,637
7,231,871


German Unity Accord May Be Signed Soon
LEAD: The Soviet Union and West Germany said today that they expected a final international agreement on German unification to be concluded in Moscow on Sept. 12 at one last round of talks on security arrangements.


Goring and Islanders Are Together Again
LEAD: Butch Goring, a catalyst when the Islanders won Stanley Cups from 1980 through 1983, rejoined the team yesterday when he was named coach of their top farm club in Troy, N.Y.


Questech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Questech Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,715,200
13,707,700
Net inc
84,600
18,100
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
1,577,762
1,587,003
6mo rev
25,617,800
26,155,700
Net inc
143,200
b715,800
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
1,577,762
1,587,003


In Brooklyn, People Say, 'I Grew Up at McCarren Park Pool'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chrysler Offers A Buyout Plan
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said it had started an employee buyout plan for its hourly workers to reduce its work force by 600 without layoffs.
Employees who accept the offer will receive between $12,000 and $65,000, depending on seniority, to leave the company, Chrysler said.


Mutual Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mutual Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
519,000
525,000
Per share
.63
.65
9mo net loss
b19,700,000
c1,400,000
Per share
-
1.73
b-Reflected a $20.3 million writeoff for goodwill and increased provisions for loan losses by $1.2 million during the quarter ended Dec.


Fifth Dimension Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fifth Dimension Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
849,529
788,040
Net inc
46,469
32,981
Share earns
.06
.05
6mo rev
1,688,744
1,487,816
Net inc
84,554
27,013
Share earns
.12
.04


College Directors Seek Strong Managers;   Grateful at Brandeis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hormel (Geo. A.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hormel (Geo. A.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Sales
654,7432,000
563,986,000
Net inc
12,628,000
14,326,000
Share earns
.16
.18
9mo sales
1,908,358,000
1,641,438,000
Net inc
40,808,000
37,815,000
Share earns
.53
.49


Far West Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Far West Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,700,000
b10,800,000
Share earns
-
1.38
6mo net loss
29,900,000
b16,300,000
Share earns
-
2.09
b-Net income
The company said the loss reflects additional reserves of $16.9 million during the second quarter of 1990 for losses on loans and investments.


Patents;   A Crib to Soothe Infants Suffering From Colic
LEAD: A Connecticut physician, seeking relief from the crying of his baby suffering from colic, won patent approval this week for a crib that soothes infants by simulating movements of the womb.


Canadian Hydropower Poses No Dire Threat;   New Yorkers Save
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chemical Leaman reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Leaman
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
58,210,474
60,899,865
Net inc
67,418
889,711
Share earns
.08
.93
6mo rev
118,618,225
117,740,885
Net inc
250,814
1,065,102
Share earns
.28
1.11


Sulcus Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sulcus Computer Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,022,474
1,217,363
Net loss
237,169
b91,017
Shares outst
4,717,625
2,650,091
6mo rev
2,231,215
2,017,486
Net loss
396,310
b51,435
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
4,296,950
2,650,091


Jones Plumbing Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jones Plumbing Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
10,667,127
9,749,818
Net inc
458,791
531,537
Share earns
.08
.10
Shares outst
5,749,275
5,470,543
6mo sales
20,226,633
18,594,901
Net inc
775,422
804,115
Share earns
.13
.15
Shares outst
5,749,275
5,181,772


Letter: On Puerto Rico;   Forests Suffer for the Drug War
LEAD: To the Editor:


With Rushdie's Approval, Britain Lifts Its Ban on Anti-Rushdie Film
LEAD: A British ban on distributing a videocassette of a Pakistani film that depicts the novelist Salman Rushdie as a ruthless and drunken playboy who tortures and kills Muslims was lifted today after an appeal by Mr.
Rushdie against censorship in any form.


Choices Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Choices Entertainment (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,394,799
16,043
Net loss
683,940
159,548
6mo rev
1,592,346
34,284
Net loss
1,384,340
535,959


Rising Deficits Could Force Fare Increase or Cuts in Transit
LEAD: Declining bus and subway ridership, a sharp rise in fare-beating and a weak regional economy could lead to substantial reductions in service and capital improvements and, possibly, another fare increase, New York City transit officials said yesterday as they released new deficit projections.


A Dispute on Role of Fund-Raiser Divides PEN
LEAD: A dispute over the role of Gayfryd Steinberg as the major private financial backer of PEN, the literary group, has divided the organization's board and raised questions about its financial prospects.


Canadian Hydropower Poses No Dire Threat
LEAD: To the Editor:


Workmen's Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Workmen's Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
814,809
202,706
Per share
.50
-
6mo net inc
1,697,671
821,914
Per share
1.05
-
The company converted from mutual to stock ownership on Jan. 10, 1990.


James Thomas Foley Dies at 80; U.S. Judge in Albany Since 1949
LEAD: James Thomas Foley, a Federal judge for 40 years, died yesterday at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
He was 80 years old and lived in North Greenbush, N.Y.


Boston Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,418,000
3,566,000
Per share
.49
.46
Shares outst
6,899,320
7,743,770
9mo net inc
10,655,000
11,446,000
Per share
1.52
1.47


Refugees from Kuwait Choose Life Over Money
LEAD: As Najib Nasif stepped into the shade of the Jordanian immigration shed here at the bleak border with Iraq today, the strain of the Lebanese merchant's two-day trek across the desert from Kuwait showed in his haggard, unshaven face.


Joseph Stein, 93, Dies; An Automobile Dealer
LEAD: Joseph F. Stein, head of the Joseph F. Stein Cadillac Agency in Asbury Park, N.J., died on Wednesday at his house in Deal, N.J.
He was 93 years old.


Bankunited reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankunited
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,031,247
4,234,179
Net inc
220,198
255,456
Share earns
.16
.20
9mo rev
15,080,793
11,515,577
Net inc
574,447
574,289
Share earns
.48
.46


Man Held in Slaying of Wife and Daughters
LEAD: A 47-year-old man was charged today with murdering his wife and two daughters, officials said.


Hammond Manufactuing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hammond Manufactuing
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
32,352,000
34,011,000
Net inc
727,000
b1,698,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo rev
65,709,000
67,215,000
Net inc
1,799,000
b1,903,000
Share earns
.24
-
b-Net loss and after losses from discontinued operations of $2,284,000 for the quarter and $3,175,000 for the 6 months.


Unimed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unimed Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,208,000
1,249,000
Net loss
343,000
494,000
9mo rev
3,330,000
3,214,000
Net loss
1,293,000
1,458,000
Corrected from yesterday's editions.


Beulah Rothman, Social Work Expert And Professor, 66
LEAD: Dr.
Beulah Rothman, who retired from Adelphi University in 1981 as associate dean of the School of Social Work and head of its doctoral program, died on Thursday at Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami.
She was 66 years old and lived in Plantation, Fla.


Morden &amp; Helwig Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morden &amp; Helwig Group
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,249,000
11,972,000
Net inc
690,000
837,000
Share earns
.16
.19
6mo rev
26,412,000
22,747,000
Net inc
1,176,000
1,190,000
Share earns
.27
.27
Results are in Canadian funds.


Welch Wins 20th, Beating Orioles
LEAD: Bob Welch won his 20th game of the season faster than anyone since 1973, leading the Oakland Athletics over the Baltimore Orioles tonight, 8-3.


Hadson Energy Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hadson Energy Resources (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,912,000
5,505,000
Net loss
1,578,000
b225,000
Share earns
-
.07
6mo rev
13,730,000
11,434,000
Net loss
531,000
b361,000
Share earns
-
.11
Shares outst
6,127,000
3,420,000


Specific Items in Use of Force Are at Issue in Guards' Rules
LEAD: The central source of contention over new ''use of force'' policies for New York City correction officers is the elimination of specific examples of prohibited behavior that were written into the old guidelines, say Legal Aid lawyers for inmates at Rikers Island.


Oil Shock Squeezing Third World
LEAD: Although small compared with the immense jumps in the 1970's, recent increases in the price of oil could create much greater hardships in dozens of third world nations because their economies are in far worse shape than they were during the last oil shock a decade ago.


Valspar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valspar Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 27
1990
1989
Sales
160,993,000
146,072,000
Net inc
10,064,000
8,460,000
Share earns
.92
.76
Shares outst
10,935,787
11,154,482
9mo sales
423,455,000
381,009,000
Net inc
19,872,000
17,638,000
Share earns
1.82
1.57
Shares outst
10,930,716
11,203,614


Standex International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standex International (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
117,878,000
108,833,000
Net inc
6,594,000
2,736,000
Share earns
.66
.59
Shares outst
10,212,000
11,113,000
Yr sales
460,192,000
443,795,000
Net inc
22,723,000
22,284,000
Share earns
2.23
2.01
Shares outst
10,212,000
11,113,000


Bridge
LEAD: One of the rarest plays in the game is the Devil's Coup, in which an apparently certain trump trick for the defense disappears in the endgame.
Equally rare, and just as satisfying, is the pseudo-Devil's Coup, in which the trump trick disappears but the defense has missed an effective countermove.


Bernstein-Leibstone reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bernstein-Leibstone
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,975,000
3,052,000
Net inc
121,956
44,746
Share earns
.03
.01


Julian McDermott, 81; Led Lighting Company
LEAD: Julian A. McDermott, a lighting engineer who founded the Julian A. McDermott Corporation of Ridgewood, Queens, a producer of warning lights and signal equipment, died on Tuesday at Sentara Norfolk General Hospital in Virginia.
He was 81 years old and lived in Gambrills, Md.


Comverse Technology Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comverse Technology Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,610,000
3,402,000
Net inc
151,000
136,000
6mo rev
7,475,000
5,858,000
Net inc
211,000
150,000


Oncogene Science reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oncogene Science (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,414,844
1,246,413
Net loss
608,251
666,447
9mo rev
3,933,901
3,521,088
Net loss
1,744,186
1,751,731


Elmira Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elmira Savings Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
197,000
262,000
Per share
.33
.44
6mo net inc
394,000
556,000
Per share
.66
.93


Dow Drops By 36.64, To 2,644.80
LEAD: The stock market closed with another sizable decline yesterday, finishing a tumultuous week down sharply.
It had experienced even steeper declines earlier in the day that activated the New York Stock Exchange's restriction on program trading.


Fronteer Directory reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fronteer Directory
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,030,941
1,252,672
Net inc
68,121
75,416
Share earns
.02
.02
9mo sales
5,062,351
3,163,042
Net inc
159,961
257,293
Share earns
.05
.09
Shares outst
3,529,202
2,842,998


Horizon Financial Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Financial Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
282,106
74,243
Per share
.17
.05
6mo net inc
588,729
375,467
Per share
.35
.23


Victoria Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Victoria Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,153,000
3,870,000
Net inc
22,000
b23,000
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo rev
10,063,000
7,121,000
Net inc
91,000
b149,000
Share earns
.03
.05
b-Included utilization of tax loss carryforwards of $8,000 and $51,000, or 2 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Supporters of Iraq Rally in Jordan


CHRONICLE
LEAD: To ease the burdens of office, PRESIDENT BUSH finds solace in country music because ''it is real people singing real stories that we can all understand.'' In a two-page essay in the September issue of Country America magazine titled, ''Why I Love Country Music,'' Mr.
Bush wrote that ''I find myself more relaxed with Reba coming over the airwaves,'' referring to the singer Reba M


American Pacesetter reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Pacesetter
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
290,000
555,000
6mo net inc
30,000
b1,006,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss
The company is listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange.


Royal Palm Beach Colony reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Palm Beach Colony (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,205,000
789,000
Net inc
873,000
114,000
Share earns
.19
.03
Shares outst
4,486,000
4,486,000
9mo rev
4,009,000
6,950,000
Net inc
2,027,000
4,335,000
Share earns
.45
.97
Shares outst
4,486,000
4,486,000


Genex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,226,000
1,221,000
Net loss
1,649,000
1,864,000
6mo rev
2,340,000
2,329,000
Net loss
3,016,000
3,720,000


Central Guaranty Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Guaranty Trustco
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
467,198,000
442,278,000
Net inc
9,585,000
23,410,000
Share earns
.16
.41
6mo rev
917,834,000
844,784,000
Net inc
22,546,000
41,935,000
Share earns
.38
.72


Soviets Didn't Cross Korean Border in '50
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vestro Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vestro Foods Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,666,000
4,680,000
Net inc
b92,000
10,000
6mo sales
15,333,000
9,095,000
Net inc
b158,000
c160,000
b-Included a tax credit of $67,000 and $116,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Hytek Microsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hytek Microsystems Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,456,000
2,979,000
Net loss
1,402,000
b821,000
6mo sales
4,634,000
5,995,000
Net loss
2,021,000
b1,635,000
b-After income of $4,000 for the quarter and a loss of $166,000 for the 6 months, both from discontinued operations.


Community Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
420,000
156,000
Per share
.28
.10
9mo net inc
1,031,000
605,000
Per share
.69
.40


Gorbachev Vows to Reorganize Military
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev vowed today to carry out a profound reorganization of the Soviet military in January, and strongly suggested that the changes could include abolition of the draft.


BUSH SAID TO APPROVE PLAN TO ACTIVATE SOME RESERVES; U.S. TAKING OVER 38 AIRLINERS
LEAD: President Bush has decided to call up a limited number of military reservists because of the Middle East crisis, Administration officials said today, and the Pentagon commandeered 38 wide-body jets from 16 airlines to carry troops and cargo to the region.


Former Notre Dame Player Loses Suit on Reinstatement
LEAD: A Federal judge today denied a request by Braxston Banks, a former Notre Dame running back, that he be allowed to return to college football despite the fact that he entered the National Football League draft last spring.


II-VI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* II-VI Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,656,000
3,599,000
Net inc
150,000
388,000
Share earns
.06
.15
Shares outst
2,655,000
2,664,000
Yr rev
15,057,000
13,894,000
Net inc
1,004,000
1,670,000
Share earns
.38
.63
Shares outst
2,665,000
2,664,000


Co-operative Bank of Concord reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Co-operative Bank of Concord
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Net inc
206,000
854,000
Per share
.06
.25


Interpharm Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interpharm Laboratories Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,723,084
4,169,981
Net inc
305,704
127,974
Share earns
.05
.02
6mo sales
9,444,225
7,812,758
Net loss
95,869
b235,955
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


CBS Records Chief Seen In 2-Year Pact
LEAD: Walter R. Yetnikoff, the 56-year-old chief executive of CBS Records, has signed a new contract under which he will remain as chief executive for two years and then become a consultant to the company, several top-level industry executives said.


Jury in Jogger Case Deliberates for 9th Day
LEAD: The jury in the Central Park jogger trial completed nine days of deliberation yesterday, but retired shortly before 9 P.M. without reaching a verdict.


Stratford American reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stratford American (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,018,000
983,000
Net loss
1,109,000
1,102,000
6mo rev
1,657,000
1,590,000
Net loss
1,992,000
2,321,000


John Hall Page, Executive, 70
LEAD: John Hall Page, a retired executive, died on Thursday at Huntington Hospital on Long Island.
He was 70 years old and lived in Huntington.


Norstan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norstan Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Revenue
28,566,000
26,349,000
Net inc
555,000
432,000
Share earns
.16
.14


Sweater Ruling Against Taiwan
LEAD: Sweaters made in Taiwan of synthetic fibers are being sold in the United States at less than fair market value, the Commerce Department ruled today.
The National Knitwear and


Bishop Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bishop Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,370,000
2,444,000
Net loss
511,000
330,000
9mo rev
7,317,000
7,526,000
Net loss
872,000
393,000


Unigene Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unigene Laboratories
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
108,000
-
Net loss
575,000
584,000
Shares outst
13,394,292
13,248,492
6mo rev
271,000
533,000
Net loss
1,145,000
601,000
Shares outst
13,394,292
13,250,304


Mega Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mega Group Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,081,614
1,034,095
Net loss
309,234
b4,945
6mo rev
2,321,594
2,226,169
Net loss
328,268
b14,379
b-Net income


New Jersey Is Delaying Trump Case
LEAD: The New Jersey State Casino Control Commission today postponed a ruling on Donald J. Trump's complex financial bailout plan until Tuesday, saying it needed more time to review more than 1,000 pages of documents.


Medical Devices reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Devices
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,828,194
1,717,359
Net inc
136,045
266,259
Share earns
.07
.13
Yr sales
6,309,788
6,062,519
Net inc
239,253
602,715
Share earns
.12
.29


Federal Screw Works reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Screw Works (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
18,790,000
18,166,000
Net inc
868,000
1,232,000
Share earns
.74
1.02
Yr sales
64,387,000
73,147,000
Net inc
2,187,000
3,502,000
Share earns
1.85
2.90


L. J. Hooker Stores
LEAD: The L. J. Hooker Corporation said it had received approval in bankruptcy court to close its three remaining retail stores in the Forest Fair Mall near Cincinnati.
The stores to be closed are B. Altman &amp; Company, Bonwit Teller and the Sakowitz specialty store.
Hooker had closed all other units in those three store groups, although it sold two Bonwit stores and the Bonwit name to Pyramid Companies, a developer in Syracuse.


American Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Realty Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,012,000
5,611,000
Net loss
2,772,000
b3,864,000
Share earns
-
.34
Shares outst
6,355,561
10,863,348
b-Net income


INSIDE
LEAD:
A Volunteer Soviet Army?


In the Customs Service, An Open Door at the Top
LEAD: Scarcely three months after Carol B. Hallett took over as head of the 200-year-old Customs Service, Congressional overseers published a blistering indictment of her domain.


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Energy Policy Trade-Off;   Dependency Is Price Of Years of Cheap Oil
LEAD: In the spring of 1986, George Bush traveled to Saudi Arabia to plead with the world's biggest oil exporter to stop flooding the market.
Mr.
Bush told the Saudis that their overproduction, by driving down the price, was jeopardizing the American oil industry, in turn undermining the nation's economic strength and security.


St. Petersburg Times Agrees To Buy Out Bass Investors
LEAD: After months of bitter wrangling, The St.
Petersburg (Fla.) Times has agreed to buy the shares of a group of unwelcome investors including Robert M. Bass, the Texas financier.


Check Express Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Check Express Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
963,950
855,242
Net inc
40,518
18,230
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
1,940,830
1,699,413
Net inc
87,318
41,585
Share earns
.02
.01


Canam Manac reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canam Manac
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
67,744,000
86,252,000
Net loss
9,311,000
d4,850,000
6mo sales
145,412,000
168,966,000
Net loss
b2,246,000
cd8,866,000
Share earns
-
.37
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $574,000.


Industrial Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Industrial Acoustics (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
22,741,739
21,266,079
Net inc
1,079,102
1,236,526
Share earns
.37
.43
6mo sales
43,717,586
44,581,492
Net inc
1,430,296
1,619,778
Share earns
.49
.56


California Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Microwave (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
39,283,000
38,333,000
Net inc
1,787,000
1,524,000
Share earns
.22
.19
Yr sales
145,851,000
125,395,000
Net inc
6,642,000
5,132,000
Share earns
.80
.63


U.S. Appeals Order to Return Suspect to Mexico
LEAD: The Justice Department said today that it would appeal a Federal judge's ruling that a doctor whom the United States charges with abetting the slaying of an American drug agent must be returned to Mexico.


Solitec Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Solitec Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,429,000
3,565,000
Net loss
848,000
898,000
9mo rev
8,303,000
13,694,000
Net loss
1,506,000
778,000


Who Will Control the Legacy of the Woodstock Nation?
LEAD: For 21 years, this rural Catskills town has lived peacefully with its legacy as the site of Woodstock, the music festival that defined an era.


Heroux Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heroux Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,487,000
22,136,000
Net inc
708,000
569,000
Share earns
.06
.05
Results are in Canadian funds.


Pan Atlantic Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pan Atlantic Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,632,020
8,083,831
Net loss
884,568
b162,927
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
2,275,584
3,471,767
6mo rev
13,263,571
15,276,138
Net loss
1,930,444
b460,848
Share earns
-
.13
Shares outst
2,275,367
3,471,767


Shasper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shasper Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,121,000
9,922,000
Net loss
331,000
b112,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
24,857,000
26,415,000
Net inc
128,000
234,000
Share earns
.03
.05
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Bell Savings Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Savings Holdings (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
10,912,000
b701,000
Per share
-
.28
Yr net loss
23,335,000
b4,361,000
Per share
-
1.74
b-Net income


Fidelity Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Medical Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,276,564
1,020,900
Net loss
225,741
333,153
9mo rev
4,009,822
2,477,554
Net loss
922,608
1,341,058


Verdix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Verdix Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,020,747
2,432,280
Net inc
492,311
315,593
Share earns
.04
.03
Shares outst
12,164,770
12,179,039


On a Scooter, Mobility Comes With Style
LEAD: Ever since Patricia Frome, a Manhattan lawyer with multiple sclerosis, bought a battery-powered scooter two and a half years ago, her life has changed.
Ms.
Frome rides in an Amigo scooter both inside and outside her home.


U.S. Intercepts and Frees 2 Iraqi Ships
LEAD: United States ships halted two Iraqi cargo vessels in the Persian Gulf today in the first test of the American-led naval blockade of vessels carrying cargo to or from Iraq and occupied Kuwait, the Pentagon said.


About New York;   French Palates Crave a Taste Of Harlem Spice
LEAD: Robert Fridman, French and therefore dapperly dressed as if for cocktails in St.
Tropez, gazed past the 19th-century wooden row houses on Sylvan Terrace in Harlem and reflected on the American Condition. ''Our Manhattan friends said we were crazy to come here.
I don't think New Yorkers refuse to visit Harlem because of fear,'' Mr.


7 Are Arrested in Robberies Around Washington Sq. Park
LEAD: Seven men and youths were arrested on charges of beating and robbing 11 people in a rampage near Washington Square Park in Manhattan early Thursday morning, the police said.


Hach Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hach Co.
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Sales
16,700,000
14,469,000
Net inc
1,256,000
1,065,000
Share earns
.26
.22


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Masur Upset in Volvo
The Volvo International in New Haven, where such highly seeded players as Ivan Lendl, Andres Gomez, Brad Gilbert and Michael Chang were all eliminated by the round of 16 this week, continued its pattern of victory yesterday by relative unknowns and aspirants.


Continental Health Affiliates Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Health Affiliates Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,626,000
13,058,000
Net inc
b2,007,000
d137,000
Share earns
.40
.03
6mo rev
24,961,000
25,808,000
Net loss
b988,000
cd240,000
Share earns
-
.05


CHRONICLE
LEAD: J. RAYMOND JONES is known as ''The Fox,'' and has been the mentor of most black politicians in Manhattan over the past several decades, including MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS.
Mr.
Jones, a former New York County Democratic leader whose Carver Club in Harlem trained generations of young black business and political leaders, is not ready to rest on his laurels.


U.S. Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Technologies
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,751,650
1,924,837
Net inc
25,569
272,427
Share earns
-
.03
6mo sales
3,438,027
3,073,753
Net inc
118,376
348,768
Share earns
.01
.04


Review/Film;   Leaving the Devil Out in the Cold
LEAD: This may sound like heresy, but ''The Exorcist III'' is a better and funnier (intentionally) movie than either of its predecessors.
That's admitted by someone who was not keen on William Friedkin's original ''Exorcist,'' a huge box-office hit in 1973, and who thought that the barrel's bottom had been scraped by John Boorman, who was responsible for ''The Exorcist


Rentrak Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rentrak Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,517,080
2,758,243
Net inc
135,392
b755,703
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
6,208,651
3,524,922
b-Net loss


Ms. Trokel Wed To Scott E. Young
LEAD: Mary Louise Trokel and Scott Edward Young were married last evening at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Rabbi Bruce Goldberg performed the interfaith ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Anthony Luzzi, a Roman Catholic priest.


Leo's Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leo's Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,387,000
18,353,000
Net inc
325,000
1,008,000
Share earns
.07
.25
Shares outst
4,348,000
4,071,000


Mets Fall 2 Games Out, Losing to the Giants, 3-2
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry made one of his rare appearances as a clubhouse orator tonight, warned the Mets that the hour was late and said that the pennant race ''starts here.'' But his eloquence wasn't enough to rally the Mets as they dropped a 3-2 decision to the San Francisco Giants and fell two full games out of the first place in the National League


Mike Haynes Let Go
LEAD: The Los Angeles Raiders have relinquished all rights to Mike Haynes, a 37-year-old defensive back, making the 14-year veteran a free agent.
The Raiders did not protect Haynes after last season.
He was expected to re-sign with the team and report to training camp July 20.
But he and the Raiders never agreed on a contract.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Perhaps the time has come to move toward a voluntary professional army.'' - President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union. [3:1.]


Emance Journal;   Welcomed in France, Albanians Reply: 'America'
LEAD: When 543 Albanian refugees marched off a ferry in Marseilles last month, many showed their delight to be in France by belting out a version of this country's national anthem.
Now, it turns out, they really meant to sing ''The Star-Spangled Banner.''


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,988,855
17,947,256
Net inc
268,738
235,437
Share earns
.10
.09
Year-ago share earnings are restated for the effect of the public offering for the same quarter a year earlier.


Mortgage Rates Down
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.05 percent this week, down from 10.08 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.31 percent, down from 8.39 percent last week.


General Communication reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Communication
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
15,202,000
12,716,000
Net inc
196,000
40,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
31,173,000
24,654,000
Net inc
574,000
472,000
Share earns
.04
.03


Washington Talk;   To Protect Home Turf, They Crowd the Capital
LEAD: California's county welfare directors have been having problems with Washington.
So in the spring they hired a Washington lobbyist, and so joined about 70 other California government bodies, like Santa Clara County or the San Francisco Bay Area's Metropolitan Transportation Commission, that have a presence in the nation's capital.


Hibernia Savings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hibernia Savings
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
2,077,413
b108,992
Per share
-
.14
6mo net loss
1,949,683
b514,863
Per share
-
.64
b-Net income


PE Ben Oilfield reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PE Ben Oilfield
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,268,441
4,208,037
Net loss
1,332,980
312,150
6mo rev
18,108,971
7,513,973
Net loss
1,159,680
807,856
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Coho Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coho Resources Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,286,000
4,077,000
Net inc
1,201,000
2,558,000
Share earns
.15
.32
6mo rev
9,094,000
7,957,000
Net inc
3,700,000
4,912,000
Share earns
.46
.61


Dicon Systems Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dicon Systems Ltd.
Year to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
19,500,000
18,400,000
Net loss
2,110,000
b1,445,000
b-After an extraordinary tax credit of $1,180,000, or 24 cents a share.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Franco-Nevada Mining reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franco-Nevada Mining
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,729,000
854,000
Net inc
1,121,000
452,000
Share earns
.09
.04
Results are in Canadian dollars.


I.I.S. Intelligent Information Systems Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* I.I.S. Intelligent Information Systems Ltd. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,661,000
3,618,000
Net inc
1,440,000
999,000
Share earns
.35
.25
Shares outst
4,061,000
4,029,000
6mo rev
13,442,000
8,173,000
Net inc
2,515,000
2,007,000
Share earns
.62
.50
Shares outst
4,061,000
4,022,000


Barringer Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barringer Resources
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,650,000
2,399,000
Net loss
480,000
b162,000
Shares outst
5,969,040
3,360,055
6mo sales
4,640,000
4,168,000
Net loss
661,000
b670,000
Shares outst
5,957,845
3,322,838


Ad Uses Iraqi Leader To Spur Fuel Saving
LEAD: The Metropolitan Transit Commission is counting on public distaste for President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to increase ridership on city buses and encourage car pooling.


Oshap Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oshap Technologies
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,473,000
5,872,000
Net inc
529,000
1,158,000
Share earns
.09
.21
6mo sales
18,939,000
14,155,000
Net inc
2,063,000
1,276,000
Share earns
.36
.24


Prosecutorial Pursuit: 'An Ounce of Revenge'
LEAD: Like Federal prosecutors throughout the country, Government lawyers here are under pressure to attack savings and loan fraud vigorously.
And like their colleagues, the prosecutors here are battling a familiar problem, a huge caseload of numbing complexity.


Bamberger Polymers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bamberger Polymers (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
43,998,000
48,466,000
Net loss
b517,000
c198,000
6mo sales
88,577,000
97,508,000
Net loss
b210,000
c851,000
b-Included a loss of $63,000 for the quarter and income of $17,000 for the 6 months, both from discontinued operations.


Atwater Condition Worsens, Republican Officials Report
LEAD: The Republican national chairman, Lee Atwater, has received additional radiation treatment as his inoperable brain tumor worsens, party officials say.


Port Agency Police Chief Quits
LEAD: The superintendent of the Port Authority police since March 1984, Henry I. DeGeneste, announced his resignation yesterday.
He will become head of corporate security at Prudential-Bache Securities, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said.


Commercial Federal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Federal (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,300,000
b4,500,000
Per share
.34
-
Yr net loss
31,900,000
c2,200,000
Per share
-
.32
b-Net loss
c-Net income


Franklin Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Holding Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
389,492
458,789
Net loss
58,478
b97,502
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


Preferred Homecare of AmerFica reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preferred Homecare of AmerFica
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,471,844
729,181
Net loss
306,005
b16,941
Shares outst
9,933,854
4,767,588
6mo rev
3,066,079
1,360,435
Net loss
206,920
b37,021
Shares outst
9,772,569
4,484,489


No Verdict in Pilots' Trial
LEAD: A Federal jury considering the case of three Northwest Airlines pilots accused of being intoxicated on a flight last March deliberated for three hours today and then recessed for the weekend.


Liberty Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liberty Homes Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
14,647,000
13,839,000
Net loss
549,000
271,000
6mo sales
25,492,000
25,131,000
Net loss
1,526,000
875,000


Environmental Power reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Power
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,837
353,241
Net loss
198,734
696,578
6mo rev
434,116
765,463
Net loss
1,129,954
1,069,621


Jets Hope to Stop Chiefs, for Appearances' Sake
LEAD: The Jets, who have to look good, and the Chiefs, who don't have to, will meet in a preseason game in Kansas City, Mo., tonight at a time when it is difficult to assess just where the Jets are in their new regime and their search for a quarterback.


Israelis Assert Palestinians Plan Terror Attacks for Iraq
LEAD: Israeli intelligence has learned that several Palestinian terrorist organizations are actively planning attacks on behalf of Iraq against American targets in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf, officials said today.


Arctco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arctco Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
12,426,000
7,890,000
Net inc
289,000
b123,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Correction
LEAD: A review yesterday of the movie ''Wild at Heart'' misidentified the director of photography.
He is Frederick Elmes, not Mark Plummer.


Review/Music;   Reconstituted Little Feat Still Rhythm-Prone
LEAD: Try as it might, Little Feat can't escape the ghost of Lowell George, who died in 1979.
With Mr.
George as its main songwriter and singer, Little Feat brought wordplay and musical gamesmanship to 1970's Southern rock, skewing country with New Orleans polyrhythm and cutting blues with funk.
The reconstituted Little Feat, which has made two albums since 1988, still boasts a rhythm section that can swing, strut, boogie and kick in ordinary or odd meters.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Accor S.A. of France accepted 53.2 million units of Motel 6 L.P. in response to its tender offer that expired this week, giving it more than 99 percent of Motel 6.
The remaining units are to be acquired in a merger at the tender price of $22.50 a unit.


Storage Equities Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Storage Equities Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,978,500
8,656,100
Net inc
2,460,700
2,417,400
Share earns
.22
.22
6mo rev
16,191,600
17,478,100
Net inc
b6,093,600
c4,483,200
Share earns
.55
.41
b-Included a gain on sale of real estate of $1,146,100, or 10 cents a share.


U.S. Might Ask U.N. Council To Condemn Baghdad Again
LEAD: The Bush Administration will seek to condemn Iraq once more at an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council this weekend if it is confirmed that 35 Americans have been removed from a Baghdad hotel to an unknown destination, a senior American official said today.


First Essex Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Essex Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
1,895,000
b1,200,000
Per share
-
.19
6mo net loss
1,570,000
b2,719,000
Per share
-
.42
Shares outst
6,014,000
6,300,000
b-Net income
The company said it restated its results for the first quarter ended March 31 to reflect the reclassification as expenses of $340,000 of costs associated with its merger with Andover Bancorp.


Review/Music;   Two Fill In For Horne At Festival
LEAD: Marilyn Horne, who withdrew from a Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra program Tuesday and Wednesday nights at Avery Fisher Hall, citing exhaustion, can take solace in the fact that the festival needed two artists to replace her.


Comarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comarco Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1990
1989
Revenue
19,764,000
22,230,000
Net inc
376,000
373,000
Share earns
.08
.08
6mo rev
37,050,000
41,978,000
Net inc
731,000
727,000
Share earns
.16
.16


For Iranians, a Windfall
LEAD: As a result of Iraq's surprise offer this week to meet Iran's terms for a peace treaty, Teheran faces one of the most fundamental questions of its 1979 Islamic revolution - whether to use its new position of strength to weaken Iraq or to join with it to push the United States, their common enemy, out of the region?


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: West Germany;   In Bonn, a Debate On Limits of Power
LEAD: A dispute has developed between Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher over how far West Germany should go militarily in joining the effort to contain Iraq.


The Right Time to Protect Banks
LEAD: Banks are not in the same mess as the saving and loan institutions.
But bank failures are uncomfortably frequent and the fund to protect deposits is shrinking.
Thus the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's proposal to charge higher premiums is financially sound and politically savvy.


National Lampoon reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Lampoon (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
847,000
983,100
Net loss
728,800
432,300
Shares outst
1,592,020
1,553,427
6mo rev
2,000,900
2,447,500
Net loss
1,373,400
479,700
Shares outst
1,580,289
1,552,662


Western Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Microwave
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
1,461,000
2,277,000
Net loss
316,000
311,000
9mo sales
6,520,000
7,455,000
Net loss
627,000
524,000


Anti-Helms Billboard: Up, Down and Up
LEAD: A day after a huge billboard that lampooned Senator Jesse Helms as an ''Artificial Art Official'' was pulled down here, the billboard's owners did an about-face and hoisted the six plywood panels back above Santa Monica Boulevard this afternoon.


Pinnacle Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pinnacle Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
416,000
b5,279,000
Per share
.60
-
Yr net loss
283,000
2,091,000
b-Net loss


New U.S. Suit For Keating
LEAD: The Justice Department filed a civil lawsuit today against Charles H. Keating Jr., former owner of the defunct Lincoln Savings and Loan Association of Irvine, Calif., seeking to force Mr.
Keating to account for all of his assets.


Official Says 'Unstable' Drifter Is Chief Suspect in Patz Case
LEAD: Officials in the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan confirmed yesterday that they consider a defendant in a child-molestation case in Pennsylvania an important suspect in the disappearance of Etan Patz.


CHENEY FORESEES LONG STAY FOR U.S.
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney suggested on Friday that American troops might have to stay in Saudi Arabia for a ''long'' time to deter an Iraqi attack.


News Summary
LEAD: International 2-7
President Bush decided to call up a limited number of military reservists because of the Middle East crisis, and the Pentagon commandeered 38 jets from airlines to carry troops and cargo to the region.
Page 1
American reserves await the call for possible duty in the Persian Gulf with a mix of dread and excitement.


B.C. Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* B.C. Bancorp
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,381,000
2,506,000
Share earns
.05
.05
9mo net inc
7,170,000
6,892,000
Share earns
.14
.13
Shares outst
94,482,000
97,608,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


American Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Republic Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
520,000
285,000
Per share
.33
.18
6mo net inc
939,000
808,000
Per share
.59
.52


OBSERVER
LEAD: Julia Child says she is going to continue cooking and eating rich foods.
This is outrageous.
And what is the Surgeon General doing about it?
What is medical science doing about it?
They are doing nothing.
They are too busy stamping out smokers.
Stamping out smokers is good, to be sure.
We all feel better every time we come across another filthy smoker who has just been stamped out.


Caci International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caci International (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
39,104,851
35,966,827
Net inc
1,268,305
1,145,229
Share earns
.11
.10
Yr rev
148,070,831
146,112,317
Net inc
4,002,835
3,706,437
Share earns
.35
.31


Michael Kraus, Professor, 89
LEAD: Michael Kraus, professor emeritus of history at City College, died Aug. 9 in a nursing home in Sun City, Ariz.
He was 89 years old and lived in Sun City.


Boonton Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boonton Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,942,956
2,547,696
Net inc
43,500
b25,572
Share earns
.03
-
9mo sales
9,037,367
8,178,883
Net inc
207,063
-
Share earns
.16
-
b-Net loss
The company said it broke even in the first 9 months of 1989.


Goldriver L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldriver L.P.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,104,000
10,154,000
Net loss
b2,825,000
1,417,000
6mo rev
24,317,000
21,366,000
Net loss
b3,758,000
1,361,000
b-Included payment to bondholders of $1,148,000.


Nostalgia Network reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nostalgia Network
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,961,271
1,004,615
Net loss
1,021,661
656,175
6mo rev
3,339,771
1,907,955
Net loss
1,506,407
1,178,678


Hershey Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hershey Oil Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,364,000
1,804,000
Net loss
193,000
b42,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
6,630,416
6,622,749
6mo rev
2,720,000
3,439,000
Net loss
233,000
b84,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
6,628,984
6,592,135


As Many Nations Join Gulf Force, Soviets Consider Sending Troops
LEAD: The multinational force converging on the Persian Gulf in response to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait continued to grow today, and the Soviet Union held out the possibility of sending troops to the region.


United Medicorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Medicorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
211,886
-
Net loss
1,779,601
-
6mo rev
299,208
-
Net loss
3,455,397
-
Year-ago figures are not available because the company went public in March 1989.


Giants Plan to Unveil Air Erhardt Against Oilers
LEAD: When the New York Giants play the Houston Oilers in a preseason game Saturday night in the Astrodome, they plan to do something unusual for them.
Against a team that loves to pass from its run-and-shoot offense, the Giants intend to pass the ball, too.


Market in U.S. Securities Steadies
LEAD: The Government securities market stabilized yesterday after prices plunged and interest rates soared during the previous session.
Dealers described yesterday's relatively lackluster trading activity as a tug-of-war between market participants influenced by inflationary fears and further weakness in the dollar and those counting on a continuing decline of the economy.


Amtech Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amtech Systems Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,744,877
6,380,758
Net loss
91,466
b230,045
Share earns
-
.12
9mo rev
21,438,125
15,104,914
Net inc
141,776
628,767
Share earns
.07
.37
b-Net income


Celerex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Celerex Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
124,439
419,556
Net loss
700,722
490,366
6mo rev
164,000
426,000
Net loss
1,399,000
1,259,000


Your Money;   Power of Attorney In Elderly Care
LEAD: As medical science prolongs life, an increasing number of people are outliving their mental abilities to make financial and health-care decisions.
And these elderly people are often poorly served when responsibility is handed over to other parties by the courts, reports the Committee on Legal Problems of the Aging of the Association of the Bar of the City of New


Die Laughing Wins Wilson
LEAD: Die Laughing won the $1,043,500 Woodrow Wilson Pace tonight at the Meadowlands, equaling a world record for 2-year-old pacing colts and establishing a new track record.


Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,375,000
4,427,000
Net inc
100,000
766,000
Share earns
.01
.11
Shares outst
9,828,659
6,817,153
6mo rev
13,699,000
8,704,000
Net inc
2,053,000
1,459,000
Share earns
.20
.22
Shares outst
9,828,659
6,531,355


Boy, 14, Shot on Brooklyn Street And the Police Question a Suspect
LEAD: A teen-ager was shot and critically wounded last night as he stood on a Brooklyn street, the police said.


Western Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
7,437,000
b543,000
Per share
-
.25
6mo net loss
7,286,000
b1,018,000
Per share
-
.47
b-Net income


Dawson Geophysical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dawson Geophysical (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,200,000
1,110,000
Net inc
22,000
bc407,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
6,170,000
4,457,000
Net loss
547,000
c313,000
b-Net loss
c-Included an extraordinary charge of $56,000 for the quarter from reversal of tax-loss carryforward and an extraordinary tax credit of $18,000, or 1 cent a share, for the 9 months.


Security Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
128,000
438,000
Per share
.18
.60
6mo net loss
904,000
b801,000
Per share
-
1.07
b-Net income


Teeco Properties L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teeco Properties L.P.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
13,000
51,000
6mo net loss
14,000
120,000


Ventura County National Banorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ventura County National Banorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
814,000
631,000
Per share
.16
.17
6mo net inc
1,545,000
1,332,000
Per share
.31
.36
Shares outst
4,816,146
3,707,590


Specialty Retail Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Specialty Retail Services Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,477,000
7,841,000
Net inc
19,000
c119,000
Shares outst
5,512,500
3,884,591
6mo sales
17,400,000
16,095,000
Net inc
b101,000
c18,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
5,512,500
3,888,888


Micronetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micronetics Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
663,299
880,821
Net inc
36,723
51,959
Share earns
.02
.03


Tie/Telecom Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tie/Telecom Canada
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,813,000
14,149,000
Net loss
310,000
1,058,000
6mo sales
12,639,000
30,948,000
Net loss
951,000
1,045,000
The company said the sales decline reflected the sale of its manufacturing facility in Sherbrooke, Que.


El Paso Electric Co.  reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* El Paso Electric Co.  (OTC)
12mo June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
436,544,000
404,322,000
Net loss
b73,913,000
b46,859,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $79,649,000 for the latest 12 months and $68,350,000 for the year- earlier period.


United Security Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Security Financial
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,100
b1,005,300
Per share
-
.11
6mo net inc
297,800
b1,060,000
Per share
.03
.12
b-Included $770,000 in gross income recorded for the sale of Pilgrim Life Insurance Co.


A Stop on I-95, a Motionless Hand, and a Murder Confession
LEAD: A Long Island man driving through Virginia was charged with murdering his wife yesterday after a state trooper pulled him over and discovered the woman's body in the back seat, the police said.


Babbage's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Babbage's Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Sales
25,042,000
16,902,000
Net loss
427,000
493,000
6mo sales
50,378,000
35,286,000
Net loss
395,000
30,000


Boston Digital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Digital Corp.
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,138,000
5,678,000
Net loss
519,000
b251,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.25
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.49
7.50
7.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.44
7.47
7.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.65
8.64
8.17
30-YR.


PDA Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PDA Engineering (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,872,000
7,308,000
Net inc
705,000
379,000
Share earns
.16
.10
Yr rev
31,376,000
27,286,000
Net inc
2,162,000
1,583,000
Share earns
.50
.39


Clothestime Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clothestime Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 28
1990
1989
Sales
56,975,000
52,054,000
Net inc
1,464,000
2,326,000
Share earns
.11
.16
6mo sales
103,804,000
93,240,000
Net inc
100,000
2,408,000
Share earns
.01
.17


Debra Waxman Weds Andrew Reegen
LEAD: Debra Lynn Waxman and Andrew Edward Reegen were married last evening at the St.
Moritz hotel in New York by Walter T. Lawton, the dean of the Council of Leaders of the American Ethical Union.


Homicide Is Top Cause of Death From On-Job Injury for Women
LEAD: The leading killer of American women in the workplace is homicide.


Equity Was Right the First Time
LEAD: When Actors Equity took its stand on ''Miss Saigon'' in favor of fair casting opportunities for its minority members, I stood 100 percent behind my union.
Now that it has reversed its decision, I am just as firmly opposed.


Marines Continue Liberia Airlift
LEAD: United States marines today flew about 360 Indian nationals from the U.S.S.
Saipan off the Liberian coast to Freetown, the capital of neighboring Sierra Leone.
They had been airlifted to the warship from the United States Embassy in Monrovia on Thursday.


Perpetual Financial reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perpetual Financial (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Net loss
5,260,000
b5,010,000
Per share
-
.29
9mo net loss
67,319,000
b16,064,000
Per share
-
.96
b-Net income


Electro Rent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro Rent Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
26,721,000
28,616,000
Net inc
1,846,000
1,833,000
Share earns
.44
.44
Yr rev
107,552,000
114,504,000
Net inc
7,027,000
7,936,000
Share earns
1.68
1.74


Speed-O-Print Business MaFchines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Speed-O-Print Business MaFchines Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 31
1990
1989
Revenue
146,000
1,009,000
Net loss
b466,000
c2,874,000
Share earns
-
1.95
6mo rev
233,000
1,678,000
Net loss
b595,000
c2,406,000
Share earns
-
1.63


Saudi Move For OPEC Meeting
LEAD: Saudi Arabia, laying the basis for a sharp increase in its oil production without OPEC's approval, stressed to other members of the organization yesterday that it was seeking a meeting to discuss the issue and that opposition to such discussion was not reasonable.


Cucos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cucos Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
3,555,694
2,985,051
Net inc
15,551
13,390
Share earns
.01
.01
Yr rev
13,582,689
12,533,084
Net inc
180,383
142,076
Share earns
.09
.07


Review/Theater;   Puerto Rican Double Bill Mixes Comic and Tragic
LEAD: Repertorio Espanol has constructed an improbable double bill at the Gramercy Arts Theater: a play about a family tragedy among Puerto Ricans in New York City today and a musical about rural Puerto Rico 130 years ago.
The fit is, at best, imperfect, but the musical has great charm and one leaves the pair, somewhat miraculously, with little emotional confusion.


Falcon Cable Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falcon Cable Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,486,700
7,273,800
Net loss
2,833,900
955,100
6mo rev
18,095,500
14,053,400
Net loss
5,334,000
1,741,900


Pearl Bailey, Cabaret Trouper And Musical Star, Dies at 72
LEAD: Pearl Bailey, the entertainer whose distinctive singing style was enhanced by her mischievous witticisms and warm personality, died yesterday at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia after collapsing at a hotel where she had been staying.
She was 72 years old and lived in Lake Havasu,


Techdyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Techdyne Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,837,350
4,612,420
Net loss
b96,259
c305,690
Share earns
-
.17
6mo rev
8,874,356
9,068,844
Net loss
b81,256
c521,589
Share earns
-
.29
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $49,017, or 3 cents a share, and $71,017, or 4 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: France;   Paris Stressing Independent Role
LEAD: While strongly backing United Nations sanctions against the Baghdad Government, France has quietly distanced itself from the American response to the Iraqi crisis, apparently in the hope of protecting its influence and interests in the rest of the Arab world.


Amerifax Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerifax Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
533,112
3,501
Net loss
153,295
137,443
Shares outst
5,370,000
2,224,945
6mo rev
815,857
4,972
Net loss
397,401
258,875
Shares outst
5,370,000
1,730,221
The company is in the development stage.


Florida State Beats M.I.T. for Science Center
LEAD: Upstart, cash-wielding Florida State University, widely known for its powerful football team, yesterday beat out the prestigious but perhaps frugal Massachusetts Institute of Technology in a Federal competition for money to build a $100 million center to conduct research on extremely powerful magnets.


Factional Clashes Continue in South Africa


Review/Film;   When Heaven Turns Out Not to Be
LEAD: As a New York Mafioso named Vinnie Antonelli, Steve Martin might be some genetic misfire in the Corleone family.
Renamed Tod and shipped to a small California town as part of the Federal witness-protection program, Vinnie is a wise guy with a nasal voice, stand-up hair moussed to within an inch of its life and an endless supply of gray silk suits that he wears to mow the lawn.


Enscor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enscor Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,600,000
13,000,000
Net inc
101,000
2,100,000
Share earns
-
.19
6mo rev
45,000,000
31,700,000
Net inc
1,000,000
5,100,000
Share earns
.08
.46
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Yanks Partners' Suit Angers Commissioner
LEAD: Clearly angered by a lawsuit that attempts to keep George Steinbrenner in control of the Yankees, the commissioner's office today asked the team's minority owners to declare where they stood on a suit that was filed by two of them.
Virtually all of the non-suing partners replied that they wanted no part of the court action.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Prime Minister MICHAEL MANLEY of Jamaica was reported resting comfortably yesterday after undergoing prostate surgery at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan on Thursday.
The 65-year-old Prime Minister has had no complications from the four-hour operation to remove a cancerous nodule, said HARTLEY NEITA, a spokesman for Mr.


Asians Urged To Negotiate
LEAD: Asian nations must learn to negotiate if they want to be big exporters, the United States Agriculture Secretary, Clayton K. Yeutter, said today.


Atek Metals Center reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atek Metals Center (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,533,000
12,226,000
Net inc
298,000
b680,000
Share earns
.07
-
9mo rev
40,387,000
38,506,000
Net inc
725,000
39,000
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss


TSC Shannock reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSC Shannock
Year to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
28,600,000
-
Net inc
401,000
-
Share earns
.16
-
The company recently changed its fiscal year-end to May 31 from Sept. 30.
For the eight months ended May 31, 1989, the company had net income of $94,000, or 4 cents a share, on sales of $16.6 million.


Pushed Out Of Bounds By the System
LEAD: A judge's denial yesterday of the request by the former Notre Dame running back Braxston Banks to regain his college eligibility after an unsuccessful application to the National Football League draft should not be the last discussion of an unreasonable system that protects every interest except those of the athletes.


Industrial Training Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Industrial Training Systems
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,082,000
1,035,000
Net loss
34,000
78,000
Shares outst
1,023,515
1,078,558
Yr rev
4,066,000
4,006,000
Net inc
54,000
10,000
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
1,056,349
1,086,494


Krystkowiak Sidelined
LEAD: Larry Krystkowiak will be lost to the Milwaukee Bucks for the entire 1990-91 season after again undergoing knee surgery, but team officials say they expect him to make a comeback the next season.


Exploration Co. of Louisiana reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exploration Co. of Louisiana
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,661,000
2,037,000
Net inc
b1,047,000
195,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
90,769,000
84,661,000
6mo rev
8,112,000
4,244,000
Net inc
b1,295,000
748,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
90,601,000
83,022,000


Falls Financial Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falls Financial Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
728,000
628,000
Per share
.46
-
6mo net inc
1,384,000
1,157,000
Per share
.87
-
Falls Financial said per share earnings for 1989 were not available because it converted to a stock company Dec.


P.A.M. Transportation reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* P.A.M. Transportation (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,917,071
19,699,796
Net loss
1,491,582
369,411
Shares outst
4,867,857
4,867,857
6mo rev
28,354,317
38,288,698
Net loss
3,520,953
1,801,576
Shares outst
4,867,857
4,867,857


Golden Cycle Gold reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Cycle Gold
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
63,000
18,000
Net loss
119,000
124,000
6mo rev
119,000
35,000
Net loss
200,000
222,000


Sundowner Offshore Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sundowner Offshore Services (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,800,013
2,771,504
Net inc
436,781
527,826
6mo rev
7,295,726
4,706,439
Net inc
937,519
824,600
Net income figures are presented on a pre- pro forma tax basis.


Newport News Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newport News Savings Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
6,200,000
2,400,000
Yr net loss
11,500,000
1,600,000


Horizon Gold Shares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Gold Shares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,638,987
2,950,502
Net loss
706,766
303,105
Shares outst
26,434,557
19,846,426


Chester Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chester Valley Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
395,000
311,000
Share earns
.34
.27
Yr net inc
1,428,000
1,390,000
Share earns
1.24
1.21


Vidmark Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vidmark Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,680,000
7,220,000
Net inc
393,000
833,000
Share earns
.10
.23
Yr rev
37,228,000
21,610,000
Net inc
4,227,000
2,651,000
Share earns
1.10
.70


Envirosource Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Envirosource Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
59,151,000
48,217,000
Net loss
b11,019,000
c287,000
6mo rev
108,153,000
91,711,000
Net loss
b18,623,000
c2,310,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $11,000,000 for the quarter and $14,000,000 for the 6 months.


Flanigan's Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flanigan's Enterprises (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,061,000
7,345,000
Net loss
b391,000
c617,000
9mo sales
22,178,000
24,933,000
Net inc
b337,000
d357,000
Share earns
.36
-
b-Included an extraordinary charge of $133,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary credit of $114,000, or 12 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Fan Roars
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Putting Lyme Disease Into Perspective
LEAD: DR.
MATTHEW L. CARTTER, an epidemiologist with the preventable diseases division of the State Department of Health Services, is in charge of surveillance for Lyme disease.
He was the editor of an edition of the Connecticut State Medical Society magazine last year devoted to the disease.Lyme disease was originally believed to cause only the characteristic rash and arthritis, but doctors now know that it can cause cardiological and neurological problems.


Safety Hazard In the Making
LEAD: A modification is currently being incorporated into the Southern State Parkway near the Suffolk/Nassau County line which will produce a very dangerous condition, and is bound to seriously endanger the public safety and the efficient passage of traffic on that highway.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   A Sauce of Ripe Tomatoes Complements Grilled Fish
LEAD: For this meal, it is essential to have the best tomatoes.
If the tomatoes have no flavor, the sauce will have no flavor.


Home Clinic;   Leveling a Sidewalk Slab
LEAD: A CONCRETE sidewalk slab that has tilted because of uneven settling can usually be leveled.
Unless the slab is quite large (more than 4 by 4 feet) or thick, the job is fairly easy.
But two or more people are required, and at least one must be strong enough to pry up the slab with a lever, as described below.


On Discarding Abstract Ideas
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sin Tax Justified
LEAD: To the Editor:


1,000 Houses Evacuated in Wisconsin


Mutual Funds;   Some Picks for the Oil Play
LEAD: Given the sharp rise in world oil prices, what are the prospects for mutual funds that invest heavily in oil and other energy companies?


Rhythm Surges to Win Travers
LEAD: Rhythm, a champion 2-year-old but a disappointing 3-year-old for most of this season, circled the field from last place and scored an impressive 3 1/2-length victory today in the $1,178,500 Travers Stakes at Saratoga Race Track.


Don't Measure Souter by the Size of His Town;   Mr. Dooley Says
LEAD: To the Editor:


More Power Restored to Lower Manhattan


On the Mend
LEAD: Just saying ''no'' nearly cost David Opont his life five months ago, when a neighborhood bully tied him up, beat him and set him afire after David refused to smoke a cigarette he thought contained drugs.
As he was released from a New York City hospital last week, the 12-year-old, who had initially been given only a 50 percent chance of survival, called on ''politicians and teachers'' to ''do more to make our children safe.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Aug. 5 about Gov.
Jim Florio's response to critics of his tax program misidentified the chairman of the Democratic State Committee.
He is Philip Keegan.


May K. Mukuda Is Wed in California
LEAD: May Kyoko Mukuda and Michael Renne Ty Tan were married yesterday at St.
Thomas Aquinas Roman Catholic Church in Palo Alto, Calif., by the Rev.
Alexander Larkin.


The Best of Steinbrenner Combines Standard Golden Oldies
LEAD: For anyone who missed the first 17 seasons, this has been the ''best,'' or the top hits, of George Steinbrenner.


Statement by Iraq's Social Ministry
LEAD: Following is the text of a statement issued today by the Iraqi Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs about the treatment of foreigners in Iraq, as transmitted by the Iraqi press agency and translated by Reuters:


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: There were only a few surprises in the Interzonal Tournament for world championship aspirants, which concluded July 14 in Manila.
For the most part, the competition went according to what the rankings of the International Chess Federation would have predicted.


Question Of the Week;   Do Tennis Players Start at Too Young An Age
LEAD: Child prodigies should be permitted to develop their talents and share them with the world from the moment those talents become evident.
The children should be encouraged, supported, nourished, nurtured.
Certainly any child with minimum talents should not be pushed to try to reach a goal that is impossible or unlikely.


Wood Wears Coats of Many Colors
LEAD: AS Betsy McManus and Jennifer Thurstan see it, a plain surface should not be left alone.
It can be painted, glazed, stenciled, stippled or maybe all of the above.
Wood can be made to look like marble or semiprecious stone.
Ordinary pine can be made to resemble exotic zebra wood.


TOPICS OF THE TIMES;


On Spraying For Gypsy Moths
LEAD: The two ''Other Views'' (Letters to the New Jersey editor, July 15) in response to Pete Dunne's article on gypsy moth spraying raise questions of judgment and fact that call for at least one additional letter.


Gary Player Has Backer
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: The Call of the Wild


The True Cost of Energy;   Pay It: For Security, the Economy and the Air
LEAD: Saddam Hussein's plunder of Kuwait only dramatizes something Americans have long known from the bottom of their gas tanks: Oil dependency breeds vulnerability.


Wall Street;   Did the Short-Sellers Stumble?
LEAD: Nothing makes a short-seller more confident of impending disaster than a whiff of disappointment in a high-flying company's sales figures.
But the recent experience of Mylan Laboratories Inc., a brash leader of the $2 billion generic drug industry, suggests that the shorts are not infallible.


Weill's Odyssey: Part 1, Europe, Is Getting Its Due
LEAD: In his 90th birthday year, Kurt Weill remains an increasingly emblematic 20th-century composer.
Before most anyone else, he abandoned modernist dissonance and abstraction in favor of a style that delicately balanced formal integrity with popular appeal.


Recycling Measure: A Pleasant Surprise
LEAD: I recently returned to New Jersey after an absence of about 10 years.
It won't come as a surprise to anyone that I was met with utter amazement every time I told people where I was going, and that I was doing it by choice. ''But why New Jersey?
It is so dirty,'' was the general message.


Come Home, Papa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Barrie Ladenheim, a Teacher, Is Wed
LEAD: Barrie Ladenheim, a teacher at the Roosevelt Island Public School in New York, and Dr.
Kenneth S. Austin, an orthopedic surgeon at the New York University Medical Center, were married yesterday at the Dellwood Country Club in New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Louis Frishman officiated.


Joanna Feinman Weds
LEAD: Joanna Bess Feinman, a daughter of Carol and Matthew Feinman of New York, was married yesterday to Tom Riordan, a son of Henry and Aileen Riordan of Summit, N.J.
Walter Lawton, an Ethical Culture Society leader, performed the ceremony at the bride's parents' summer home in Arkville, N.Y.
The bride, 37 years old, will keep her name.


The Free-Play Spaces of Rap
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Barry Weds Richard Grinalds
LEAD: The chapel of the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Greenwich, Conn., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Maura Roff Barry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Barry Jr. of Green Farms, Conn., to Richard Drummond Grinalds, a son of Maj.
Gen. and Mrs.
John Southy Grinalds of Belle Haven, Va., and San Diego.


Norris Holds On to Win Offshore Prix
LEAD: It was a rivalry made in Hollywood that determined the winner today of the Ultra Slim-Fast New York Offshore Grand Prix, the first major powerboat race on the Hudson River in nearly a decade.


Not Sauce for The Gander
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ms. Slusser Weds Matthew Arnold
LEAD: At St.
Philip's Roman Catholic Church in Occidental, Calif., Sarah Ann Slusser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Peter Slusser of New York City and Windsor, Calif., was married yesterday to Matthew Baylor Arnold, a son of Dr.
Mary B. Arnold of Barrington, R.I., and the late Dr.
John Hampton Arnold.
Msgr.


'Council School' Offers Training to Hopefuls
LEAD: In an era devoted to managing skills and behavior - where finishing schools and canine obedience schools exist near treatment centers for sex or food addicts - perhaps it was inevitable that New Yorkers would get a training program for City Council aspirants.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 19, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
38
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
5
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights Colombian drug lords.


Campus Life: Maryland;   Diggers Unearth Clues to History Of Free Blacks
LEAD: Writers filling history textbooks with accounts of blacks in America's slave days often omit stories about the ones who were never slaves.
But the University of Maryland and the Historic Annapolis Foundation plan to piece together part of this forgotten history from broken glass, ceramics and other artifacts unearthed in a parking lot here.


Where There's Smoke There's Flavor
LEAD: THE idea of smoking fish and game to preserve them has been around since the discovery of fire.
But recently customers at the new West Street Grill in Litchfield, Conn. (203-567-3885) have been intrigued by the subtle, smoky flavor of unexpected foods such as tomatoes, corn and even lentils.


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF    FOREIGNERS IN IRAQ WILL SHARE IN HARDSHIPS, BAGHDAD WARNS; SAUDIS TO INCREASE OIL OUTPUT;   CHALLENGE TO OPEC
LEAD: Saudi Arabia served notice today that it would increase oil production by two million barrels a day with or without the support of other members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
That would equal half the oil lost to the world market because of the international embargo on Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil shipments.


Sticking To Rules
LEAD: Although Japanese corporate interests have been buying golf courses and sponsoring tournaments in the United States in order to increase their visibility on television back in Japan, what happened this weekend at the JAL Big Apple Classic pretty much resembled a drive into a bunker.


Reappraising the Appraisal Industry
LEAD: ''THE party is over,'' said Eugene Albert, a real estate appraiser. ''The binging of the 1980's is finished.'' Mr.
Albert was discussing the excesses that characterized the 1980's real estate market and led to a recent law requiring state certification of real estate appraisers.


Campus Life: C.S.U., Long Beach;   Roof Collapse Forces Relocation Of Classes
LEAD: Officials of California State University at Long Beach are hurriedly rearranging fall music-school programs after a recital hall roof collapsed and seven other buildings were closed because of concern that they were unsafe.


Where There's Smoke There's Flavor
LEAD: THE idea of smoking fish and game to preserve them has been around since the discovery of fire.
But recently customers at the new West Street Grill in Litchfield, Conn. (203-567-3885) have been intrigued by the subtle, smoky flavor of unexpected foods such as tomatoes, corn and even lentils.


Rachel F. Weber Weds Carlos A. Ortiz
LEAD: Rachel French Weber and Carlos Alejandro Ortiz Cathcart were married yesterday at Our Lady of the Snows Roman Catholic Church in Woodstock, Vt., by the Rev.
William P. Gallagher.


Recycling Measure: A Pleasant Surprise
LEAD: As chief environmental official for the Town of Babylon, Suffolk County, New York, I was dismayed to read in the article ''Recycling: New Report, New Debate'' that our town had abandoned its newspaper recycling program in order to provide the requisite amount of fuel for our resource recovery plant.


Fashion: On the Street;   Summer's Assertive Success
LEAD: At least once a season, it seems, a fashion item appears and almost at once asserts itself.
This summer that item is a cotton canvas jacket from the designer Isaac Mizrahi that comes in a variety of graphic black-and-white patterns: checks, diamonds, spots, stripes and abstract flowers.
Besides the boldness of its racing-pattern prints, what sets this jacket apart is its signature solid-black collar.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Travel Advisory column on Aug. 12 about Fastbreak Vacations, in Chicago, misstated its telephone number for information on discount travel.
The number is (900) 990-3335.


Hanging Tough Won't Be the Only Test of Leadership
LEAD: THE race is on.
President George Bush versus President Saddam Hussein.
There is no prize for coming in second.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: A rather vague area of postal history - improvised delivery services - often leads students to view their collections as paradigms of particularly turbulent periods.


Erika Pieger Is Married
LEAD: Erika Pieger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric A. Pieger of Tewksbury, N.J., was married yesterday to Donald Armstrong Odel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Odell of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenyon J. Wildrick officiated at the Community Congregational Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Odel, 27 years old, graduated from Bucknell University.


Holdout on Rape Verdict Still Sees Discrepancies
LEAD: One juror at the Central Park jogger trial held out until yesterday against convicting Antron McCray of rape andchanged his mind only after Mr.
McCray's videotaped confession was played for the fifth time.


Question Of the Week;   Do Tennis Players Start at Too Young An Age
LEAD: Many over-ambitious parents, dazzled by visions of trophies and dollar signs, do push their offspring into tennis almost from infancy.
Such parents should be reminded that Stefan Edberg, the Wimbledon champion and the No. 1 player in the world, did not start playing tennis until the age of 7.
Throughout a normal childhood spent at home, not at a tennis academy, he continued to pursue many other sports, including soccer, hockey and basketball.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD: East Patchogue
$125,500
55 Furman Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, deck; taxes $1,850.
Franklin Square
$192,500
162 Poppy Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.


Daisies Are Coming Into Their Own
LEAD: DAISIES are dandy, and August and September are the months when they come into their own.
There are white ones, golden ones, yellow ones, blue ones, even maroon ones.


Ms. Randall Weds Lawrence Bailey Jr.
LEAD: Juliet Farrar Randall, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Joseph Randall of Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday to Lawrence Randolph Bailey Jr., a son of Cora T. Walker of Manhattan and Mr.
Bailey of Queens.
The Rev.
Darryl James, an Episcopal priest and a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


'A Howling Tempest in the Brain'
LEAD:
DARKNESS VISIBLE
A Memoir of Madness.
By William Styron.
84 pp. New York: Random House. $15.95.


THE WORLD: The Gulf;   Key Points of the Week
LEAD: AS rhetorical salvos intensified in the Middle East last week, the United States sent some of its most sophisticated offensive weapons to the potential battlefront with Iraq.
Putting a Vietnam-size troop lift on fast forward, the Pentagon poured in tens of thousands more troops, commandeering commercial airliners to fly them there.


Thornburgh's Son Is Cleared of Drug Accusations
LEAD: The Justice Department says that the F.B.I. looked into an accusation by a former Pennsylvania official that the son of Attorney General Dick Thornburgh had used marijuana and cocaine as recently as 1988, but that investigators found the charges to be unsubstantiated.


The Ethical-Erotic
LEAD:
THE CULTURE OF REDEMPTION
By Leo Bersani.
232 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $25.


King Takes Record And Lead With a 63
LEAD: Betsy King shattered the record of the Wykagyl Country Club course with a sizzling nine-under-par 63 today for a three-shot lead going into the final round of the JAL Big Apple Classic.


Anglo-American Music And a World Attuned
LEAD: If the arts are mankind's mirror, then international popular music may be a reflection of international politics and economics.
Or so I brooded recently in Hamburg, West Germany, listening to the music on a restaurant sound system.
The fare consisted of a nonstop onslaught of English and American pop hits, not a


Walking in New York And Staying Alive At the Same Time
LEAD: IT is not sheer coincidence that the imperial city of New York is also the most pedestrian city in the country.
In contrast to other communities where people move mainly by car, New York is an infantry operation, dependent on auxiliaries in the shape of mass transit.


Basking in the Regional Warmth of Swiss Faience
LEAD: As guardians of the local culture and regional arts, the provincial museums of Europe are an invaluable resource for the study of special products manufactured locally.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My husband painted our brick patio with a clear water sealer.
This was a mistake because when it rains the water stays on the bricks.
Can the sealer be removed?


Stephanie Feinstein Is Wed
LEAD: Stephanie Beth Feinstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hyman Feinstein of Brooklyn, was married last evening at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York to Alan Jonathan Marquesano, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Marquesano of New York.
Rabbi David H. Lincoln officiated.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Review/Rock;   Cajun Singer Transcends Novelty
LEAD: In the mid-1950's, when the Cajun rockabilly singer Joe Cheramie was 17, he earned a contract with RCA records.
The company flew the singer, who called himself Joe Clay, from Harvey, La., to New York City, where he recorded with a group of New York's best black rhythm-and-blues musicians.
A rare early example of racial integration in pop music, the records, featuring two drummers who played simultaneously, are astonishingly hard.


Christopher J. Walton Weds Sandra M. Wall
LEAD: Sandra M. Wall and Christopher J. Walton were married yesterday at 45 Downing Street, a Manhattan caterer.
Adele Agin officiated.


They Were Not Broken
LEAD:
BOUNCING BACK
How a Heroic Band of POWs Survived Vietnam.
By Geoffrey Norman.
248 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


Q and A
LEAD:
Discount Travel Agencies


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My husband painted our brick patio with a clear water sealer.
This was a mistake because when it rains the water stays on the bricks.
Can the sealer be removed?


Review/Jazz;   A Young Blues Guitarist Intent on Modernization
LEAD: About halfway through his set at Manny's Car Wash on Tuesday night, the young blues guitarist and singer Kenny Neal played ''The Things That I Used to Do.'' The song, which was written by Guitar Slim in the mid-1950's, has become a standard because of its originality, derived from a distinct guitar figure and the unusual rise and fall of its melody.


A TASTE FOR SCRAMBLED ENGLISH
LEAD: As a recent, first-time traveller to Egypt, I was amused to find S &amp; M's candies that ''melt in your mouth, not in your hand;'' also, savory, salty crackers called Pitz and a fast-food hamburger chain called Limpy's.
ELLEN PEARLSTEIN
Ridgewood, N.J.


Why Iraq Won't Make Israel Say 'Atom'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Style Makers;   Xenobia Bailey, African-Hat Designer
LEAD: ''I've always worn hats, but they never did what I wanted them to,'' Xenobia Bailey said. ''The knit hats become unraveled and the floppy hats just had no style.''


FOX IN THE NETWORK HENHOUSE
LEAD: Fox Broadcasting has done more than just create successful, youth-oriented programming (''Fox in the Network Henhouse'' by Cameron Stauth, July 15).
It has given us a glimpse at our own future, and it's not pretty.
From the urban body counts on shows like ''Cops'' and ''America's Most Wanted'' to the antihero Simpsons, watching Fox television is like peering over the horizon into post-industrial


Salvadoran Foes Meet to Seek an End to War
LEAD: Government and rebel negotiators met today to work toward an end to El Salvador's civil war, and the Government's chief delegate said progress was possible despite differences over the future of the army.


Katherine Smith Weds Stephen Ware
LEAD: Katherine Ludlow Smith, a daughter of Leonard T. Smith of Rochester and the late Charlotte Smith, was married yesterday to Stephen Jordan Ware, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Timmis Ware of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dewey F. Fagerburg Jr., the bride's uncle, performed the ceremony at the Scarsdale Congregational Church.


An Independent and Erratic Life
LEAD:
ETCHINGS IN AN HOURGLASS
By Kate Simon.
240 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers.
$19.95.


Streetscapes: 19 East 54th Street;   A Fire-Ravaged, 1900 Mansion Now Enmeshed in a Dispute
LEAD: For years, the austere, granite town house at 19 East 54th Street has been a historical question mark for curious New Yorkers.


Man Is Saved After Plunging From Bridge
LEAD: A man who apparently jumped off the Brooklyn Bridge yesterday was saved by quick teamwork between the crew of a Manhattan sightseeing boat, officers on a police rescue launch and ambulance technicians.


THE ANT MAN
LEAD: When E. O. Wilson got in trouble for saying that sexual division of labor in modern man may be an adaptive trait and that there may be a ''loose correlation'' between worldly success and genetically determined traits, Elizabeth Royte implies it was ''Marxist influence at Harvard'' that caused the subsequent uproar (''The Ant Man,'' July 22).


How the Big Oil Companies Blundered
LEAD: The rush by oil companies to raise gasoline prices after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was a tremendous public relations blunder.
By raising prices, these companies unraveled the thin cloak of credibility around their industry.


Tech Notes;   Computers Linked by Light
LEAD: In the past, computers were linked together by networks made of wire or fiber-optic cables that were placed under the floors and under the ground.
Now, engineers at the Photonics Corporation in Campell, Calif., are linking them with light.
The new networking system - Photolink (right) - works very much like the remote control unit of a television set.


Migrant Worker Group Is Subject of Wide Study
LEAD: Feliciana Flores grimaced as the needle slipped into a vein and her blood filled a vacuum tube.
But 3-year-old Sergio Flores was unafraid. ''No voy a llorar,'' he said. ''I won't cry.''


Streaking Pirates Beat Reds Again
LEAD: Barry Bonds hit a home run and a double and drove in two runs today, leading Zane Smith and the Pittsburgh Pirates past the Cincinnati Reds, 3-1.
It was the fourth straight victory for the Pirates.


An Exciting Country Showplace
LEAD: THE Bellport is made for summer.
This white, gingerbread Victorian house with cornflower blue shutters has open doorways, swirling ceiling fans and herb, vegetable and cutting gardens.
It is a perfect backdrop for the season.


Postings: 15-Story Facelift;   New Windows, Lobby on 33d
LEAD: Most people familiar with the oddly shaped, ''winged'' structure that straddles the Penn Central Railroad tracks on West 33d Street and 10th Avenue know it as the home of Sky Rink, Manhattan's only public indoor ice-skating rink.


Roderick Cook, Actor On Stage, Dead at 58
LEAD: Roderick Cook, the British-born stage and film actor who was perhaps best known for his 1972 Off Broadway revue ''Oh Coward!'' in which he adapted and performed the works of Sir Noel Coward, died on Friday at his home in Los Angeles at the age of 58.
Dan V. Fuller, his business manager, said Mr.
Cook died of what appeared to be a heart attack.


Pregnant, Addicted - and Guilty?
LEAD: Traveling West From Detroit about 200 miles along I-96, crack arrived in Muskegon County, Mich., late in September 1988.
Or at least that's when the prosecutor Tony Tague first started noticing that a crime rampage was rocking this hard-scrabble, blue-collar county - the kind of siege that supposedly strikes only the nation's largest cities.


New York's Frisbee Champ Feels Jaws of Defeat in Philly
LEAD: The flying disk slices through the air - whishhh - and Boe takes off after it.
His muscles appear in outline as he gains with each bound.
Forty, 50, 60 yards: it's within reach.
Suddenly he's flying - whooshhh - and he clamps down on the disk.
As he settles back to earth the crowd breaks into applause.


In the Brazilian Jungle They Have a Story to Tell
LEAD: Working in the jungle one degree south of the Equator, the heat on the set repeatedly hit 108 degrees.
At dusk, tropical downpours washed out key shots day after day.
Exotic ailments felled several of Hollywood's finest.
During one week of night shooting, the call sheet warned actors of ''insects and crawly things around the set.


For Some, a Case of Airplane Angst
LEAD: Edgar Cosman had a choice for his vacation in Panama: a 4-hour-and-45-minute nonstop flight, or a 3-hour flight to Miami, a 2-hour wait in the airport there and a 3-hour flight to Panama City.


Lisa A. Lien Wed To David Keyko
LEAD: Lisa Ann Lien and David George Keyko were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church at Lafayette Square in Washington by the Rev.
Charles A. Cesaretti.
Mrs.
Keyko is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Lien of Potomac, Md.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Keyko of Westfield, N.J.


Daisies Are Coming Into Their Own
LEAD: DAISIES are dandy, and August and September are the months when they come into their own.
There are white ones, golden ones, yellow ones, blue ones, even maroon ones.


Audience Fickleness Is No Mystery
LEAD: To the Editor:


Red Herrings in 'The Veil,' a Thriller
LEAD: WHO did what to whom and why is, of course, the soul of any mystery.
The only difference is in how the playwright goes about presenting the facts - and the red herrings - in the case.


Chrysa A. Radice, A Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Chrysa A. Radice and Dr.
Charles A. Lawson were married yesterday at St.
Philip's Roman Catholic Church in Clifton, N.J., by the Rev.
Christopher DiLella.
The couple's parents are Claire Beaven of Clifton and the late Arthur C. Radice and Mr. and Mrs.
Rodney Lawson of Wilmette, Ill.


Psychological Counseling From the Company Store
LEAD: AFTER two decades of rapid growth, employee assistance programs, which have helped millions of workers suffering from angst and workplace stress, are experiencing an identity crisis of their own.


Q and A
LEAD:
Down Payment in Escrow
Question: In accordance with the mortgage contingency clause in our purchase contract for a co-op, we promptly informed the sponsor of our inability to get a mortgage that complied with the terms of the contract.
But so far, he has refused to let the escrow agent return our down payment.


Works in Progress;   Steps in the Right Direction
LEAD: ''You know how your leg goes to sleep sometimes?'' Sarah East says. ''That's what it feels like.'' Sarah, an 11-year-old from Anadarko, Okla., whose congenitally deformed left leg was amputated when she was an infant, is describing the tingling on her thigh provided by a new device aimed at helping amputees ''feel'' their feet.


Managing;   Under Contract Not to Jump
LEAD: Not long ago, Fred Siegel, a New York executive recruiter, found the ''perfect'' candidate for a senior job at a consulting firm.
Lawyers said the courts would certainly overturn the man's contract, which forbade him to work for a competitor, yet Mr.
Siegel's client would not hire the candidate. ''We run into this all the time,'' Mr.


Guggenheim Museum Is Designated a Landmark
LEAD: The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission voted unanimously last week to designate the Guggenheim Museum a landmark - perhaps the first time in the distinctive building's history that a group of nine people have agreed upon all its merits.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


A Kentucky Home Afloat
LEAD: The dense jungle filling the cove that surrounded our mooring was barely visible in the breaking dawn.
An orchestra of birds wrapped their melody around the syncopation of an ancient percolator in the galley as I sat, feet propped on the bow rail, watching the mist lift from the landscape.
There was no visible sign of civilization, recalling the shore of some remote Pacific


Trapped in the Mideast: A Cross Section of U.S. By LISA BELKIN
LEAD: In a windowless room of the State Department building in Washington, a carefully guarded list of nearly 2,000 names is said to contain all the information the government has managed to gather on the Americans stranded in Iraq and Kuwait: their names, their purposes for being in the region, their ages, hometowns, relatives' names and phone numbers, when they were heard from last.


Evening Hours;   Hamptons: A Benefit, A Premiere
LEAD: A film premiere in East Hampton and a hospital benefit in Southampton had partygoers shuttling between the two Long Island resort towns on Aug. 11.
About 1,500 guests arrived at 6 P.M. for the Southampton Hospital cocktail buffet dance under a 39-pole tent.


Latin American Conflict at Home
LEAD: ''WHAT do you think about what's happening in Central America?''


Project Shows Teachers How to Make Texts Live
LEAD: ''When I use the word act, I am not talking about becoming an actor,'' Michael Tolaydo told the men and women gathered around him in the tiny Elizabethan-type theater at the Folger Shakespeare Library. ''I am talking about physicalizing words, about doing it.'' It was the fourth week of ''Teaching Shakespeare: Texts and Performances,'' a monthlong joint effort of the Royal Shakespeare Company of Britain and the Folger, aimed at helping teachers of


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Commerce in the Middle Ages was a strange affair.
Picture merchants in London adding 12 pence to a shilling and 20 shillings to a pound.
And then don't forget farthings, sixpence and guineas.
Then, just to complicate the calculations even more, picture them doing all the addition, subtraction, division and multiplication using Roman numerals.


Suzanne M. Cocco Is Wed To Michael Francis Midlige
LEAD: Suzanne Marie Cocco and Michael Francis Midlige, third-year students at the Seton Hall University School of Law, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Denis in Manasquan, N.J.
Msgr.
Joseph O'Connor officiated.
Mrs.
Midlige, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Cocco of Wall Township, N.J., is a graduate of Muhlenberg College.


Reaction to Jogger Verdict Ranges From Support to Disillusionment.
LEAD: In the East Harlem neighborhood where the jogger trial defendants live, just northeast of Central Park, some residents welcomed the verdicts last night, but others insisted it was unjust.


Conner Strategy: Playing Catchup
LEAD: Dennis Conner announced last week that he had secured a second major sponsor for his $30 million 1992 America's Cup campaign.
But with the money starting to roll in, Conner conceded that he and other United States teams still were in the unsavory position of having to catch up with international challengers.


Correction
LEAD: A credit with a photograph of the film director David Lynch with an article about him last Sunday misidentified the photographer.
He is Gary Moss.


First U.S. Shots Fired
LEAD: American warships fired warning shots near two Iraqi tankers in the gulf region after the vessels refused orders to halt, United States military officials said yesterday.
Page 11.


Mets End Their Candlestick Jinx
LEAD: The Mets reached the crisis stage in the pennant race today but survived when David Cone pitched them past the San Francisco Giants, 9-2.
He gave up seven hits, struck out 13 batters and kept the Mets from falling three games out of first place in the National League East with 45 games to go in a season that has suddenly become short and dangerous.


Where There's Smoke There's Flavor
LEAD: THE idea of smoking fish and game to preserve them has been around since the discovery of fire.
But recently customers at the new West Street Grill in Litchfield, Conn. (203-567-3885) have been intrigued by the subtle, smoky flavor of unexpected foods such as tomatoes, corn and even lentils.


Campus Life: Chicago;   Atlantic Bridge: Boxers Exchange Visits With French
LEAD: Eight boxers from Vitry-sur-Seine, France, are spending eight days at a gymnasium on the South Side to exchange techniques and experiences with Americans.


Northeast Notebook: Philadelphia;   Trading Space For Upkeep
LEAD: BUSINESS owners who want guaranteed customer traffic twice a day and liberal long-term leases are being sought for commercial space in commuter rail stations outside Philadelhia.
The quid pro quo is that the tenants must maintain the stations.


Catherine Ann Christensen Is Married
LEAD: Catherine Ann Christensen and Paul J. Duffy Jr. were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Saviour in New York by the Rev.
Joseph A. Latella.


Deadline Closing In for Deer Permits
LEAD: The deadline for submitting applications for deer-management permits in New York State is Sept. 7.
These permits allow hunters to take a deer of either sex in addition to the antlered buck to which their big-game licenses entitle them.


Art World Head Scratching
LEAD: To the Editor:


Julia G. LeStage Is Married
LEAD: Julia Greene LeStage, a funding coordinator at the American Finance Group, and Joseph Anthony McOsker 3d, an associate in the law firm of Jon E. Steffensen &amp; Associates, both in Boston, were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Spirit in Orleans, Mass.
The Rev.
David White officiated.


Friendly Persuasion
LEAD: Sometimes before gods can help people, people have to help the gods.
When the Zuni Indians of New Mexico, feeling the strong tug of old beliefs, began in recent years to seek the aid of ancient war gods - whose appeal is not limited to wartime - they had to rescue dozens of the carved wooden statues from museums and private collectors.


Best Sellers: August, 19, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
10
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.
?
2
9
MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel.


Women, Too, Deserve a National Holiday
LEAD: To the Editor:


Where There's Smoke There's Flavor
LEAD: THE idea of smoking fish and game to preserve them has been around since the discovery of fire.
But recently customers at the new West Street Grill in Litchfield, Conn. (203-567-3885) have been intrigued by the subtle, smoky flavor of unexpected foods such as tomatoes, corn and even lentils.


The Irene Adler Story, Continued
LEAD: In the lightsome spirit of the Baker Street Irregulars and their universe, I'd like to add some recently discovered notes concerning Irene Norton, nee Adler (''Jerseyana,'' July 8).


Come Home, Papa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fashion;   Gambling on the Untried and New
LEAD: A signature is more than a written name; it's an identifying characteristic.
And that's the meaning of New Signatures, a shop that opens next Sunday at Macy's Herald Square store as a showcase for new designers with distinctive points of view.


Joyce Seligson Weds
LEAD: Joyce Ellen Seligson, a production manager for Reiss Media Enterprises, a cable television company in Northvale, N.J., was married yesterday to Nelson David Barrett, a network radio correspondent for ABC News in New York.
The Rev.
Doug Miller officiated at the Norfield Congregational Church in Weston, Conn.


Listen Up
LEAD: To the Editor:


Joann Knudson Weds Thomas Handler
LEAD: Dr.
Joann Marie Knudson, the chief resident in obstetrics and gynecology, and Dr.
Thomas Joshua Handler, a resident in radiology, both at the Yale-New Haven Hospital, were married last evening at the New Haven Lawn Club.
Rabbi Edward Schlaeger officiated.


Golfers Accused Of Indifference
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Fairfield Area May Be Vital In the Race For Governor
LEAD: FAIRFIELD COUNTY has long been regarded as the state's political stepchild, a bastion of wealthy Republicans in a largely Democratic, working-class state.
It is dominated by news media from New York rather than from Hartford or New Haven.
The estrangement is so severe that in 1982, the Republican gubernatorial candidate in New York, Lewis E.


Facades, Reversed
LEAD: Modern America has turned facades inside out.


Unions Are Expanding Their Role to Survive in the 90's
LEAD: Organized labor, battered by union-busting, concessions contracts and shrinking membership during the 1980's has begun to expand its services to attract new members and remain relevant for the ones they already have.


Gordon Bunshaft: A Man Who Died Before His Time?
LEAD: Gordon Bunshaft was not an easy man: he was brusque, arrogant and impatient with those who could not see the world as he saw it.
He believed in making modern buildings, not in talking about them or, indeed, in talking about much of anything else.
His personality was as spare as his architecture, and as unbending.


Fears That Haunt a Scrubbed America
LEAD: Put yourself, for a moment, inside the mind of Jesse Helms.
Imagine a scrubbed, manicured neighborhood, a pocket of decency in the heart of our sinful land.
The music is by Wayne Newton, the paintings are by Norman Rockwell, and sex takes place only between married men and women in beds at night.


A Lone Ranger Battles Cattlemen


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: A set of 16 deals played in the Summer Nationals in Boston three weeks ago made a solid imprint on bridge history.
The setting was the last act of the 1990 Spingold Knockout Team Championship.
The scenario was a mirror image of many comparable occasions.


Question Of the Week;   Do Tennis Players Start at Too Young An Age
LEAD: It is a question of whether young tennis players spend too much time at it and are too concernced with playing tournaments, winning and attaining rankings.
Excessive focus on these things can cause detrimental effects both physically and emotionally.
KATE STEWART
Pompton Lakes


Portuguese Bread For a Feast Day
LEAD: THERESA TRUSS eyed the big metal pan of bread dough on her kitchen table. ''I mixed this dough this morning,'' she said. ''I used 25 pounds of flour, 3 dozen eggs, 5 pounds of sugar.''She also noted that she had mixed the dough entirely by hand. ''No spoon,'' she said. ''A spoon would break.'' Mrs.


Hostages in Forefront
LEAD: In declaring that he would use foreigners as a shield against Western attack, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has placed these captives at the forefront of the Persian Gulf crisis in just the manner the Bush Administration hoped to avoid.
Mr.
Hussein and Mr.
Bush are now engaged in a struggle within a struggle, namely over whether the fate of the Americans and other foreigners in Kuwait and Iraq will weaken the international resolve to squeeze Baghdad hard enough to force a withdrawal from Kuwait.


Photos of Paterson And 1968 Multiples
LEAD: PHOTOGRAPHS of Paterson taken by George Tice between 1967 and 1970 and a portfolio of multiples produced by artists working in 1968: these are the current attractions at the Paterson Museum, and though they have little in common beyond period and smallness of scale, they exist in a kind of symbiosis.


Yankees Continuing To Face Turmoil
LEAD: Charlotte Witkind, one of George Steinbrenner's partners in ownership of the Yankees, searched for a way to describe what unfolded within the team's ruling family last week.


Don't Measure Souter by the Size of His Town;   More Than Lip Service
LEAD: To the Editor:


Iraqi Remarks On Detention Of Foreigners
LEAD: Following is the text of the statement made Friday by the Speaker of the Iraqi Parliament, Saadi Mahdi Saleh, about the detention of foreign nationals in Iraq and Kuwait, as transmitted by the Iraqi press agency and translated by Reuters:


Chamorro Requests Pardon For Slayers of Her Husband
LEAD: President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro is asking the legislature to pardon at least five men convicted in the murder of her husband, a popular newspaper publisher whose death helped set off the 1979 revolution.


New State Regulations on Cable TV to Begin
LEAD: CABLE television companies in New Jersey will be required to have people available 24 hours a day to answer consumer calls and pay interest on billing mistakes when new state regulations take effect tomorrow.


Style Makers;   Richard Morgenthal and Robert Warner, Opticians
LEAD: They're opticians, but they're also artists.
So Richard Morgenthal and Robert Warner decided to combine their areas of expertise and design a line of eyeglass frames.


A Lazzeri Vote
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Photography's Early Images Keep the Nation's Past Alive
LEAD: PHOTOGRAPHY was officially born with the daguerreotype in the Paris of 1839, but its birth pangs began as early as 1826.
In that year, Joseph Niepce (also in France) made an eight-hour exposure of the view from his house on a plate of pewter.
Then there was the Englishman William Fox Talbot, who, in 1835, produced the first image on sensitized paper, calling it a calotype and, later on, a talbotype, but not unveiling it until 18 days after the debut of the daguerreotype.


Fictional Policewomen Are Good Role Models
LEAD: Congratulations to the authors Lillian O'Donnell and Dorothy Uhnak, who share the field of policewoman-mystery genre and have helped to reinforce the image of the intelligent female sleuth (''Fans Keep Watch on Prolific Mystery Writer,'' July 15).
They both show policewomen no longer silenced and being recognized as equals to men, contributing to detective investigations and being inspiring role models.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Some people are still trying to read the lips of various politicians with some accuracy, and good luck to them.
Fortunately, there's a much easier way to figure out what's going on in the country, and with most people: read their T-shirts.


Aleichem Inspires Russian Suite
LEAD: TWENTY years ago in the Soviet Union, it would have been pointless for a composer to write a work based on Jewish stories, and virtually impossible for artists to perform it.


The Battle of the Sexes (To Be Continued)
LEAD: The title, ''Women &amp; Men: Stories of Seduction,'' does a disservice to tonight's unusually grown-up offering at 9 on Home Box Office.
Although the seduction process is very much part of two of these mood-capturing adaptations of three well-known short stories, all are considerably more than kiss-and-tell tales.


Switzer Speaks
LEAD: In his years as Oklahoma's highly successful head football coach, Barry Switzer may have made his share of mistakes, but three he denied ever making were being in a hotel room in Las Vegas, Nev., where cocaine was used, betting on his team's games and manipulating the Sooner drug-testing program.


Homeless Man Is Indicted in Rutgers Fires
LEAD: An unemployed homeless man has been indicted on charges of setting fires at three fraternity houses and two private residences near the Rutgers University campus here.


Data Bank/Aug. 19, 1990
LEAD:
$
Sales at Retail Outlets
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.1
1.1
-0.1
Industrial Production Index
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.4
0.6
Capacity Utilization
July
June
May
Output as a percentage of capacity
83.4
83.6
83.4
Consumer Price Index
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.5
0.2
Business Inventories
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
-0.4
0.5
0.3
Housing Starts
July
June
May
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,150
1,180
1,210
$


Tennis Stars Split by Rival Tournaments
LEAD: THE competition began at the Northstar Bank Hamlet Challenge Cup in Commack long before the first ball is to be served this week.


Ms. Warner Weds William Simmons
LEAD: Deidre Lin Warner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Mooney of Washington, N.J., was married yesterday to William Richard Simmons, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Simmons of Plandome Manor, L.I.
The Rev.
E.
Wayne Antworth, a minister of the Reformed Church in America, performed the ceremony aboard a yacht in New York


Punjab Theater Bomb Kills 2
LEAD: A powerful bomb exploded at a movie theater near Amritsar today, killing 2 people and wounding 45, the police said.
They said they suspected Sikh extremists of setting the bomb, which went off at the theater in the town of Patti.


Data Update
LEAD:
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED
(Housing units)
June 90
May 90
June 89
New York
3,241
3,302
5,248
New Jersey
1,655
1,795
3,717
Connecticut
640
945
987
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES
(Averages)


Fashion: The Paris Couture;   The Need For New Ideas
LEAD: The end of the line has come for a couple elements of design.
After viewing the Paris fall couture collections, it is clear that skirts cannot get any shorter and clothes cannot get any tighter.
Anyone interested in fashion could sense that the time has come for shifts of both ambiance and silhouette.


The Executive Computer;   Can the New dBASE Solve Ashton-Tate's Problems?
LEAD: Nearly two years after it rushed a flawed version of dBASE to market, the Ashton-Tate Corporation of Torrance, Calif., has finally brought out a new, improved update of the leading data base management program for personal computers made by the International Business Machines Corporation and compatible models.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the India Day Parade, Lexington Avenue will be closed today between 26th and 47th Streets from 1:30 to 4 P.M.


The Joe Papp of Bali Finds Himself In a Cultural Pickle
LEAD: As the best-known producer-director in Bali, Made Bandem (pronounced MAH-day BAHN-dem) is dealing in a world most of his Western counterparts pray for: an abundance of talented dancers and musicians, audiences sophisticated in the lore of the theater and a society that welcomes great performances.


Practical Traveler;   Air Fare Savings, Real and Apparent
LEAD: A TIMES correspondent who needed to get from Chicago to Minneapolis this summer booked a seat at the last minute for the 334-mile trip.
The United coach ticket cost $246.30, not counting tax, for the flight of an hour and 10 minutes.
He asked for an open-date return ticket and was booked in first class.


New Jersey Will Investigate Auto Accident by Prosecutor
LEAD: The state Attorney General's Office will investigate the Warren County Prosecutor's involvement in an automobile accident with a county-owned car last weekend, a spokesman said today.


Going Round the World Via Beer Barrel
LEAD: ''Yes, my name really is Michael Jackson,'' says the narrator. ''But I don't sing and I don't drink Pepsi.'' Indeed, this British-born Michael Jackson is the antithesis of his rubber-limbed American counterpart: pudgy, professorial, woolly, contemplative.
And while this Michael Jackson doesn't partake of soft drinks, he sure does put down a vat or two of beer every year.


Tracing Turner's Steps In the Yorkshire Dales
LEAD: The Yorkshire dales afford so many pleasures, from Wensleydale cheese to medieval abbeys, that artistic connections seem superfluous.
They exist, although for most recent travelers they begin and end with James Herriot, the local veterinarian whose books inspired the television series ''All Creatures Great and Small.


Dana Wysoczanska Weds
LEAD: Dana Wysoczanska, a teacher of French and a translator of French technical and scientific writings for the Polish Academy of Sciences in Warsaw, was married yesterday in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., to Peter M. Koloski, an export sales representative for the Evergreen International Corporation, a container shipping company in Jersey City.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 5 about expansion of the Merritt Parkway misidentified a member of a homeowners organization.
She is Joan Caldwell, a former president of the Northwest Greenwich Association.


Protect Passengers Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


World Markets;   The Shine's Off Madrid
LEAD: In Spain, one of those small European stock markets that became the darling of investors this spring has taken one of the hardest falls since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
The Madrid Stock Exchange Index has fallen 12 percent since Aug. 1.
With the index at 258.83, it is not far off its 248.17 low for the year.


Brooklyn Man Questioned in Killing of Youth
LEAD: The police were questioning a 49-year-old Brooklyn man yesterday in connection with the shooting of a 14-year-old boy in the Sunset Park neighborhood on Friday night, but had not charged him with attempted murder.


Griffey Retires
LEAD: He was a significant force on the Cincinnati Reds teams that won the World Series in 1975 and 1976, and now, at the age of 40, Ken Griffey may have provided some crucial help in the team's bid to win in 1990.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My husband painted our brick patio with a clear water sealer.
This was a mistake because when it rains the water stays on the bricks.
Can the sealer be removed?


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 12 about the Lincoln Square neighborhood omitted the largest component of the complex of buildings now being added at the northwest corner of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.
It is 3 Lincoln Center, a 45-story, 347-unit condominium, which is being built over a 150-foot base containing other parts of the complex.


Woman Defending Brother Is Killed by Youth in Bronx
LEAD: A 20-year-old Bronx woman was killed early yesterday when she tried to break up an argument between her brother and a 16-year-old boy who was brandishing a pistol, the police said.


THE SPORTSCASTERS
LEAD: In the evening of April 2, millions of sports fans tuned in to the telecast of college basketball's championship game with one question in mind: How's Brent feeling?
Brent wasn't injured, physically anyway; he wasn't even playing.
Brent Musburger was CBS's lead sportscaster for the game and - as nearly everyone had learned from headlines the day before - CBS had dumped him.


Residential REsale
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Aug. 4
MANHATTAN
Greenwich Village
$860,000
339 West 12th Street
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, 4-story town house; dining room, library, bay windows, wet bar, garden, 18- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $4,442 (Broker: Kingman Associ-ates/Wells &amp; Gay-Stibling &amp; Associates)


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF    FOREIGNERS IN IRAQ WILL SHARE IN HARDSHIPS, BAGHDAD WARNS; SAUDIS TO INCREASE OIL OUTPUT;   'ACT OF WAR' SEEN
LEAD: Declaring the American-led naval blockade ''an act of war,'' Iraq said tonight that thousands of foreigners, including infants, who have been turned into hostages would suffer the same food shortages as Iraqis.


Wine;   TREASURED ISLAND
LEAD: It's getting so crowded in Long Island wine country that some of the pioneers have already moved on.
It's true; Pat and Peter Lenz, who built one of the first showcase wineries on Long Island in 1978, sold out more than a year ago and moved to Calistoga, in the Napa Valley.
Now, is that a sign of a maturing wine region or not?


Looking Beyond the Mideast Crisis
LEAD: The conventional wisdom in Washington was that President Bush took an immense risk when he shifted his stance on tax increases.
But even before the Middle East crisis, the bond market was sending a different message.
It signaled that major economic benefits would flow from a White House budget deal.


Carolyn E. Jones Weds J. J. Borris
LEAD: At the Highland Presbyterian Church in Lancaster, Pa., Carolyn Elizabeth Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Louis Jones of Lancaster, was married yesterday to Jacques Jean Borris, a son of Andree Borris of Mont-de-Marsan, France, and the late Rene Borris.
The Rev.
Ross McClintock performed the ceremony.


A TASTE FOR SCRAMBLED ENGLISH
LEAD: Bill Bryson's delightful article ''A Taste for Scrambled English'' (On Language, July 22) brought a friend's anecdote to mind.
Her son and his musical group were flown to Japan to make a commercial for a Japanese fast-food emporium.
The name of the place was ''D Cup Soup.'' Translation?
A large cup of soup.


Where Will New York Put The State's Nuclear Waste?
LEAD: ON the quiet main streets of a few small towns in upstate New York, it is hard to find lampposts or storefronts without bright orange posters plastered on them.
Some say, ''Don't Waste New York,'' others, ''Bump the Dump.'' The residents are afraid their towns will become home to the permanent storage site for low-level radioactive waste that New York must build within the next few years.


Wall Street;   How the Market Is Treating Energy Stocks
LEAD: A string of recent earnings disappointments in the energy sector just goes to show how forgiving investors have become in light of the gulf crisis and its positive implications for oil prices.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
LEAD: It may be that the thesis of Daniel Easterman's BROTHERHOOD OF THE TOMB (Doubleday, $19.95) is hard to believe.
Yet it is a scary book, action-packed, well written and even thoughtful at times.


Rhonda Marcus Weds
LEAD: Rhonda Beth Marcus, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel G. Marcus of the Bronx, was married yesterday to Daniel Sadur, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Sadur.
Rabbi Solomon Aidelson officiated at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I., assisted by Cantor Charles Ritter.
Mrs.
Sadur, 39 years old, graduated from Rider College.


Talking Back to the Screen
LEAD:
SEEING THROUGH MOVIES
Edited by Mark Crispin Miller.
266 pp. New York:
Pantheon. Cloth, $24.95.
Paper, $11.95.
THE SCREENING OF AMERICA
Movies and Values From ''Rocky'' to ''Rain Man.''
By Tom O'Brien.
219 pp. New York:
A Frederick Ungar Book/
Continuum. $21.95.


The Quiet Side of the Delaware Shore
LEAD: A mosaic of marsh, woods and upland fields, Prime Hook National Wildlife Refuge on the southwest shore of Delaware Bay is a welcome relief from the crush of the Eastern Seaboard.
Its 8,800 acres of rich land draw tens of thousands of migratory birds and relatively few people.
Flocks of geese and ducks gather in the fall, shorebirds and warblers in the spring.


Prime Minister Invites Solzhenitsyn to Russia
LEAD: Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, his Soviet citizenship restored by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, has been invited by the prime minister of the Russian republic to visit the Soviet Union.


Review/Theater;   Learning to Love, Too Late
LEAD: During the blackouts between scenes in Ted Whitehead's play ''The Man Who Fell in Love With His Wife,'' excerpts of golden oldies ranging from Nat (King) Cole to the Beatles to David Bowie are played over the Quaigh Theater's sound system.
This hit parade from the past is the best part of an otherwise tedious tale of a Liverpool docker's midlife crisis, which he is handling rather badly.


A TASTE FOR SCRAMBLED ENGLISH
LEAD: We found illustrations of scrambled English in Barcelona.
The popular word there for jogging is el footing.
A Barcelona daily, Avui (Catalan for today), printed a feature on a new sport sweeping the United States, one that requires no teamwork, competition, special facilities or complex rules.
This new sport, one learns, is el fitness.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, an article about Soviet art on page 37 of the Arts and Leisure section omits a paragraph.
The second full paragraph in the third column should read:


Jeffrey Rose Wed To Katie Behne
LEAD: Kathryn Lindsay Behne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Behne of Riverside, Conn., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Dennis Rose, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Rose of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Gilbert D'Souza officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Catherine of Siena.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about Biarritz and St.-Jean-de-Luz omitted the names of two restaurants in St.-Jean.
They are Auberge Kaiku (17 Rue de la Republique; 26.13.20), where a meal for two with wine is about $95, and Chez Pablo (Rue Mlle. Etchero), a family-style restaurant behind the market, where a meal for two with wine is $40.


Harvest of Surplus Food Eases Plight of the Hungry
LEAD: It all started with potato skins.


Cory Aquino's Downhill Slide
LEAD: Corazon Cojuangco Aquino glides into the reception room, smartly dressed in a pastel peach suit.
Smiling warmly, she radiates serenity and self-confidence as she chats about her family, her travels, the weather.
I have known her for two decades, and she has always appeared to be extraordinarily poised, even under enormous stress - a trait she attributes to her fatalism.


Why They Killed Chico Mendes
LEAD:
THE BURNING SEASON
The Murder of Chico Mendes and the Fight for the Amazon Rain Forest.
By Andrew Revkin.
Illustrated. 317 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.
THE WORLD IS BURNING
By Alex Shoumatoff.
Illustrated. 377 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


Sing, Sing, Sing
LEAD: JAZZ SINGING
America's Great Voices
From Bessie Smith to Bebop and Beyond.
By Will Friedwald.
Illustrated. 477 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $29.95.


Home Clinic;   Leveling a Sidewalk Slab
LEAD: A CONCRETE sidewalk slab that has tilted because of uneven settling can usually be leveled.
Unless the slab is quite large (more than 4 by 4 feet) or thick, the job is fairly easy.
But two or more people are required, and at least one must be strong enough to pry up the slab with a lever, as described below.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a listing in the Travel section last Sunday misstated telephone numbers for eating places and hotels in San Sebastian, Spain, and the immediate area.
Here are the correct numbers:


An Anthropologist With Bite
LEAD:
FOX AT THE WOOD'S EDGEA Biography of Loren Eiseley.
By Gale E. Christianson.
Illustrated. 517 pp. New York:
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $29.95.


U.S. Ships Fire in Warning When Iraqis Refuse to Halt By MICHAEL R. GORDON
LEAD: An American warship fired six warning shots near an Iraqi tanker in the Gulf of Oman today after it refused to heed warnings to halt, officers said today. [In Washington, Defense Department officials reported that a second set of warning shots was fired by an American warship in the Persian Gulf.


Campus Life: Wisconsin;   Contriving A Shorter Leash For Bucky Badger
LEAD: What do you see when you find a badger wearing boxing gloves and a University of Wisconsin sweater?


NEW U.N. WARNING TO BAGHDAD URGED
LEAD: The Security Council voted unanimously tonight to demand the immediate release of all foreigners detained by Iraq and delivered an implicit warning that Baghdad could face international military action unless it complied.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Larchmont, N.Y.
$311,500
77 Briarcliff Road
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 72-year-old Norman Tudor; den, eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $4,544.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.
$185,000
11 Stanwood Road
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 52-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, yard w/grove; taxes $3,816.


Postings: A Homey Look for Offices;   'Compatible' Condominiums
LEAD: With pitch-roofed, chimney-topped, brick buildings that look more like homes than most homes do, a condominium office park is being planned for the Toms River section of Dover Township, N.J.
Its 27 buildings will range from a 1,200-square-foot, one-story unit (for $192,000) to a 2,400-square-foot, two-story unit (for $475,000).


Mary V. Demopoulos Weds A.B. Campbell
LEAD: Mary Vasiliki Demopoulos and Andrew Bolter Campbell, graduates of the Vanderbilt School of Law, were married yesterday at the Westminster Presbyterian Church in Bluefield, W.Va.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Chadwick performed the ceremony.


Now, a Real Vixen. That's Plausible Casting
LEAD: I'm sure many thoughtful people were upset recently by the Actors' Equity decision to refuse permission for an Englishman to portray a Eurasian pimp in an American production of the musical ''Miss Saigon.'' The issue of artistic freedom, after all, does arouse emotions in the hearts of almost every American, and rightly so.


British Homosexuals Report Rise in Attacks


Political Art Comes of Age In the U.S.S.R.
LEAD: For years, bits and pieces of what has loosely been termed unofficial Soviet art have appeared in American galleries and museums.
The names of Ilya Kabakov, Erik Bulatov, Vitaly Komar and Alexander Melamid were the only ones to become familiar in the United States, but it was clear from their works that many alternatives to official Socialist Realism existed.


Vacuum Chamber Use Is Illegal
LEAD: The article ''Fewer Dogs Ending Up In Pounds'' (July 29) contains a serious error: Gerald Moore, director of public information for the Department of Agriculture and Markets is quoted as saying that stray unclaimed dogs, after the required holding period, 'May then be destroyed by a lethal injection of sodium pentobarbital or by asphyxiation in a 'vacuum chamber.


From Mirage To War
LEAD: A country that emerges from one war without knowing why it came about prepares the way for another war - with the same enemy or his clones.


All About/Meteorological Services;   The Diverse New Industry of Private Weather Forecasting
LEAD: Wertfilms Inc. chose to shoot Nissan commercials in Seattle because it wanted skies that were overcast but not on the verge of a deluge.
So the producers called Northwest Weathernet Inc., a private company that could render specific forecasts. ''Five or ten miles can make a difference,'' said Phil Breuser, the vice president of Northwest Weathernet.


Town Without Political Placards Rethinks Its Ban
LEAD: IN late summer and early fall, political signs sprout like ragweed, promoting candidates for every office from town council to Congress.
But not in Mansfield.


All New York Getting Car-Theft Decal Plan
LEAD: For car owners in New York City who have registered their cars in the Combat Auto Theft program, a late night phone call from the police may be reassuring.
They may discover that their car has been recovered before they even knew it had been stolen.


Show Celebrates Group's 40 Years
LEAD: HOW can the work of 28 crafts people be fitted into one compact gallery of the Newark Museum?
The solution: think small.


Part of Crash Survivor's Suit Against Secord Is Dismissed
LEAD: Federal district judge has thrown out major parts of the civil suit brought against Richard V. Secord by the lone survivor of an airplane crash that helped to expose the Iran-contra affair.


2 Californians, Agreeing on Many Issues, Turn to S.&amp; L. Crisis
LEAD: Gauged by the broad made-for-television generalities that govern American politics today, not much divides the two candidates for governor of California on the major issues facing the state.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:
SPIRIT WORLD


Maria Baldwin Morgan Plans to Wed Christopher Johnson Grill in October
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Morgan of New York have made known the October wedding plans for their daughter, Maria Baldwin Morgan, and Christopher Johnson Grill, a son of Sandra Johnson of Schoharie, N.Y., and John A. Grill of Woolwich, Me.


Zimbabwe Aide Affirms Plan for One-Party State
LEAD: Bucking the trend in sub-Saharan Africa, the Zimbabwean Foreign Minister reaffirmed on Friday that the Government intended to push ahead with plans to introduce a one-party state.


Worse is Coming
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My husband painted our brick patio with a clear water sealer.
This was a mistake because when it rains the water stays on the bricks.
Can the sealer be removed?


Review/Music;   Intimacy of Ensemble In Appropriate Setting
LEAD: Apply 18th-century instruments to Classical and early-Romantic string quartets and there are lessons to be learned.


Daisies Are Coming Into Their Own
LEAD: DAISIES are dandy, and August and September are the months when they come into their own.
There are white ones, golden ones, yellow ones, blue ones, even maroon ones.


That's Me Behind The Machine Gun
LEAD: One day in 1988 I found myself strapped into a kind of canvas sling behind the machine gun in the open side of a helicopter gunship, scooting along above the hot, flat jungle known as the Chapare - the principal coca-growing region of Bolivia.
We were looking for clandestine landing strips, clandestine laboratories.


The Case of the Central Park Jogger
LEAD: April 19, 1989 - A woman jogging on the 102d Street Transverse in Central Park is attacked by a gang of youths at about 10 P.M.
The 28-year-old victim is beaten and left in a coma and near death from brain damage and loss of blood.


Today's Yellow Brick Road Leads Straight to Hell
LEAD: Sailor and Lula, the strangely sympathetic misfits in David Lynch's ''Wild at Heart,'' drive a big old convertible from Cape Fear, N.C., through New Orleans and on to Big Tuna, Tex.
They are preoccupied with making love and steering clear of the law, but they always keep an eye on the yellow brick road.


Helene M. Tragos Weds Pravin Rao
LEAD: Helene Maria Tragos, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Tragos of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Chicago to Pravin Bandari Rao, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
B.
Taramanohar Rao of Big Rapids, Mich.
The Rev.
Eva S. Hochgraf, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at Spiaggia, a restaurant.


A Polar Bear's Picnic
LEAD: Below the small plane the results of the brief Arctic summer could be seen: inlets of clear water covered with broken patches of melting ice that looked like white lace tossed over the bright blue water.
The landscape itself was austere and barren, covered with bare stone scoured out of the earth by ancient glaciers.


Marla Gusmer to Wed David Jeffrey
LEAD: The engagement of Marla Ann Gusmer to David Arthur Jeffrey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis R. Jeffrey Jr. of Summit, N.J., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Gusmer of Short Hills, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.


Bill Farley, Overleveraged And Outfoxed
LEAD: In his desperation to keep his debt-riddled empire afloat, William Farley is borrowing money on terms that would make a loan shark blush.
And the lender seems to be the investment banker who was advising Mr.
Farley when he got into the mess.


Lara Horne Marries
LEAD: Lara D. Horne, the daughter of Dorothy W. Horne of Athens, Ga., and the late Dr.
Kenneth W. Horne, was married yesterday to Samuel D. Holmes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Holmes Jr. of Monticello, Ga., and St.
Simons Island, Ga.
The Rev.
James K. Yeary performed the ceremony at Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Athens.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Basketball
United States Wins Bronze Medal: The United States used another comeback yesterday to take the bronze medal at the world championships in Buenos Aires, beating Puerto Rico by 107-105 in overtime.
Kenny Anderson scored 34 points and made two free throws with one second left to send the game into overtime after Puerto Rico led by 8 points with 1 minute 34 seconds to play in the second half.


Debra Wright Is Married
LEAD: Debra Lynn Wright, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Wright of Ilion, N.Y., was married there yesterday to William Joseph Ryan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Ryan of Ozone Park, Queens.
The Rev.
George B. Greene performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Ryan, 24 and a graduate of the State University of New York College at Potsdam, is the marketing coordinator and public relations director at the Boston architectural firm of Huygens, DeMella, Schaffer &amp; Associates.


Castro Loses His Appeal to the Latin Left
LEAD: VISITING Cuba in the 1980's, Antonio Navarro Wolff worked to bring Fidel Castro's revolution home to Colombia through guerrilla warfare.


Giants Plod to a Slim Victory


Elizabeth Hiser Weds C.P. Hoban
LEAD: Elizabeth Lawrence Hiser, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold R. Hiser Jr. of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles Park Hoban, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Hoban of Lake Forest, Ill.
The Rev.
Shirley L. Paxton officiated at the Wyoming Presbyterian Church in Millburn, N.J.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 5 about housing auctions misidentified the hotel at the base of the Executive Plaza condominium in midtown Manhattan.
It is Parc Fifty-One.


A Friendly Suggestion From the Home Office
LEAD: Going all the way back to 1823, the Monroe Doctrine has been invoked at the slightest suggestion of outside interference on the American continent.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Howell
$179,900
40 Heritage Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 3-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, family room, deck; taxes $3,545.
Jackson
$140,000
3778 Park Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old contemporary; patio, 1-car garage, den, h/w floors; taxes $2,220.


Question Of the Week;   Do Tennis Players Start at Too Young An Age
LEAD: No.
If they and their parents think they are mature enough to cope with the intensity of competition, unscrupulous agents and managers, rakish media, frenzied fans, social and academic underdevelopment, serious injury, give them the opportunity to play.
BEVERLEY BYER
Brooklyn


Senior League Shuffles Lineup
LEAD: The Senior Professional Baseball Association has reduced its Florida membership by half and added one team in California and another in Arizona, Richard A. Remmert, vice president of the year-old league, said Friday.


Repository Of Black Past Is Reopened
LEAD: The Countee Cullen Regional Library, the New York Public Library branch with the largest circulating collection on black culture and history, reopened yesterday after a five-year, $2.8 million renovation and expansion.


Correction
LEAD: A review of ''Time of Change: An Insider's View of Russia's Transformation'' on Aug. 12 misidentified the reviewer, Abraham Brumberg.
He is the editor of ''Chronicle of a Revolution: A Western-Soviet Inquiry Into Perestroika,'' not its author.


THE ANT MAN
LEAD: You don't have to go to the Panamanian rain forest to be fascinated by ants.
I was walking past the soccer fields in Inwood Park, at the west end of Dyckman Street, on a Friday afternoon in late August two years ago.
I couldn't find a place to sit because there were swarms of black ants in literally every square inch of grass.


Rikers Inmate Dies and Inquiry Begins
LEAD: A Rikers Island inmate died yesterday at Harlem Hospital, but it was unclear whether the death was related to the violent disturbance at the nine-jail complex Tuesday night in which 135 people were injured, 92 of them inmates.


Going Commercial
LEAD: Has David Lynch taken his mother's advice and gotten a day job?
Mr.
Lynch, the director whose luridly skewed visions in the films ''Eraserhead'' and ''Blue Velvet'' attracted a cult following even before the bizarre television show ''Twin Peaks'' made him seriously famous, has just finished making a batch of commercials for Calvin Klein.


Lenders Feel New Pressures To Aid Poor Neighborhoods
LEAD: Already squeezed by mounting defaults, lower earnings and a savings and loan debacle that has made them shy away from many development proposals, the nation's real estate lenders are now feeling pressure from another source - new Federal rules that require greater attention to the credit needs of minorities and low-income neighborhoods.


Fashion;   Versatile Metal Makes a Varied Apparel
LEAD: Jewelry and fashion designers are rediscovering anodized aluminum, a metal that lends itself to delicate shaping and subtle coloration in the electrochemical process that gives it its name.


Question Of the Week;   Do Tennis Players Start at Too Young An Age
LEAD: Yes, definitely, and for several reasons.
First, tennis is a physically demanding sport, and young professionals are, by participating in this sport so competitively, asking for trouble.
Their bodies have not yet fully developed, and such a taxing sport can cause serious physical problems later on.


Currency;   Down, Down, Down
LEAD: It happened.
The dollar fell last week to its lowest level against the German mark since that currency was created 42 years ago.
There was no celebration.
With the United States facing a possible recession, there is little the Federal Reserve can do to counter the fall, which can add to inflationary pressures by raising the cost of imported goods.


Pearl Bailey, Musical Star and Humorist, Is Dead at 72
LEAD: Pearl Bailey, the entertainer whose distinctive singing style was enhanced by her mischievous witticisms and warm personality, died on Friday at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia after collapsing at a hotel where she had been staying.
She was 72 years old and lived in Lake Havasu,


The Governor Did It
LEAD:
SIRENS
By Stephen Pett.
401 pp. New York: Vintage Contemporaries.
Paper, $9.95.


In 'The Icicle Thief' Parody Turns Into A Tour de Force
LEAD: An affectionate acknowledgment of 1940's film history informs such recent film noir releases as ''The Two Jakes'' and ''After Dark, My Sweet.'' But ''The Icicle Thief,'' which opens Friday at the Lincoln Plaza, goes further in invoking a postwar cinematic legacy, comically depicting an artist who confronts his own creation.


Girl In Baby-Swapping Case Meets Parents and Siblings
LEAD: Kimberly Mays, an 11-year-old at the center of a two-year baby-swap controversy, has finally met the couple who proved she was switched with another infant in a maternity ward, a newspaper report said today.


Beachgoers Returning With Renewed Confidence
LEAD: TWO years after the horror stories about medical debris led to widespread panic and many beach closings, Long Island's shores are once again clean and the crowds have returned.


Moscow Letting Long Lost Masters Leave
LEAD: COUNTRIES and people are not all that the new Soviet Union is ready to turn loose.
Now comes word that hundreds of priceless drawings and watercolors that were thought to have disappeared forever from Germany during World War II have actually been kept safe in Moscow and will soon go back to the museum whence they came.


Technology;   Getting the Kinks Out of the Global Rescue System
LEAD: The global satellite-based rescue system for locating downed airplanes and wrecked ships saves hundreds of lives each year, but it has been plagued by a false-alarm rate of 97 percent.
Now a new system is being proposed that could drastically reduce the false alarms that waste precious time and millions of dollars.


Quarrels Over Who Said What and When
LEAD:
THE FIREMAN'S WIFE
And Other Stories.
By Richard Bausch.
219 pp. New York: Linden Press/
Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Florida Hotel, Closed, Looking For Operator


Ms. Wiechmann, Playwright, Weds
LEAD: Barbara A. K. Wiechmann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack G. Wiechmann of Guilford, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael John Carley Jr., the son of Constance Worthington of Providence, R.I., and the late Captain Carley, U.S.M.C.
The Rev.
Nancy Leckerling, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at Olmstead's Overlook in


Home Clinic;   Leveling a Sidewalk Slab
LEAD: A CONCRETE sidewalk slab that has tilted because of uneven settling can usually be leveled.
Unless the slab is quite large (more than 4 by 4 feet) or thick, the job is fairly easy.
But two or more people are required, and at least one must be strong enough to pry up the slab with a lever, as described below.


For Women Returning to Job Market
LEAD: CONTINUING a 28-year practice of serving nontraditional adult students, Sarah Lawrence College is offering a new one-year program this fall to help those who earned bachelor's degrees 10, 20, even 30 years ago to update job skills for today's marketplace.


'A Hard Life for the Non-poor'
LEAD:
NATURAL SELECTION
By Frederick Barthelme.
212 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Patch seed the thin established lawn; repair smaller bare areas with sections of sod or seed a new lawn promptly.
Last call to dig, divide and replant iris rhizomes.
Cut out browned stalks and seed pods of hostas and day lilies.
Don't delay making plans for next spring's garden, and mail hardy bulb orders for delivery in early fall.


Margaret Goldman Marries
LEAD: The marriage of Margaret Hildreth Goldman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart B. Goldman of New York, to Jan Verheijen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martinus Verheijen of Ospel, the Netherlands, took place yesterday.
The Rev.
Stewart W. Herman, a Lutheran minister, officiated at an interdenominational service at the Union Chapel in the Grove in Shelter Island Heights, L.I.


Michael Stoll Wed To Ms. Gaylord
LEAD: Susannah Payne Gaylord and Michael Justin Stoll were married yesterday at the Community Church of Pound Ridge, N.Y., by the Rev.
Richard Monkman.
Mrs.
Stoll, 27 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeremy Payne Gaylord of Pound Ridge.
She is a graduate of the Fox Lane School and Dartmouth College.


First for Fresh Air Campers: a Pet Pig, Not a Dog
LEAD: Giggles, a sudden burst of laughter, smiles and nervous shouts of joy.
Those were the sounds and expressions of Fresh Air Fund campers on their first visit to the Fund's model farm on the Sharp Reservation, in Fishkill, N.Y.


Up and Down
LEAD: He came up for a cup of coffee, and his performance was good to the last drop, but all Mike York has to show for it after one game with the Pittsburgh Pirates is an empty cup and an impressive line in the record book: seven shutout innings and a 7-1 victory over the Reds in Cincinnati.


4 Killed as Oil Tank Explodes
LEAD: Four young people, including two teen-age sisters, were killed Friday night by the explosion of an oil storage tank on which they were climbing.
The authorities have not determined the cause of the explosion but say it may have been a spark from a cigarette lighter. ''Places like these are gathering places for teens,'' said Lieut.


Possibilities of Love
LEAD: IT was just one of those one-night stands, Frankie assumed.
And Johnny would then get dressed, go back home and leave her alone in her dingy one-room apartment in the Clinton section of Manhattan.


Blacks March in an Afrikaner Suburb
LEAD: Andre Erasmus peered down the broad, straight road outside his tin-roofed home in a whites-only suburb here and gazed with a baleful eye on the advance of 15,000 black protest marchers, chanting through the dust clouds raised by many stamping feet.


Onan and Egon
LEAD:
ARROGANCE
By Joanna Scott.
283 pp. New York:
Linden Press/Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


The Invasion Vacation
LEAD: We didn't want to take this vacation.
It was the President's idea.
I figured we should just call August on account of invasion, hunker down, and wait for the price of gasoline to reach the foie gras mark.
The President would have none of this. ''The American people want to see life go on,'' he said.


'Sweet Equity'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Food;   Summer Improv
LEAD: Let's face it. the stark truth for many of us who spend summer weekends at the beach or in the mountains is that when it comes to groceries, the pickings are often slim.
For the cook approaching the weekend with a definite menu in mind (culled, no doubt, from some enticing new cookbook filled with seasonal recipes), this can be a hair-tearing exercise in frustration.


Farm Stand Story Is About One Person
LEAD: Your article on the controversy over the tiny Dayton farm stand in East Hampton (''Changes on East End Ensnare a Family's Farm Stand,'' July 29) somewhat distorts the story by presenting it as a conflict between commercial and residential interests, the old guard and the recently arrived.


Composers Gather At New Milford Center
LEAD: ''IT may be possible,'' Charles Ives wrote in his ''Essays,'' ''that a day in a Kansas wheat field will do more good for an American composer than three years in Rome.'' Connecticut may be a little short on wheat fields, but the rolling hills around the Canterbury School, in New Milford, have been deputized well: in its first 10 years, the Charles Ives Center for American Music (not to be confused with the Ives Center for the Arts, in


Hermann Simon, 89, Lawyer in Manhattan
LEAD: Hermann E. Simon, a lawyer who specialized in estates and trusts and who obtained compensation from West Germany for victims of Nazi persecution, died of a heart attack on Tuesday in an elevator on his way to work at his office in lower Manhattan.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Sonic and Sexual Updates From Prince
LEAD: Prince has his head in the clouds, his hands on half a dozen instruments, his feet on the dance floor and his pelvis ready for all sorts of action.
Verbally, he's no deep thinker; when he's not singing about sex, his messages tend to be benevolent and banal.
His new album, ''Graffiti Bridge'' (Paisley Park/Warner Bros.


Commercial Property: The Old J.C. Penney Building;   New Name, New Owners, New Tenants, New Image
LEAD: Take a 26-year-old building that never had any architectural distinction and that was made even more anonymous by its identification for many years with a single, none-too-glamorous tenant, and put it on the Avenue of the Americas, where vacancy rates are among the highest in mid-Manhattan.
It would seem to be a recipe for leasing disaster.


'An American Looks at Britain'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Upside Down Becomes the Norm
LEAD: The falling of the mighty continued today at the Volvo International when the last seeded player in the tournament was beaten in a semifinal round in which players ranked 79th, 127th and 135th in the world were on display.


Campus Life: Michigan;   Gay Rights Group Protests Remarks By an Official
LEAD: Forty student members of a gay rights advocacy organization in Ann Arbor staged their second demonstration of the summer on Thursday to demand the resignation of a university regent they accuse of making anti-gay remarks.


Violent Imaginings Invade Our Thoughts
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE WORLD: The Gulf;   Iraq, Though Vulnerable, Has Strong Cards to Play
LEAD: SADDAM HUSSEIN, ruthless and wily though he may be, must be an increasingly worried man.


Gillian Lusins Is Married
LEAD: Gillian Marie Lusins, a daughter of Dr.
John and Anna Marie Lusins of Oneonta, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Simon Paul, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Paul of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Richard Breuninger, a Methodist minister, officiated at Shineman Chapel at Hartwick College in Oneonta.


Together Again
LEAD: In a moment as poignant as when that single teardrop glides slowly over the photogenic cheekbone of Miss Congeniality, Bert Parks and the Miss America Organization made up last week.
Mr.
Parks, who was fired for being too old in 1980 after 25 years as the pageant's host, agreed last week to appear next month in the 70th anniversary Miss America contest.


Trenton Prison Attack Seen as Inmate Plot
LEAD: An attack on correction officers Aug. 10 at Trenton State Prison was part of a plan by a group of inmates to kill staff members at the maximum-security institution, state officials said.


3 Rebel Organizations in India Link Activities
LEAD: Three well-armed leftist insurgencies in India's strategic and oil-producing northeast have agreed to coordinate their militant activities, the first such move in the troubled region in more than 30 years.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Rikers Inmate Dies
An inmate hospitalized after a jail disturbance died, but the cause of death was unclear.
Page 22.
Pesticides and Migrants
The nation's first comprehensive medical study of migrant farm workers is under way in Ohio.
Page 16.
News Summary, Page 2
Obituaries, Page 34
Weather,


China's Greatest Dissident Writer: Dead but Still Dangerous
LEAD: ''If China is not to perish, then as history tells us, the future holds a tremendous surprise for the murderers.
This is not the conclusion of an incident, but a new beginning.
Lies written in ink can never disguise facts written in blood.
Blood debts must be repaid in kind: the longer the delay, the greater the interest.


Encountering Elie Wiesel
LEAD: To the Editor:


SPORTS OF THE TIMES: Next Week;   Are College Atheletes' Rights Ignored?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Cynthia Romaine Is Married on L.I.
LEAD: Cynthia Scherer Romaine and Thomas Garland Milstead 3d were married yesterday in Bridgehampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Ronald G. Abrams performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church.


Largest Force Since Vietnam Committed in 15-Day Flurry
LEAD: In only 15 days, while Congress was scattered on summer recess and much of official Washington was on vacation, senior Bush Administration officials have committed the United States to its broadest and most hazardous overseas military venture since the Vietnam War.


Roads Sealed as Yugoslav Unrest Mounts
LEAD: Hundreds of Serbs armed with rifles and pistols sealed off towns in the Yugoslav republic of Croatia today, raising fears of ethnic clashes that some Western diplomats say could lead to civil war.


Looking Ahead
LEAD: MONDAY: Treasury auctions three- and six-month bills.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
EXAMINING THE MIDEAST


Father of the Nation Has Seen Better Days
LEAD: In a summer besieged by unreasonable heat and humidity, a Mideast crisis, power failures, disruptive road repairs in New York City and far too many wet Saturdays or Sundays, the question of why George Washington looks washed out on dollar bills has been one of the more pleasant problems to ponder.


Military Agency Loses Authority Over Civilian Computer Security
LEAD: President Bush has ordered a quiet dismantling of an aggressive Reagan Administration effort to restrict sources of computerized information, including databases, collections of commercial satellite photographs and information compiled by university researchers.


Jessica Bussgang Marries
LEAD: Jessica Edith Bussgang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian J. Bussgang of Lexington, Mass., was married last evening at the Harvard Club in Boston to Thomas Adam Rosenbloom, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Rosenbloom of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Cary Yales officiated.
Mrs.
Rosenbloom is a magna cum laude graduate of Tufts University and will receive an M.B.A.


Carolin D. Irwin Plans to Marry
LEAD: Mrs.
William E. Fenhagen of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and Paul Irwin of Gibson Island, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carolin Davidson Irwin to Eric A. Angione, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Conrad J. Angione of Norwalk, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''America and its allies have gone beyond an economic boycott, which in essence means a ban on commercial exchanges.


Spooky Stuff
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dana Allen Weds Benjamin Sands
LEAD: Dana Elizabeth Allen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Leonard Allen of Lebanon, N.J., was married yesterday to Benjamin Francis Sands, a son of Sarah Darlington Sands of Merida, Mexico, and William F. Sands of Dallas.
The Rev.
Gerald J. Gallagher performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Messiah in Rhinebeck, N


Ice Cream for La Dolce Vita
LEAD: Sometime during the Roman Empire an anonymous genius poured fruit juice over snow and ate it.
The difficulty of obtaining and keeping snow meant that only the privileged could enjoy this proto-sherbet, which disappeared with the decline of the empire.


In Search of a Poet's Past
LEAD: A shabby, mice-ridden worker's cottage may seem an unlikely dwelling for a Romantic poet and his family, but such a cottage in the Somerset village of Nether Stowey was, during the final three years of the 18th century, the place where Samuel Taylor Coleridge's imagination took flight.
Or, rather, took to sea.


Once Again, Ready on the Set For Kim Novak
LEAD: It was the fizzy 50's in Hollywood, the era of Hedda Hopper and Louella Parsons, pouty starlets in strapless evening gowns, and industry kingpins in rumpled suits.
Harry Cohn ruled the roost at Columbia Pictures, where Rita Hayworth was the resident love goddess.
But all was not quiet in the hallowed executive suites.


Systems for Students on the Move
LEAD: The college years are when music begins to occupy an eminent place in many lives.
During this time, nothing more effectively spurs incipient musical interests than a really good-sounding yet easily transportable stereo system.
Whether acquired with savings from a summer job or as a munificent back-to-school gift, such a system serves as an exploratory probe into still unknown worlds of music.


New York-Breds Have Defender
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Playing Favorites
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Lehigh;   A Condo Project Strikes the Fancy Of Many Parents
LEAD: Harold K. Tish said he knew that his University Square condominium project was going to be a success when he received a letter from a Lehigh University alumnus living on a remote island in the South Pacific.
The alumnus, Thomas A. Bayer, was interested in buying a condominium for his daughter, Melissa, an incoming freshman at


Diverse Fare for Fans of Indian Food
LEAD: THE latest Indian restaurant to open in Fairfield County is Ganga in downtown Norwalk, and enthusiasts of Indian cooking should run, not walk, to this modest storefront place.


Patricia Stanley Married on L.I.
LEAD: Patricia Mary Stanley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Stanley of Baldwin Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday in Baldwin, L.I., to David Anthony Noblett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Noblett of Simi Valley, Calif.
The Rev.
Lawrence M. Kupferman performed the ceremony at St.
Christopher's Roman Catholic


Madison Avenue, Where Humor Can Get Some Respect
LEAD: Humor on Madison Avenue is no longer a laughing matter.
It has evolved from whimsical fad into an established marketing tool that is now taken very seriously, something akin to product demonstration, celebrity endorsement, the sexual tease or the adorable child.


Talking: Inspections;   Caveats In Buying A Co-op
LEAD: While a professional engineering inspection has become standard practice among buyers of one-family houses, brokers say that fewer than 10 percent of apartment buyers think it worth the cost to check out the unit - and the building - in which they intend to live.


Lisa Brody Weds D. L. Ernsberger
LEAD: Lisa Ruth Brody, a staff psychologist at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn, was married yesterday in Brookline, Vt., to Dr.
Daniel Livermore Ernsberger, a staff psychologist at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I.
The bridegroom's father, the Rev.
Dr.
David J. Ernsberger, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Massey


Trouble on the Range as Cattlemen Try to Throw Off Forest Boss's Reins
LEAD: In the high sage and scrub forest of southern Idaho, a handful of cattlemen have squared off against a stubborn United States ranger in a battle over land, water and a way of life as old as the mythology of the American West.


Postings: Carroll Gardens Condos;   Brooklyn Mews
LEAD: Drawing on the architectural tradition of the mews - 19th-century stables or carriage houses grouped around a courtyard - a developer in the Carroll Gardens section of Brooklyn is completing three small houses that are bigger than many apartments but smaller than most single-family homes.
The developer, Jonathan Perlstein, has clustered the houses around a private courtyard at 126 Fourth Place.


Come Home, Papa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: To ask or not to ask?
That is the question many novices have on their minds when venturing out to photograph strangers.


Hospital Growth Approved
LEAD: THE State Commission on Hospitals and Health Care has approved a $153 million plan to build a children's hospital at Yale-New Haven Hospital, in New Haven, and renovate patients' rooms there.


Radio Contact Restored With Magellan Craft
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration restored steady radio contact with the Magellan spacecraft on Friday night, and today engineers continued the task of returning the craft to normal operation.


Julia Linsley Weds
LEAD: Julia Robertson Linsley and Jeffrey Halpin Carter were married yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn., by the Rev.
Stephen J. Chinlund.
Mrs.
Carter, 27 years old, is the daughter of Susan Cutler Linsley of Wrentham, Mass., and the late James Duncan Linsley.
Her husband, 28, is a son of Mr.


Home Clinic;   Leveling a Sidewalk Slab
LEAD: A CONCRETE sidewalk slab that has tilted because of uneven settling can usually be leveled.
Unless the slab is quite large (more than 4 by 4 feet) or thick, the job is fairly easy.
But two or more people are required, and at least one must be strong enough to pry up the slab with a lever, as described below.


What IS Youth Coming To?
LEAD: FOR years Americans have been bludgeoned by one report after another documenting what a mess the new generation is supposed to be.
Their grade point averages and S.A.T. scores are falling while high school dropout rates are rising.
They don't know when the Civil War was or what Lithuania is.


Making a Splash in Paris
LEAD: During the dog days in Paris, tourists may find themselves compulsively swallowing a Perrier at every corner cafe and dangling their fingers in city fountains from the Jardin du Luxembourg to the Place des Vosges.
They will undoubtedly wonder, too - as I did during the uncharacteristically hot month of June in


People Who Study People
LEAD:
AUTHORS OF THEIR OWN LIVES
Intellectual Autobiographies by Twenty
American Sociologists.
Edited by Bennett M. Berger.
503 pp. Berkeley:
University of California Press. $29.95.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD: CHARITY BEGINS AT HOME: Generosity and Self-Interest Among the Philanthropic Elite.
By Teresa Odendahl. (Basic, $22.95.) Who questions the motivations of generous donors to universities, museums, hospitals or any of the 950,000 nonprofit organizations competing for charitable contributions?
Certainly not the supplicants, and there have been few scholarly critical analyses of this aspect of philanthropy.


Fashion;   LOOKING BACK TOWARD THE FUTURE
LEAD: Paris itself is mighty inspiration for fashion movers.
This summer, three exhibits may further fuel the creative process.
At the Louvre, there is a fascinating re-creation of a work put together in 1945 to show the world that Paris's couturiers and artisans had not gone down the drain during World War II.


Saturday Night Is Hardly the Loneliest Night
LEAD: MANY decades ago, between two big projectors and stacks of reels in numbered cans, the projectionist sat staring down from his booth along one projector's beam cutting the vaster dark of the Huntington Theater.
He wasn't watching the movie.
He had seen it too many times.


There's More to Giacometti Than Met the Eye
LEAD: It is hard to imagine another gallery anywhere capable of mounting a Giacometti exhibition like the one here at the Galerie Beyeler through Sept. 29.
Only a gallery with intimate, thick-walled spaces similar to those in which Giacometti grew up in Italian Switzerland could make his work seem so comfortable and, in the process, call into question the understanding of


Faces of Death in Liberia
LEAD: AT least 5,000 people have been killed in Liberia's eight-month civil war, 3,000 of them unarmed civilians.
Begun with an invasion by about 150 rebels led by Charles Johnson, a former minister in President Samuel K. Doe's Government, the war is now being waged by three factions: the Government, Mr.


Don't Measure Souter by the Size of His Town;   New Hampshire's Best
LEAD: To the Editor:


PRISONS CRITICIZED ON AIDS PROGRAMS
LEAD: America's jails and prisons are not coping with the rapid increase of AIDS among inmates, causing needless suffering, say health and legal experts from around the country.


Injury Idles Tapani
LEAD: The Minnesota Twins' most consistent starter this season, Kevin Tapani, was placed on the 15-day supplemental disabled list yesterday with a pulled muscle in his rib cage.
He was replaced by Paul Abbott, another right-hander, from the Twins' Class AAA affiliate in Portland, Ore.


Question Of the Week;   Do Tennis Players Start at Too Young An Age
LEAD: Many remain in the little leagues of tennis, carriers of the dreaded What If? disease.
Better to learn too early than learn too late.
MARTIN FELANDO
New York


NOTE WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
So Much for the Noble Savage


Gioia Arnold Whittemore Is Married To John B. Frelinghuysen in Vermont
LEAD: The United Church of Christ in Dorset, Vt., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Gioia Arnold Whittemore of Greenwich, Conn., to John Brewster Frelinghuysen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Frelinghuysen Jr. of Bernardsville, N.J.
The Rev.
Frederick S. Baldwin, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 5 about the gubernatorial campaign misstated the position of a Democratic candidate, Representative Bruce A. Morrison, on a state income tax.
Mr.
Morrison said that as a public official, he had never advocated an income tax for Connecticut.


Colleen F. Gibbs, A Designer, Weds
LEAD: St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Millbrook, N.Y., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Colleen Frances Gibbs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John David Gibbs of Arlington Heights, Ill., to Cornelius DeForest Howland 3d, a son of Mrs.
Cornelius D. Howland and the late Mr.
Howland.
The Rev.


A Challenge To Somers On Land Use In Watershed
LEAD: IN its first legal challenge of a municipal planning decision in its watershed region, New York City is suing the Somers Planning Board to prevent a housing subdivision from rising on a peninsula of land jutting into the Amawalk Reservoir.


Gun-Control Group Heartened by '76 Souter Brief
LEAD: When David H. Souter was Attorney General of New Hampshire, his office once argued that the Constitution does not guarantee individual citizens the right to carry firearms.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: UTRILLO'S MOTHER, by Sarah Baylis. (Fawcett Columbine, $8.95.) Suzanne Valadon, the mother of the artist Maurice Utrillo, worked as a model for the likes of Degas and Renoir; but she was an artist herself, forgotten, in no small part, because she was female.
This imagined autobiography often comes off like ''an antimale polemic,'' Richard Goodman said here last year, but the author, who died in 1987, ''was very good indeed at re-creating the ambiance of life in the rural France of 100 years ago.


A View Too Close for Comfort
LEAD: My wife and I boarded the day's last bus in Kamikochi, headed down toward the isolated mountain town of Takayama from a mile-high valley in the Japanese Alps.
Immediately, we had some questions.
Why, we wondered, was a small television mounted on the bus dashboard?
And why was a second bus driver standing next to the one behind the wheel?


Don't Measure Souter by the Size of His Town
LEAD: To the Editor:


Courting the Muse at Playwrights Horizons
LEAD: ''I sometimes produce shows that I know are less than great,'' says Andre Bishop, the 41-year-old artistic director of Playwrights Horizons. ''Of course, sometimes Mr. and Mrs.
Audience don't care that I'm producing a show for what I feel is a valid purpose.''


Campus Life: George Mason;   Lights-Out Policy For Parking Lots Worries Students
LEAD: Fearing that their safety will be jeopardized, many students at George Mason University are opposing a decision by administrators to turn off the lights in several parking lots on the largely wooded campus to cut costs.


As Accord on Afghan Future Nears, Refugees Live in Fear and Hardship
LEAD: On the rocky border with Afghanistan, where millions of exiles might be expected to rejoice in the news that Moscow and Washington are nearing agreement on their political future, there is no joy.
Among the Afghans, guerrillas and refugees alike, there is tension, mounting hardship and despair.


British Behaviour
LEAD: The English Tourist Board has just published a code of behavior for foreign visitors to Britain's historic monuments suggesting, among other things, that they prevent ''annoying behaviour'' by their children.
Visitors may find the board's imperious ''Twenty Tips for Visitors'' even more annoying than obstreperous kids.


Giddy and Romantic, 'Me and My Girl'
LEAD: ''ME AND MY GIRL'' is a most entrancing feel-good model of the bygone English formula musical, and if anyone doubts its ongoing appeal, just look around.
A summer package began performances at the Westport Country Playhouse last Monday.
The premiere of the Darien Dinner Theater version was set for Friday, nine days after An Evening Dinner Theater displayed its own production in Elmsford, N.Y.


Come Home, Papa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Daisies Are Coming Into Their Own
LEAD: DAISIES are dandy, and August and September are the months when they come into their own.
There are white ones, golden ones, yellow ones, blue ones, even maroon ones.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
THE FROG PRINCE
Retold by Jan Ormerod and David Lloyd.
Illustrated by Jan Ormerod.
Unpaged. New York:
Lothrop, Lee &amp; Shepard Books. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 8)


Can We Put Everyone to Work?
LEAD:
FAT YEARS AND LEAN
The American Economy Since Roosevelt.
By Bernard D. Nossiter.
271 pp. New York:
HarperCollins. $22.50.


On Soviet Farms: Collective Indifference
LEAD: On a rainy day in late July, the Dawn Collective Farm resembles a hog wallow in which someone has planted discarded tractor parts, rusting sheds and weathered buildings, creating a powerful impression of gloom and neglect.


LAWYERS CONDEMN 5-YEAR SUSPENSION
LEAD: Several specialists in legal ethics say that a court acted too harshly in imposing a five-year suspension from legal practice on a lawyer whose disclosure that he had paid kickbacks to New York City officials helped expose major municipal corruption.


Lee J. Richmond, Poet, 54
LEAD: Lee J. Richmond, a poet and novelist who taught at St.
John's University for more than two decades, died on Friday at Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre, L.I.
He was 54 years old and lived in Hempstead, L.I.
The Hempstead Funeral Home said he died of complications from pneumonia.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
Albeniz: 'Iberia' (complete); Granados: 'The Maiden and the Nightingale'
Benita Meshulam, piano. Classic Masters CD CMCD-1033. CD 0nly.
Anybody who attempts a complete ''Iberia'' must have a superior technique and plenty of confidence.
And anybody who comes through it is going to be up against the competition of the great Alicia De Larrocha.


Witt Gives Yankees a Big Boost
LEAD: The small stopwatch resting atop the ice pack on Mike Witt's right arm silently ticked off the minutes as he stood in front of his locker, his work done, his treatment about to be.


De-Icing by Hand Cited in Air Crash Inquiry
LEAD: Crew members of a commuter plane that crashed last year, killing all six people aboard, used credit cards to scrape ice from the wings and propellers and declined de-icing equipment at least twice, investigators say.


Teaneck Journal;   After Night of Violence, Storekeepers Are Determined to Stay
LEAD: IF he closes his eyes and allows his mind to wander, John Callas says, he can still hear sheets of glass breaking and crashing to the floor.
But more vividly, he remembers the shouts of anger mixed with frustration and fear.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   A Riverside Retreat With a Notable Arboretum
LEAD: For visitors, the 130-acre Bayard Cutting Arboretum's informal gardens provide a respite along the Connetquot River here in Suffolk County, about 50 miles east of Manhattan.
In addition to its conifer collection, some of which is unique to Long Island, the arboretum offers a network of well-maintained nature trails, an architecturally notable mansion and a carriage house where concerts, meetings and art exhibits are held.


Dorothy Riordan Is Married
LEAD: Dorothy A. Riordan, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert Rohe of Katonah, N.Y., and the late Daniel A. Riordan, was married yesterday to Michael G. Hughes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George E. Hughes of Miller Place, L.I.
The Rev.
John Kauta officiated at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Hughes graduated from American University and received a law degree from St.


Wrong War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bridget Maloney Weds John Bush
LEAD: Bridget Kristine Maloney and John Kenneth Bush, graduates of the Harvard Law School, were married yesterday at St.
John the Evangelist Roman Catholic Church in New Hartford, N.Y.
The Rev.
Paul J. Drobin performed the ceremony.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-14


3 Youths Guilty of Rape And Assault of Jogger
LEAD: Three young men were convicted last night of raping and beating a jogger in Central Park but were acquitted on the most serious charge they faced, attempted murder.


Rider's Case Elaborated
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Two Cheers for the Soviet Boom
LEAD: To the Editor:


Taking Fresh Stock of Les Ballets 1933
LEAD: Nostalgia and legend surround Les Ballets 1933, the first company that George Balanchine founded in the West.
A more tangible and revealing reminder is the trailblazing exhibition that the four-year-old National Museum of Dance in Saratoga Springs is devoting to Balanchine's short-lived ballet troupe of 57 years ago.


At Its Last Hurrah, A Municipal Frog Seems Almost Princely
LEAD: IT was the board that Fiorello H. La Guardia bullied and that Robert Moses lectured.
But Mayors since John V. Lindsay hardly ever attended its twice-monthly marathon meetings in person, even as the board's importance as an arbiter of land use grew in a city with less and less available land.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Hawthorne
LEAD: To many people, Hawthorne is just the name of a traffic circle, even though that circle disappeared in the late 60's to be replaced by the three-tiered Hawthorne Interchange connecting the Saw Mill River, Taconic and Sprain Brook Parkways.


About Men;   The Pennsy And Me
LEAD: The other day, I got an announcement that there will be a 50th anniversary reunion next year of the survivors of Pearl Harbor.
As part of it, all the officers who have ever served on the battleship Pennsylvania, which was hit at Pearl, have been invited to a reunion of their own.
Ever since men first went down to the sea in ships, they have experienced the tender bond that exists between the seafarer and his vessel.


Come Home, Papa
LEAD: To the Editor:


On Language;   Medical Edibles
LEAD: Things are easier to remember when they are named after something familiar, and what could be more familiar than food?
It comes in every color, shape and size.
And everybody eats.
The father of modern medicine figured this out 2,400 years ago.
Noticing strange noises coming from the chests of some sick people, Hippocrates described the sound to his students as ''bubbling like boiling vinegar.


Review/Theater;   Landlady as Metaphor For Repressive Regime
LEAD: It's not always easy for an outsider to grasp that he is being presented with a metaphor, but that is not a prime consideration in the case of ''El Palomar'' (''The Pigeon House''), a play being offered by Teatro Encuentro de Costa Rica at the Public Theater as part of the Festival Latino in New York.


Jane Alexanian Wed to L. D. Sperling
LEAD: Jane Abbott Alexanian, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Raymond Alexanian of Houston, was married there yesterday to Lawrence David Sperling, the son of Phyllis C. Sperling of Glenview, L.I., and Dr.
Herbert L. Sperling of New York.
The Rev.
John Stelling, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Ted Sanders officiated at the Doctors'


Back to the Convent
LEAD:
THE PAST IS ANOTHER COUNTRY
By Lois Battle.
392 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


Question Of the Week;   Do Tennis Players Start at Too Young An Age
LEAD: If you're talking about tennis as a lifetime sport with many benefits for physical and mental health, the answer is, it is never too early to begin playing.
But if tennis is viewed as a sure path to financial riches, it will be a burden that far too few children will be able to bear and a goal that even fewer will be able to realize.


Cooper to Rome
LEAD: The Los Angeles Lakers had no further use for him and neither did any other National Basketball Association team, but Michael Cooper did not need much time to land another job.
A day after clearing National Basketball Association waivers after his release by the Lakers, the 34-year-old Cooper, as expected, signed a two-year contract yesterday to play for Il Messaggero


Don't Measure Souter by the Size of His Town;   Much Like Brennan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan Gives Its Leader A Long Honeymoon
LEAD: WHEN he took office a year ago, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu seemed like the man least likely to succeed.
He had no power base, no major record of achievement in government and almost no serious experience at political maneuvering, and he was faced with an electorate irate after more than a year of scandals and unpopular policies.


Ellen A. Bauerle Weds David S. Potter
LEAD: Ellen Ann Bauerle, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Bauerle of Delaware, Ohio, was married yesterday to David Stone Potter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
David Potter of New York.
The Rev.
Kristen Leslie, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Michigan League in Ann Arbor, Mich.


O'Brien-Eason Race Goes On
LEAD: The Jets' quarterback battle between best friends produced stirring performances tonight by both Ken O'Brien and Tony Eason.


Fair Play for Arbitrators
LEAD: To the Editor:


Susan Wallerstein Weds S. M. Scherr
LEAD: Susan Beth Wallerstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Wallerstein of Smithtown, L.I., was married last evening to Stephen Mark Scherr, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morris Scherr of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Moshe Edelman and Cantor Tibor Kelen officiated at Temple Beth-El in Cedarhurst, L.I.


Keep Politics Out of Scientific Research
LEAD: Decisions about medical research belong in the realm of cool, unemotional scientific logic.
Why then have we allowed politics, activism and social hysteria to turn our nation's health research priorities on end?
Giant strides have been made in the treatment of heart disease and cancer, yet funding to continue these programs is being siphoned off to meet the demands of the relatively small but vocal AI


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   The Tastes of Cuba And the Caribbean
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some restaurants that offer Caribbean and Cuban food.
Sugar Reef


What's Doing In;   Amsterdam
LEAD: Marlise Simons; Marlise Simons, a native of the Netherlands, is a correspondent in the Paris bureau of The Times.
By MARLISE SIMONS


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
HORSING AROUND


Phyllis H. Gray To Marry in '91
LEAD: Phyllis Hunt Gray and David George McCormick plan to marry in May.
Miss Gray is a daughter of Cynthia Hunt Gray of West Chester, Pa., and John L. Gray 3d of Rye, N.Y.
Her fiance is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. McCormick of West Chester.


Cooling Off Poolside


Oil's Big Chance To Shape the Future
LEAD: For oil companies, Iraq's invasion of Kuwait has created a host of uncertainties about prices and supplies.
But there is no question that the Mideast crisis, however it is resolved, has the potential to reshape the industry.


A Gift to America From Trumbull, Conn.


Postings: Matching Grants;   Religious Repairs
LEAD: Flushing Friends Meeting House, built in 1674 in Queens, had to repair its exterior, including its soffits and cornices, and to put in a new security system.
St.
Alban's Episcopal Church, built in 1865 in the Eltingville section of Staten Island, wanted to restore the exterior to its original colors and replace rotting boards.


Christiane Sweeny to Wed in October
LEAD: The engagement of Christiane Taylor Sweeny to Christopher Ashley Gorycki, the son of Ann Gorycki of New York and the late George Gorycki, has been made known by her parents, Christiane B. Sweeny of Pleasantville, N.Y., and Arthur Sweeny 3d of New York.
An October wedding is planned.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 12 about equity ownership in full-health-care facilities misstated the range of prices in Fox Hill Village in Westwood, Mass.
It is $170,000 to $560,000.


Eagle Telephonics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Telephonics Inc.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,406,446
5,143,777
Net loss
247,957
547,388
6mo sales
10,168,755
10,005,821
Net loss
230,014
1,097,170


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


For Many Travelers, Biggest Trip Is to the Bookstore
LEAD: The travel industry is suffering from its worst summer in more than a decade, but travel books are enjoying a banner season.


Brazil's Plan on Bank Debt
LEAD: Brazil does not plan to make payments on its foreign bank debt this year, the nation's economy minister said Friday.


Altron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altron Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,160,000
13,225,000
Net inc
340,000
330,000
Share earns
.10
.10
6mo sales
27,178,000
26,354,000
Net inc
875,000
590,000
Share earns
.26
.18


Taylor, 2 Others Wooed
LEAD: Not only have the Giants made two different offers to Lawrence Taylor, as General Manager George Young confirmed Saturday night, but they also appear to be close to signing two other defensive players, Erik Howard and Mark Collins.


Penn Treaty American reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Treaty American
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,818,902
7,378,489
Net inc
1,346,576
1,008,043
Share earns
.42
.40
6mo rev
20,816,436
13,961,802
Net inc
2,802,244
2,057,135
Share earns
.87
.82


Reviews/Music;   'Tosca' With a More Human Scarpia
LEAD: The New York City Opera's sturdy production of ''Tosca,'' which returned to the New York State Theater on Saturday evening, makes some interesting points by toying with viewers' expectations.
We expect the corrupt Baron Scarpia, for instance, to be irredeemably evil, but he is introduced in an understated way that makes him more complex and at times more human.


Personal Business by a Nose
LEAD: The owner Ogden Mills Phipps and the trainer Shug McGaughey, who sent out Rhythm to win the Travers Stakes here Saturday, completed a weekend Grade I double when their Personal Business scored a narrow victory today in the $117,000 John A. Morris Handicap at Saratoga Race Track.


Niagara Exchange Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Niagara Exchange Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b450,000
c175,000
Share earns
-
.09
6mo net inc
117,000
301,000
Share earns
.07
.17
b-Included costs of $600,000 related to litigation by Riedman Corp. against proposed sale of preferred stock to W.R.


Metro Matters;   Going for the Gold In the Campaign For Surrogate


Inmate's Death Not Linked To Clash, an Autopsy Finds
LEAD: A Rikers Island inmate who died Saturday ''suffered no physical injuries that either caused or contributed to his death,'' but instead died of kidney infection, according to preliminary autopsy findings released yesterday by the New York City Medical Examiner's Office.


Tokyo Journal;   A Plush City Hall, but Please, No Marble Bathtub!
LEAD: For the city fathers of Tokyo, this is the year of the ''marble bathtub.''


Proposal to Execute Drug Kingpins Appeals Strictly to Fear;   Darrow on Deterrence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Good Day for Yanks and Merrill
LEAD: With the game against the Seattle Mariners an hour away, Stump Merrill, manager of the Yankees, sat alone in his office yesterday afternoon, poring over the scouting reports and statistical breakdowns.
The silence was ultimately broken by the sound that over the years had amused, annoyed and forever haunted the men who had sat in Merrill's chair.


Mizlou Communications Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mizlou Communications Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
283,067
238,959
Net loss
5,302,417
746,886
Shares outst
15,275,405
14,641,894
9mo rev
983,771
2,292,267
Net loss
10,316,787
361,975
Shares outst
15,066,006
14,641,894


Behind Rikers Melee: Tensions Wrought by Strain of Change
LEAD: Last week's bloody eruption at Rikers Island highlights dramatically the tensions of the nation's most populated penal complex as it grapples with sweeping changes that have come close to altering its very nature.


Saddam's Last Roundup
LEAD: The question is no longer ''will there be war?'' between the world and Iraq, but ''what is the best strategy to win the war already begun with the least loss of life?''


Linda Cohen Wed To John Jacobson
LEAD: Linda Sue Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Cohen of Brockton, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
John Joseph Jacobson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerry H. Jacobson of Ogdensburg, N.Y.
Rabbi Elyse Goldstein performed the ceremony at the Maison Robert restaurant in Boston.


Health-Chem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health-Chem Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
10,798,000
11,908,000
Net inc
b135,000
170,000
Share earns
.02
.02
6mo sales
20,888,000
22,328,000
Net loss
b429,000
c56,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Included extraordinary gains from repurchase of convertible subordinated debentures of $86,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $227,000, or 3 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Gibraltar Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gibraltar Mines
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,600,000
25,300,000
Net inc
2,200,000
5,400,000
Share earns
.19
.45
6mo rev
36,900,000
57,300,000
Net inc
4,500,000
15,400,000
Share earns
.37
1.28
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Anger Over Verdicts in Jogger Case Is Mixed With Calls for Compassion
LEAD: In the pulpits of churches in black neighborhoods yesterday, some ministers urged compassion for three black teen-agers convicted in the Central Park jogger case.
Others expressed anger, saying the verdict was preordained because the youths were black.


Diversified Energies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Energies (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
127,750,000
136,390,000
Net loss
2,909,000
426,000
Shares outst
16,060,000
15,936,000
6mo rev
404,391,000
471,788,000
Net inc
15,681,000
b39,489,000
Share earns
.98
2.48
Shares outst
16,070,000
15,940,000


100 Groups Form Coalition to Help Blacks
LEAD: The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and a diverse group of more than 100 other organizations have formed a coalition to battle social ills among blacks.


Coherent Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coherent Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
46,919,000
48,832,000
Net inc
108,000
2,402,000
Share earns
.01
.26
9mo sales
139,161,000
148,048,000
Net inc
1,320,000
6,336,000
Share earns
.14
.70
The company attributed the decrease in net income to lower sales, higher expenses associated with new product development, lower royalties, and a higher effective tax rate.


Detrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detrex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
24,388,302
27,586,265
Net inc
410,152
815,421
Share earns
.26
.51
6mo sales
49,926,853
55,143,976
Net inc
1,304,841
1,676,979
Share earns
.83
1.06


Text of Iraqi's Demand for U.S. Withdrawal
LEAD: Following is the text of a five-point proposal announced today by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq in a broadcast message to the families of Westerners held in Iraq and Kuwait, as translated by Reuters:


Tokyo Stock Prices Decline
LEAD: Stock prices fell in light mid-afternoon trading today as arbitragers sold the cash index to buy futures.
A surge in selling orders by a large Japanese brokerage after the midday break added to the swift decline, brokers said.


Tel Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tel Electronics
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
648,554
654,012
Net inc
15,230
75,613
6mo sales
1,308,036
1,155,620
Net loss
22,196
b4,118
b-Net income


Faith Joy Smith Weds David Dantowitz
LEAD: Faith Joy Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fredric M. Smith of Maplewood, N.J., and the late Sara E. Smith, was married yesterday to David Matthew Dantowitz, a son of Martha L. Dantowitz of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and the late Edward Dantowitz.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene, assisted by Cantor Erica Lippitz, performed the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun in Short Hills, N


Market Place;   Havens Are Scarce in Current Slide
LEAD: As stock prices have tumbled in the last month, in a decline that was accelerated by the Persian Gulf crisis but began before it, nearly every sector of the market has been affected.


Chempower Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chempower Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
21,412,000
18,105,000
Net inc
2,162,000
1,783,000
Share earns
.30
.27
Shares outst
7,299,997
6,552,253
6mo sales
35,927,000
30,665,000
Net inc
3,115,000
2,641,000
Share earns
.43
.43
Shares outst
7,301,634
6,102,894


L. E. Orans Weds Barbara Gorode
LEAD: Barbara Carol Gorode, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Gorode of New York, was married yesterday to Lawrence Eric Orans, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Orans of Baltimore.
Rabbi Joseph Telushkin, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I.


Precision Standard reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Standard
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
32,800,000
32,700,000
Net inc
312,000
1,682,000
Share earns
.03
.13
6mo sales
61,700,000
60,700,000
Net inc
1,280,000
2,195,000
Share earns
.10
.17


Badger Paper Mills reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Badger Paper Mills
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,495,000
19,675,000
Net inc
964,000
1,201,000
Share earns
.49
.61
6mo sales
38,489,000
39,142,000
Net inc
1,553,000
2,527,000
Share earns
.79
1.28


How Vulnerable Is Iraq?
LEAD: Short of food and dependent on imports for everything from auto parts to chicken parts, Iraq's economy is widely assumed to be exceptionally vulnerable to a trade embargo.
If the United States and its allies are prepared to stand up to Baghdad's threats over the weekend to cut off food to foreigners in Iraq - an indication that the embargo is indeed causing worry - the effects of the sanctions are likely to take hold quickly.


Brajdas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brajdas Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
12,311,753
15,642,273
Net loss
119,064
b5,728
Shares outst
2,845,688
2,931,597
b-Net income


Yugoslavs Beat Soviets for World Title
LEAD: Yugoslavia, living up to its role as favorite, won its third world basketball championship today with a 92-75 victory over the Soviet Union.


Hara Person Is Wed
LEAD: Hara Elizabeth Person, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Person of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Yigal M. Rechtman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Rechtman of Kibbutz Tzora, Israel.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 26 years old, will keep her name.
She is a freelance photographer.


Silicon General reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon General
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
15,618,000
15,266,000
Net inc
b215,000
c550,000
Share earns
.02
.04
Shares outst
12,974,000
13,041,000
Yr sales
58,206,000
56,172,000
Net inc
b1,146,000
c1,504,000
Share earns
.09
.22
Shares outst
12,691,000
13,291,000


Dorchester Hugoton Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dorchester Hugoton Ltd.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,349,000
1,482,000
Net inc
616,000
782,000
Share earns
.06
.07
6mo rev
3,065,000
3,026,000
Net inc
1,585,000
1,624,000
Share earns
.15
.15


Air Fleet's Call-Up Unlikely to Hurt Airlines
LEAD: The Government's activation of the Civilian Reserve Air Fleet last week is not expected to affect scheduled passenger flights by the nation's airlines, industry executives and analysts said over the weekend.


Trading Business
LEAD: STEVE JONES, a 15-year-old from Natrona Heights, Pa., considers himself an avid baseball fan, and a fairly crafty businessman.
So tomorrow, between innings of Little League World Series games in Williamsport, Pa., he will reach for his portfolio and go about the business of trading, buying and selling the most popular collectibles associated with Little


Starrett Housing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Starrett Housing Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
28,248,000
25,794,000
Net inc
1,527,000
2,006,000
Share earns
.18
.24
Shares outst
6,609,000
6,596,000
6mo rev
51,339,000
48,998,000
Net inc
3,080,000
3,428,000
Share earns
.36
.39
Shares outst
6,609,000
6,590,000


Clemens Wins 18th With a 4-1 Victory
LEAD: Roger Clemens scattered seven hits in seven innings for his sixth consecutive victory and 18th of the season as the Boston Red Sox ended a three-game losing streak today with a 4-1 decision over the California Angels.


Indiana Law at Center Of Malpractice Debate
LEAD: When Sylvia Richardson went to Indiana University Medical Center to have her wisdom teeth removed in January 1978, a resident gave her 10 times the intended amount of anesthesia.


Paul Spector Wed To Kinnaird Fox
LEAD: Mary Kinnaird Fox, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell Stephens Fox of Barrington, R.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Paul Joseph Spector, a son of Dr.
Abraham Spector of New York and the late Joan Grudin Spector.
Justice William Mackenzie, who is retired from State Superior Court of Rhode Island, performed the ceremony at the Tillinghast estate in


100 in Indiana Are Evacuated As Heavy Rains Threaten Dam
LEAD: About 100 people were evacuated from the area around Lake Manitou today after high water from heavy rains threatened to break a dam, the authorities said.


Conscientious Jurors and Racial Tension
LEAD: A jury in the case of New York City's anonymous ''jogger'' produced a fair verdict - fair to the facts and fair to a community tormented by racial fears.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: KATERINA MALEEVA, ranked sixth in the world among women tennis players, had no qualms about attacking the Communist Government in her native Bulgaria, when she raised money for the opposition by playing exhibition matches.
But opposing her sisters is a bit touchy, Ms.
Maleeva said on Friday in Mahwah, N.J.


Reporter's Notebook;   A Grim Bush Golfs and Boats As Aides Fret About Image
LEAD: The President's vacation has stopped being fun.


Knowledge Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knowledge Data Systems
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,309,000
1,229,000
Net inc
107,000
b1,040,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
10,006,000
4,955,000
Net inc
483,000
b1,848,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Jets (2-0) Exhibiting Fresh Potential
LEAD: There have been few festive occasions in the last year for the Jets.
It hasn't taken much to make them grouchy.


Concorde Career Colleges reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concorde Career Colleges
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,006,000
8,687,000
Net inc
546,000
771,000
Share earns
.08
.12
6mo rev
19,128,000
18,325,000
Net inc
1,858,000
1,931,000
Share earns
.27
.30
Shares outst
6,978,976
6,478,976


Alpine Group reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpine Group (AMEX)
Year to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,937,000
6,341,000
Net inc
b3,846,000
c11,671,000
Share earns
.74
-
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $11,826,000 and an extraordinary gain from extinguishment of debt of $19,984,000, or $3.94 a share.


Mediagenic reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mediagenic
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,046,000
13,563,000
Net loss
608,000
586,000
Revenue represented net revenue.


No Esthetic Value To Giants' Victory
LEAD: It was only a preseason game and it was hardly a thing of beauty.
But the bottom line was that the Giants did beat the Oilers, 13-10, Saturday night by rallying in the last quarter.


Top Official Facing Ouster At Student Loan Insurer
LEAD: Top officials of the Education Department are forcing out Richard C. Hawk, chairman of the nation's largest guarantor of student loans, Mr.
Hawk said today.


Medical Innovations reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Innovations
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,013,082
1,198,255
Net inc
39,889
84,763
Share earns
.01
.02
6mo rev
4,052,882
2,058,387
Net inc
21,012
189,609
Share earns
-
.06


Imagine an East Europe Minus Ethnic Tension
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shutdown at Ford Plant
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company will extend last week's shutdown of its Dearborn assembly plant through this week because of a shortage of 2.3-liter engines for the Mustang model.
A Ford spokesman, Jay Meisenhelder, said the shortage was a result of a switch to a slightly different 2.3-liter engine made in the company's Lima, Ohio, engine plant.


Martha Lemer Is Wed
LEAD: Martha Dorothy Lemer, an associate in the law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler, and Richard J. Byrne, a vice president of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Four Seasons Hotel in Chicago.
Rabbi Neil Brief officiated.
The bride, 28 years old, is the daughter of Mr.


Vivian Cavalieri Wed to Daniel Grosse
LEAD: Vivian L. Cavalieri, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Corrado A. Cavalieri of New York, was married yesterday to Daniel J. Grosse, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Grosse of Ann Arbor, Mich.
Jean Kotkin, a Leader of the Ethical Culture Society, officiated at the Water's Edge in Long Island City, Queens.


Russian Party Ranks Shrink
LEAD: The head of the Russian republic's Communist Party was quoted today as saying 162,750 members - 90,000 of them factory workers - quit in July, about 1.5 percent of the 11 million members.
The announcement by Ivan K. Polozkov, who was elected in June, was reported by the republic newspaper Sovetskaya Rossiya.


Advatex Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advatex Associates Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,845,703
4,647,557
Net inc
300,660
59,033
Share earns
.06
.01
6mo rev
17,683,799
9,701,035
Net inc
558,421
270,579
Share earns
.11
.05


Vader Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vader Group (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
135,239
92,097
Net inc
b36,383
c86,312
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
2,263,279
2,094,821
9mo rev
429,359
286,643
Net inc
b77,862
c32,343
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
2,263,279
2,093,141


Mona Last, Lawyer, Weds Rabbi Howard S. Herman
LEAD: Mona E. Kushner Last, an associate in the law firm of Watstein &amp; Watstein in Bristol, Conn., and Rabbi Howard S. Herman of the Farmington Valley Jewish Congregation in Simsbury, Conn., were married yesterday at the rabbi's congregation.
Cantor Susan L. Levine performed the ceremony.


Continental Materials reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Materials (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
20,229,000
23,799,000
Net loss
37,000
248,000
6mo sales
37,253,000
42,501,000
Net loss
900,000
959,000


This Tour Blends Cycling and Helping
LEAD: TOMORROW, Bike-Aid '90 will conclude with 120 cyclists pedaling through Washington to the Lincoln Memorial, the final destination of six individual routes covering 2,000 to 3,400 miles over a period of five to nine weeks.


Township Violence: Separatist Legacy
LEAD: Seven days of bloodletting in black townships near Johannesburg stem from divisions with deep roots in South Africa's past.


Computer &amp; Communications Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer &amp; Communications Tech (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,087,000
15,630,000
Net loss
685,000
345,000
6mo rev
33,574,000
33,777,000
Net loss
1,157,000
82,000


Jurors in Jogger Trial Remember A Relentless Period of Testing
LEAD: The debates seemed interminable.
Respectful discussions shattered into shouting matches and name-calling.
Even in deciding who would sit near the front of the bus to and from their hotel - and so suffer fewer potholes along the road - the tempers of jurors in the Central Park jogger trial flared over and over.


Israeli Troops Shoot 2 Jordanian Infiltrators
LEAD: Two armed Jordanian soldiers in uniform crossed into Israel this morning and exchanged fire with Israeli soldiers, who killed one and wounded the other.


Political Memo;   Seeking Seats, Republicans Find Ally in Rights Act
LEAD: Are Republicans using the civil rights laws to undercut the Democratic Party?


Group 1 Software reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Group 1 Software (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,921,000
4,733,000
Net inc
747,000
691,000
Share earns
.18
.17
Shares outst
4,198,000
4,193,000


Cheney With the Admirals
LEAD: With tension running high in the Persian Gulf region after Iraqi ships ignored American warning shots, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney met here today with the commanders of the United States' naval blockade of Iraq.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: The Oil Jolt


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., New York, the pharmaceutical company, appointed Charles G. Tharp vice president of compensation and human resource development.


How to Stop Spreading Nuclear Arms
LEAD: The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty has not always lived up to its high purpose of keeping nuclear weapons out of the hands of states that want them.
So the treaty will certainly come under sharp criticism at the review conference that starts today in Geneva.


Jane Green Is Married to Lee Bender
LEAD: Jane Beth Green, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Green of Ambler, Pa., was married yesterday to Lee Stewart Bender, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Bender of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Richard Fagan, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.


Hawkins Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawkins Energy Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,767,000
1,053,000
Net inc
6,000
b302,000
6mo rev
3,037,000
2,719,000
Net loss
476,000
463,000
b-Net loss


New York Real-Estate Slide Hits Biggest Developers
LEAD: Some of New York's wealthiest and best-known developers, squeezed by the region's economic retrenchment and a dearth of young, high-salaried tenants, have missed monthly mortgage payments on large apartment complexes and, in at least one case, defaulted on a $100 million mortgage.


Chargers Do a Turnaround
LEAD: THE incessant ridicule.
That is what Gil Byrd remembers most about the San Diego Charger defense he joined in 1983.


Phone Competition Puts Consumer Last
LEAD: To the Editor:


Steinbrenner Era Could End Today
LEAD: By 5 P.M. today, barring a court-ordered reprieve, George Steinbrenner is expected to terminate a 17 1/2-year run as the very visible managing owner of the Yankees.


Memtek Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Memtek Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,405,964
2,795,096
Net loss
31,948
86,147
Shares outst
16,008,001
15,974,375


Magazines Embracing Rural Virtues
LEAD: In the mostly urban world of magazines, few things seem to attract readers - and publishers - quite as much as the virtues, real or imagined, of the countryside.


Pace Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pace Medical Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
776,774
398,296
Net inc
197,004
b37,621
Share earns
.07
-
6mo sales
1,474,784
776,092
Net inc
433,532
b101,207
Share earns
.16
-
b-Net loss


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Despite the financial predicament that DONALD J. TRUMP finds himself in, Trump is becoming a bigger and bigger name in real estate.
That is, brothers EDDIE and JULIUS TRUMP, no relation to Donald.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Basketball Is Small Shop's Big Break
LEAD: GOODBY, BERLIN &amp; SILVERSTEIN, a small but well-regarded San Francisco agency, finally made it into the big leagues on Friday by winning the estimated $10 million account for the National Basketball Association.


American Learning reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Learning
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,463,000
4,099,000
Net loss
765,000
2,049,000
9mo rev
11,804,000
11,627,000
Net loss
2,757,000
5,257,000
Year-ago results included a $480,000 provision for center closing costs related to 14 learning centers.


Ruddock Wins; Odum May Protest
LEAD: Donovan (Razor) Ruddock, a highly ranked heavyweight contender from Toronto, knocked out Kimmuel Odum at 2 minutes 58 seconds of the third round of a scheduled 10-round fight at Harrah's Marina Hotel Casino here today.
But the result was tainted by a knockdown Ruddock scored after the bell ending the second round, and by the prospect of a protest that was raised by the defeated fighter and his handlers.


Penta Systems International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penta Systems International
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,283,000
4,450,000
Net loss
309,000
b366,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
4,277,377
5,277,377
6mo sales
4,826,000
9,333,000
Net loss
751,000
b619,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
4,277,377
5,277,377


Review/Television;   His Life Was Changed by the Blues
LEAD: John Hammond, the subject of an ''American Master'' biography tonight at 9 P.M. on Channel 13, put his music where his conviction's were.
For five decades as a talent scout and producer, he had a double agenda: making the best blues-rooted music available to the widest public, and working toward an ideal of a desegregated


Books of The Times;   The Influence of Jazz On Popular Singing
LEAD:
Jazz Singing
America's Great Voices From Bessie Smith to Be-Bop and Beyond
By Will Friedwald
Illustrated. 477 pages. Charles Scribner's Sons. $29.95.


Consumers Water Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consumers Water Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,091,000
20,507,000
Net loss
b3,025,000
c1,992,000
Share earns
-
.33
Shares outst
6,021,000
5,956,000
6mo rev
39,791,000
39,071,000
Net loss
b1,418,000
c3,318,000
Share earns
-
.55
Shares outst
6,008,000
5,945,000


Novelty in Leipzig: A Paper With No Party Line
LEAD: This is the time to be an entrepreneur in Eastern Europe, in newspaper publishing as in any other business.
But at East Germany's largest independent weekly, youth and steady nerves are the most important assets.


Rebecca Ivry and Clifford Stein Wed
LEAD: Rebecca Ann Ivry, a daughter of Dr.
Joann Ivry and Dr.
Alfred L. Ivry of West Newton, Mass., was married yesterday to Clifford Seth Stein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira Stein of Fair Lawn, N.J.
Rabbi Scott Rosenberg performed the ceremony at Temple Reyim in Newton, Mass.


Computer Language Research reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Language Research (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,177,000
26,101,000
Net loss
3,540,000
1,708,000
6mo rev
66,711,000
69,381,000
Net inc
2,026,000
4,420,000
Share earns
.15
.32


Airtran Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airtran Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
20,441,000
14,771,000
Net inc
440,000
714,000
Share earns
.11
.18


Medical Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Dynamics
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
749,300
986,600
Net loss
226,000
b163,500
Share earns
-
.07
9mo rev
2,359,600
2,584,000
Net loss
513,400
157,000
b-Net income


Let's Leave Oil Behind
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prices Up 9.8% in Britain
LEAD: Retail prices in Britain rose 9.8 percent in the 12 months that ended in July, the same rate as in June, the Government said Friday.
Some economists had forecast that the rate might break through 10 percent because of higher wage settlements and consumer spending.
Lower prices for seasonal foods in July left the figure unchanged from June.


J. A. Singer Wed To Miss Bartner
LEAD: The Starlight Roof of the Waldorf-Astoria was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Lauren Joy Bartner, the daughter of Mrs.
Stanley Easton of Alpine, N.J., and Dr.
Norman Bartner of Closter, N.J., to Dr.
Joseph Asher Singer, the son of Hannah Singer of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Abraham Singer.


Margate Venture Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Margate Venture Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,978,042
9,910,094
Net inc
b298,189
408,749
Share earns
.01
.02
6mo sales
15,327,101
18,339,664
Net inc
b423,615
117,297
Share earns
.02
.01
b-Included loss of $13,517 for the quarter and a gain of $45,839 for the 6 months, both from disposal of West Haven Casting Co.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
The animated dancing raisins that represent the California Raisin Advisory Board will be used in a public service announcement this fall for the American Library Association.
The television spot, which will be the first public service announcement featuring the raisins, will have the characters performing a rap song encouraging children to read.


Taiwan Plans to Cut Tariffs
LEAD: Taiwan will reduce tariffs on 1,900 goods in a move intended to support its attempt to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Finance Ministry said last week.


Digital Systems International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Systems International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,977,000
6,208,000
Net inc
1,995,000
1,514,000
Share earns
.25
.21
Shares outst
7,919,000
7,233,000
6mo sales
15,972,000
9,961,000
Net inc
3,356,000
2,298,000
Share earns
.44
.32
Shares outst
7,704,000
7,218,000


Leisure Concepts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leisure Concepts Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,316,826
1,127,416
Net inc
168,312
113,787
Share earns
.05
.04
6mo rev
2,353,463
2,054,290
Net inc
238,837
116,484
Share earns
.07
.04


Outdoors: Some Sedentary Seafood for All Seasons
LEAD: EVERY year when confronted by the dog days of August - a time when, for shore fishermen at least, such species as striped bass and bluefish are often difficult to locate along much of the Northeast coast - I begin thinking of other sources of food and fun, among them soft- and hard-shelled clams and mussels, critters that don't move about with the seasons.


Bridge
LEAD: The twists of international events that have made Washington and Moscow allies instead of antagonists have many parallels in the microcosm of the bridge world.
One day's teammate is likely to be the next day's opponent, and those who organize bridge events regularly switch from cooperation to confrontation.


Review/Theater;   A Prison Experience in Movement and Music
LEAD: The sensuous music and movement in ''Voces de Acero'' (Voices of Steel) by the Pregones Theater, presented as part of the Festival Latino at the Public Theater, might make some viewers think the experience of prison is not all bad.


Ruth Feldstein and Asa Nixon Marry
LEAD: Ruth Sara Feldstein and Dr.
Asa Joel Nixon were married yesterday at the Harrison (N.Y.) Jewish Center by Rabbi Benjamin Mintz, an uncle of the bride.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-9
Iraq offered a deal on hostages, promising that foreigners held against their will would be released in return for a military pullout by the U. S. The foreigners are already being used as shields against bombing.
Page A1


Confessions Lawyers Couldn't Undo
LEAD: The case against the three defendants convicted in the rape and the beating of the woman who came to be known as the Central Park jogger was won not in a courtroom in lower Manhattan but in three grubby New York City police station houses, where detectives smoothly convinced the three young men to confess.


Elan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elan Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,025,000
12,433,000
Net inc
2,238,000
969,000
Share earns
.14
.06
The company said all figures are translated for convenience from Irish pounds to U.S. dollars at the noon buying rate in New York City on the closing date of the quarter ($1.61 on June 29, 1990 and $1.48 on June 30, 1989).


Sharing Success
LEAD: WHEN Patty Dodd told her loved ones nearly five years ago that she was dating a professional volleyball player, the news was greeted with skepticism.


Synergistics Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synergistics Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
53,300,000
47,400,000
Net inc
776,580
112,740
Share earns
.17
.03
6mo rev
101,100,000
94,000,000
Net inc
1,900,000
165,907
Share earns
.42
.04
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Juvenile Sentencing for 3
LEAD: Although the three teen-agers in the Central Park jogger trial were convicted of rape and assault as adults, they will be sentenced on Sept. 11 as juveniles.


Los Ojos Journal;   Aiding the Poor Receives Its Reward
LEAD: One morning a few weeks ago Maria Varela received a telephone call informing her that after a lifetime of working with the poor, she suddenly had become rich.


Boole &amp; Babbage reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boole &amp; Babbage (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,105,000
18,028,000
Net inc
670,000
713,000
Share earns
.17
.18
9mo rev
68,654,000
55,754,000
Net inc
3,431,000
3,628,000
Share earns
.87
.97
Year-ago revenue for the quarter results included $1 million in revenue and $310,000 in net income, or 8 cents a share, from sale of a product's distribution rights in Japan.


Santa Monica Finds Its Generosity Has Limits After Vagrant Attack
LEAD: Santa Monica, a city so tolerant that it serves street people free meals on the City Hall lawn, is experiencing a backlash against the homeless.


Marci Braunstein Is Married
LEAD: Marci Ann Braunstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Braunstein of Plainview, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark B. Arnold, a son of Kenneth E. Arnold and Lori A. Crider, both of Houston.
Rabbi Edward Treister officiated at the Plainview Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Arnold, 23, graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband, and is a management trainee at Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.


South Jersey Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Jersey Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
49,402,000
44,327,000
Net inc
b1,683,000
c1,751,000
Share earns
.20
.21
Shares outst
8,316,899
8,310,515
6mo rev
127,134,000
134,058,000
Net inc
b8,299,000
c9,565,000
Share earns
1.00
1.15
Shares outst
8,316,127
8,309,606


Gasoline Spills Into Delaware River


A Day of Celebration Puts the Coda on a Fortnight of Harlem Week
LEAD: Cloudy skies and intermittent rain put a damper on Harlem Day festivities yesterday, but tens of thousands of people still turned out on 125th and 135th Streets to eat, listen to music, shop and socialize.


Amy Rothenberg, A Teacher, Weds
LEAD: Amy Rand Rothenberg, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Sylvan G. Rothenberg of Wayne, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jonathan Kiev, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ari Kiev of Saddle River, N.J.
Rabbi Richard Eisenberg officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.


PGI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PGI Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,777,000
4,812,000
Net loss
1,171,000
736,000
Shares outst
3,316,530
2,905,160
6mo rev
6,795,000
10,432,000
Net loss
2,185,000
1,208,000
Shares outst
3,316,530
2,905,160


Basic American Medical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Basic American Medical
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
89,700,000
75,500,000
Net inc
500,000
200,000
Share earns
.07
.03
6mo rev
200,300,000
165,600,000
Net inc
6,300,000
b5,400,000
Share earns
.79
.69
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $1,400,000, or 19 cents a share.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Berlin Refashions Itself
Berliners are taking the changes in stride as their city, like two gigantic pieces of a cracked dinner plate, is glued together.
Some chips are still missing.
Page A3.
The Pressures at Rikers
The clash at Rikers Island came as the prison grappled with sweeping changes amid the pressures of court orders and union demands.


Soybean Case To Proceed
LEAD: A Federal judge has let stand charges against a soybean futures trader who had charged that prosecutors in Chicago mishandled the grand jury.
Federal District Judge


Reviews/Music;   Just Don't Be Pretentious
LEAD: Punk rock was a back-to-basics musical revolution, a return to simplicity and punch.
It was also a shared joke at a time when too many musicians took themselves too seriously, and the Dictators were in on it from the beginning with their 1975 album, ''Go Girl Crazy.''


Dr. Knobler Wed To A. J. Weinberg
LEAD: Dr.
Elizabeth H. Knobler, an attending physician in dermatology at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, and Andrew J. Weinberg, a consultant for T.P.F. &amp; C., a human-resources consulting firm in New York, were married Aug. 12 at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Rabbi Jack Stern officiated.


Conflict to Consensus
LEAD: Over lunch recently, a Chilean who was a bright young official in the long-ago Government of Salvador Allende looked back on that period with a certain realistic nostalgia:


Action Auto Rental reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Auto Rental (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
27,345,000
22,678,000
Net loss
b5,643,000
c1,629,000
Share earns
-
.16
6mo rev
54,864,000
43,205,000
Net loss
b5,583,000
c2,982,000
Share earns
-
.30
b-Included a pretax charge of $5.8 million for insurance-related costs, provisions for uncollectible receivables and other adjustments for both the quarter and 6 months.


Foster Grant Bankruptcy
LEAD: The Foster Grant Corporation, the maker of sunglasses, filed for protection from its creditors on Thursday under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
In the filing in Tucson, Ariz., it reported total assets of about $25 million and liabilities of about $36 million, including nearly $19.3 million in unsecured debt.


Iraq Crisis Gives Fed New Woes
LEAD: The dominant figure in the credit markets these days does not sit in the Federal Reserve's ornate office at the corner of Constitution Avenue and 20th Street in Washington, but in the Iraqi presidential palace in Baghdad.


Lidak Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lidak Pharmaceuticals
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
38,083
2,665
Net loss
1,380,937
146,751
9mo rev
146,261
4,022
Net loss
1,923,323
247,464
The losses for the 1990 periods reflected a one-time charge to research and development expenses of about $818,000, representing the present value of installment fees payable pursuant to an exclusive 20-year technology license agreement with the Medical Biology Institute.


A New Format
LEAD: IN his dozen or so years as a tennis promoter, John Korff, a 38-year-old graduate of Harvard Business School, has gained a reputation as something of an innovator.
Now he seems destined to make the history books, as the organizer of the first tournament with two semifinal rounds.


Manufactured Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufactured Homes Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,560,000
35,020,000
Net loss
6,535,000
6,101,000
Shares outst
4,096,796
3,598,900
6mo rev
21,495,000
69,755,000
Net loss
9,449,000
9,064,000
Shares outst
4,094,835
3,559,851


A Sweep for Pirates In Cincinnati Series
LEAD: Jack Armstrong got what he wanted today when the Cincinnati Reds' manager, Lou Piniella, left him in to pitch to Bobby Bonilla with the game on the line.


The Rolling Stones Take On Prague
LEAD: The Rolling Stones, once denounced by the former Communist Government of Czechoslovakia as a capitalist money-making machine, performed before an enthusiastic audience of 107,000 who ignored a heavy rain to attend an outdoor concert on Saturday, which both the band and the fans said they had been awaiting for years.


Cash Machine Pact Reached
LEAD: The Cirrus and Plus automatic teller networks have agreed to make their machines available to the holders of each company's cards, Plus System Inc. said yesterday.


A Correction
LEAD: A letter Aug. 13 from Ozer Koray, representatative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, incorrectly identified the writer as a United Nations representative.


Chandler Insurance Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chandler Insurance Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
34,075,000
24,391,000
Net inc
3,030,000
2,635,000
Share earns
.40
.50
Shares outst
7,665,000
5,318,000
6mo rev
62,817,000
44,830,000
Net inc
5,731,000
5,152,000
Share earns
.85
.97
Shares outst
6,709,000
5,308,000


Germans' Corporate Lag in East
LEAD: In the Kohl Government's vision of reunification, West German companies were expected to race into East Germany, providing the financing, equipment and expertise needed to rebuild that nation's ruined industrial base.
As the largest West German company, Daimler-Benz A.G. would naturally play a leading role.


Businesses Cope With Iraq Conflict
LEAD: Scheduled passenger flights are unlikely to be affected by the Pentagon's commandeering of 38 civilian jetliners.


Davox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Davox Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,043,000
7,345,000
Net loss
640,000
2,126,000
6mo sales
18,959,000
16,912,000
Net loss
592,000
1,889,000


Rostagno, No. 79, Wins Volvo Title
LEAD: In a tournament that was rife with upsets to players like Ivan Lendl and Andrei Chesnokov, 79th-ranked Derrick Rostagno defeated No. 135 Todd Woodbridge of Australia today, 6-3, 6-3, in the final of the Volvo International tournament here.


Company on Trial for Injuries on Job
LEAD: More than six years after charges were first brought, testimony began here last week in the criminal trial of a Chicago manufacturer and its top officials, accused of seriously injuring more than 40 workers by exposing them to toxic chemicals.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an editorial on Saturday misstated the proposed increase in bank premiums for Federal Deposit Insurance.
The proposal is to raise premiums to, not by, 19 1/2 cents per $100 of insured deposits.


Barri Gordon Is Married To Daniel R. Waltcher
LEAD: Barri Hope Gordon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Gordon of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Daniel Russell Waltcher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Waltcher of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
Rabbi Ronald Millstein officiated at the Loft in New York.


Rocking Horse Child Care Centers of America Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocking Horse Child Care Centers of America Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,400,582
5,636,516
Net inc
230,661
219,930
Share earns
.02
.02
Shares outst
11,452,028
11,061,848
6mo rev
18,508,945
10,972,462
Net inc
77,868
479,159
Share earns
.01
.04
Shares outst
11,141,556
11,051,062


Falconbridge Gold reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falconbridge Gold
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,651,000
12,253,000
Net inc
2,766,000
1,841,000
Share earns
.21
.14
6mo rev
21,067,000
27,394,000
Net inc
4,162,000
3,207,000
Share earns
.31
.24
Results are in Canadian dollars.


U.S. Textiles Need a Chance to Compete
LEAD: To the Editor:


Costar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Costar Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,069,000
8,338,000
Net inc
1,026,000
300,000
Share earns
.29
.11
Shares outst
3,521,515
2,679,607
6mo sales
26,566,000
15,867,000
Net inc
2,108,000
650,000
Share earns
.60
.24
Shares outst
3,498,590
2,678,104


Cannon Express Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cannon Express Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,823,542
4,068,330
Net inc
422,631
287,844
Share earns
.25
.17
Yr rev
18,930,380
16,055,334
Net inc
1,142,837
1,357,630
Share earns
.68
.80


WELFARE ON RISE, REFLECTING SLUMP IN ECONOMY OF U.S.
LEAD: In a further sign of weakness in the nation's economy, the number of people receiving food stamps and welfare benefits has jumped sharply this year.
At least 44 states have reported increases in enrollment, some ranging up to 50 percent.


Roger Barrer Married to Diane Tepper
LEAD: Diane Sabesin-Tepper, an interior designer, and Roger Aaron Barrer, the president of Alexander's department stores, were married yesterday at the United Nations Plaza Hotel in New York by Rabbi Daniel Fogel.


Rockwood National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rockwood National
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
783,000
440,000
Net loss
b825,000
b850,000
Shares outst
9,829,389
9,824,527
b-Included income of $8,000 for discontinued operations for the quarter, and the year-ago quarter included a loss from discontinued operations of $77,000.


Noisy Discos Are Targets Of Crackdown
LEAD: Responding to what he called ''an avalanche of community complaints'' against noisy discotheques, the New York City Consumer Affairs Commissioner announced regulations yesterday to make nightclub owners responsible for maintaining order in and around their clubs.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Aug. 19:
MONDAY
Crane Co
First Inst Bancorp
Genuine Parts Co.
Tyco Labs Inc
TUESDAY
Amer Cyanamid Co
Century Tel Ent Inc
Edison Bros Stores Inc
Eljer Inds Inc
Ohio Edison Co
Smith Corona Corp
Whirlpool Corp


Planes Collide; 2 Bodies Found
LEAD: Two small planes collided over Long Beach Harbor and plunged into the ocean today, and divers recovered two bodies from one of the submerged planes, officials said.


Valley Forge Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Forge Scientific (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
453,604
279,778
Net inc
53,182
7,657
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
7,000,000
4,685,734
9mo sales
1,273,639
633,145
Net inc
189,586
97,577
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
6,953,518
4,685,734


Miss Cohn Weds Daniel P. Karnovsky
LEAD: Priscilla Betsy Cohn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert L. Cohn of West Orange, N.J., and Chilmark, Mass., was married yesterday to Daniel Philip Karnovsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Manfred L. Karnovsky of Cambridge, Mass., and Chilmark.
Rabbi Jeshaia Schnitzer performed the ceremony, assisted by Cantor Elliot Levine, at the home of the bride's parents in


Tapping Sugars for New Drugs
LEAD: A spoonful of sugar helps the medicine go down, according to the song.
But in the future, the spoonful of sugar may be the medicine.


Plugging For Comfort
LEAD: An athletic-footwear firm from New Zealand has developed a new running shoe that allows you to customize its fit by inserting cushioning plugs into the sole.


Isomet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Isomet Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,796,000
1,922,000
Net loss
300,000
132,000
Shares outst
2,030,315
2,023,772
6mo rev
3,663,000
3,485,000
Net loss
343,000
50,000
Shares outst
2,030,315
2,023,772


Delphi Information Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delphi Information Systems Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,673,000
6,255,000
Net inc
1,131,000
b1,137,000
Share earns
.25
-
b-Net loss and after a loss from an accounting change of $1,712,000.
Year-ago results are restated to reflect the change in revenue recognition method adopted April 1, 1989.


Keeping the Nations United
LEAD: Concerted international action: It is essential to secure the safety of the thousands of foreigners trapped in Kuwait and Iraq.
It is essential to resolve the Iraq-Kuwait crisis with minimum violence.
It is essential to keep Saddam Hussein from obscuring his own aggression with continued fabrications about the nature of


Imre Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imre Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
617,000
431,000
Net loss
369,000
584,000
6mo rev
1,056,000
890,000
Net loss
824,000
1,281,000


City of Past and Future, Berlin Refashions Itself
LEAD: When the two German states are joined, probably only nine weeks from now, this sprawling city of over four million people will once again be the capital of a united Germany and more - a great metropolis of Europe and the world.


Farm Agency Income Slips
LEAD: The Farm Credit System said on Thursday that its net income dropped 5 percent in the second quarter.


Galvest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galvest Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
554,000
530,000
Net inc
138,000
129,000
Share earns
.02
.02
6mo rev
1,110,000
1,022,000
Net inc
253,000
224,000
Share earns
.04
.03


Stephen Smith, 62, Businessman And an Adviser to the Kennedys
LEAD: Stephen E. Smith, a financial analyst and political strategist in the Presidential campaign of his brother-in-law, John F. Kennedy, in 1960, died yesterday at his Manhattan home.
He was 62 years old.


From State Pricing to Stoop Labor, Soviet System Dooms a Bumper Crop
LEAD: When the first reports from the Soviet grain belt reached Moscow early this summer, it seemed that fate had at last chosen to take pity on the famished economy of Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


King Holds Off Daniel To Win
LEAD: Refusing to crumble after her five-shot lead with nine holes left was narrowed to one stroke with five holes remaining, Betsy King captured the JAL Big Apple Classic today at Wykagyl Country Club.


Multi-Color Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multi-Color Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
14,020,000
15,563,000
Net loss
707,010
b459,000
Share earns
-
.21
b-Net income


Dickenson Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dickenson Mines (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
17,064,000
13,862,000
Net inc
999,000
b5,178,000
Share earns
.06
.35
6mo rev
32,653,000
26,609,000
Net inc
2,300,000
b6,576,000
Share earns
.13
.45
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $3,675,000, or 25 cents a share, for both the quarter and 6 months.


Gooden Falters But Mets Win, 10-9
LEAD: Forget that the Mets won a game they had to win tonight when they outscored the San Francisco Giants, 10-9, and stayed two games out of first place in the National League East.
Forget that Kevin McReynolds knocked in six runs with two home runs and a single.
And, most of all, forget that Dwight Gooden won his 13th game of the season.


Banking Expert Criticized
LEAD: In an unusual move, the chairman of the House Banking Committee has suggested that a financial expert who is studying the health of the commercial banking industry's deposit insurance system for a banking subcommittee should be removed.


It's Kickoff Time For a New Game
LEAD: FACED with legal challenges, shifting alliances and a deteriorating relationship with the National Football League, college football is beginning the most significant season in its 122-year history.


Moniterm Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moniterm Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,416,000
6,995,000
Net inc
45,000
35,000
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo sales
13,834,000
14,246,000
Net inc
195,000
b356,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss
The company said latest second quarter income included a $100,000 non-recurring recovery of bad debt.


Move by FundAmerica
LEAD: FundAmerica Inc., a buying club with 100,000 members, filed for bankruptcy protection from its creditors and asked the court to appoint an independent examiner to investigate various allegations against it.
The company, based in Irvine, Calif., is facing scrutiny from regulators in Florida and other states and is the subject of a $150 million class-action suit filed in San Francisco.


A Typecast Oddball, Each Time Different
LEAD: ''I've been a character actor for, my God, 27 years,'' said Paul Benedict. ''I play a lot of really bizarre people.''


Astrocom Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astrocom Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,575,000
1,337,000
Net inc
b43,000
c455,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
3,070,000
2,776,000
Net inc
b65,000
c620,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-After a loss of $37,000 for the quarter and income of $9,000 for the 6 months, both from discontinued operations.


Consolidated Products reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Products (OTC)
Qtr to July 4
1990
1989
Sales
25,195,378
24,001,398
Net inc
1,386,923
1,203,981
Share earns
.33
.29
9mo sales
79,552,794
74,992,696
Net inc
3,616,142
3,097,118
Share earns
.86
.75
Year-ago share earnings are restated for a 10 percent stock dividend paid in January 1990.


American Precision Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Precision Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
11,852,000
13,337,000
Net inc
b548,000
1,035,000
Share earns
.08
.14
6mo sales
24,574,000
26,408,000
Net inc
b1,519,000
2,079,000
Share earns
.21
.28


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Group Restricts Billboard Ads
LEAD: The Outdoor Advertising Association of America, in response to growing protests by special-interest groups that want to ban the use of billboards for tobacco and alcohol advertisements, said the international children's symbol - a stylized figure of a child walking - would be used to mark billboards that will be off-limits to advertising any product or service illegal for sale to minors.


Review/Television;   Adventure With a Cause
LEAD: ''The Last Elephant'' is evidence for the proposition that good causes make bad art.
In pursuance of its honorable campaign to arouse indignation over the slaughter of Africa's elephants by ivory poachers, the National Audubon Society has come up with a show that poaches on countless B-movies but produces nothing as precious as ivory.


Cadmus Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadmus Communications (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
46,840,000
41,539,000
Net inc
1,285,000
508,000
Share earns
.21
.09
Yr sales
170,376,000
160,671,000
Net inc
4,362,000
3,373,000
Share earns
.72
.56


People
LEAD: *
Ralph Rydholm, a managing partner and chief creative officer at Tatham-Laird &amp; Kudner, Chicago, has been assigned the additional role of chairman of the agency.
Ian Miller, a senior vice president and client director at the Chicago office of Ogilvy &amp; Mather, has joined Tatham-Laird as president and managing partner.


Ms. Singer Wed to Frederick Weibgen
LEAD: Marcie Fried Singer and Frederick Hartmut Weibgen were married yesterday at their home in Teaneck, N.J., by Mayor Eleanor Kieliszek of Teaneck.
Mrs.
Weibgen is a daughter of Phyllis Dubetsky of Teaneck and Ralph Fried of Elizabeth, N.J.
Her husband is the son of Elisabeth Weibgen of Kronberg, West Germany, and the late Hans-Joachim Weibgen.


Serv-Tech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Serv-Tech Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,277,000
10,353,000
Net inc
987,000
b675,000
Share earns
.22
.21
Shares outst
4,444,982
3,409,996
6mo rev
21,062,000
16,568,000
Net inc
2,009,000
b1,575,000
Share earns
.45
.49
Shares outst
4,425,173
3,409,952


Debra Mizrahi Weds Glenn Spechler
LEAD: Debra Mizrahi, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Abraham Mizrahi of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Glenn Spechler, the son of Mrs.
Herbert Rosenfeld of Irvington, N.Y., and Col.
Jay Spechler, U.S.A.F., retired, of Tamarac, Fla.
Rabbi Jeffrey Segelman and Cantor Martin Goldstein officiated at the Westchester Jewish


Realty Refund Trust reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Realty Refund Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
999,045
1,010,333
Net inc
443,056
442,402
Share earns
.43
.43
6mo rev
1,977,405
1,997,672
Net inc
882,340
881,355
Share earns
.86
.86


Firstmiss Gold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstmiss Gold Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
18,392,000
11,036,000
Net inc
1,114,000
1,214,000
Share earns
.06
.07
Yr sales
62,042,000
22,117,000
Net inc
157,000
5,640,000
Share earns
.01
.31


Imagine an East Europe Minus Ethnic Tension;   Plight of Gypsies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Armed Serbs Guard Highways in Croatia During Referendum
LEAD: Bands of armed Serbs blocked roads today in districts of the Croatian republic inhabited largely by ethnic Serbs, trying to prevent Croatian authorities from interfering with a ''referendum'' on local autonomy.


More Viewers for TV News
LEAD: The networks' evening newscasts received higher ratings than the average prime-time entertainment show this month.
ABC's newscast ratings jumped the most.
Page D1.


Review/Pop;   Armatrading In the Mood For Rocking
LEAD: Not too many performing songwriters have Joan Armatrading's ability to put a personal signature on so many modes of pop.
Even though the West Indian-born English singer, who performed at the Beacon Theater on Tuesday evening, is something of a stylistic chameleon, moving easily from folk-pop to reggae to hard rock, she usually succeeds in bringing something fresh to each genre.


FOREIGNERS TRAPPED TILL U.S. LEAVES REGION, IRAQI WARNS; SAYS KUWAIT IS 'ARAB ISSUE'
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq said tonight that he would free foreigners being held hostage in Iraq and Kuwait in exchange for a complete military and political pullout by the United States from the Persian Gulf region.


CF&amp;I Steel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CF&amp;I Steel Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
73,477,000
75,371,000
Net loss
4,599,000
2,508,000
6mo sales
149,191,000
146,823,000
Net loss
9,072,000
4,705,000


Atlanta Church Begins Inquiry
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Atlanta said Saturday that Donald R. Keough, president of the Coca-Cola Company, would head an inquiry into whether Vicki Long had improperly received church money during her affair with the Archbishop Eugene A. Marino.


Mack Trucks' Projection
LEAD: Mack Trucks Inc. increased its projected loss for the year by 38 percent Friday, to $180 million.
Mack now expects sales to total $1.67 billion, compared with the $1.5 billion predicted earlier.
Mack originally predicted a loss of $130 million.
The truck maker lost $97 million for the first half of the year and went into default on its large bank loans.


Oil, Saddam Hussein and the Re-emergence of America as the Superpower
LEAD: The obituaries were a bit premature.


U.S. Evacuates 800 From Liberia
LEAD: United States Marines plucked about 800 people, most of them Lebanese, from Liberia's war-torn capital today and flew them by helicopter to neighboring Sierra Leone.


U.S. Consults U.N. on Use of Force As Navy Shadows 2 Iraqi Tankers
LEAD: With American warships shadowing two loaded Iraqi oil tankers in Middle East waters, the Bush Administration began a round of urgent diplomacy today in hopes of winning United Nations approval of its use of military power to enforce the international embargo on trade with Iraq, Administration officials said.


Nimitz Sailors Reprimanded
LEAD: Four sailors have lost their clearance to work on nuclear ships because they publicly questioned the safety of the nuclear reactor program on the aircraft carrier Nimitz instead of telling their superiors, Navy officials said.


Logic Devices reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Logic Devices (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,231,000
4,179,000
Net inc
360,000
842,000
Share earns
.08
.19
6mo sales
6,511,000
7,842,000
Net inc
793,000
b2,039,000
Share earns
.17
.45
b-After income of $665,000, or 15 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Analysis &amp; Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysis &amp; Technology (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
25,736,000
22,019,000
Net inc
949,000
873,000
Share earns
.44
.39


NDE Environmental Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NDE Environmental Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
727,490
457,673
Net loss
285,600
47,054
Shares outst
2,394,315
1,622,360
6mo rev
1,242,838
804,931
Net loss
298,956
215,387
Shares outst
2,354,015
1,809,150


Renewed Call For Chinese Stock Market
LEAD: After two difficult years of stop-and-go progress, a group of ambitious economic experts has taken another small step toward developing a centralized securities market in China.


Geotek Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geotek Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,744,000
3,563,000
Net loss
423,000
b594,000
Shares outst
3,191,000
1,625,000
6mo rev
11,890,000
6,973,000
Net loss
917,000
b642,000
Shares outst
3,136,000
1,602,000


Check Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Check Technology (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,384,000
4,719,000
Net inc
868,000
246,000
Share earns
.17
.05
Shares outst
5,172,000
4,779,400
9mo sales
14,653,000
13,513,000
Net inc
1,919,000
842,000
Share earns
.39
.18


Income Opportunity Realty reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Income Opportunity Realty (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,082,000
3,725,000
Net loss
669,000
1,816,000
Shares outst
3,723,275
3,699,578
6mo rev
4,051,000
7,421,000
Net loss
1,150,000
1,955,000
Shares outst
3,734,575
3,695,846


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
None
Thursday
Durable Goods Orders . . . July
Friday
G.N.P. . . . 2d Qtr
Corporate Profits . . . 2d Qtr


Jordan Asserts U.S. Stopped Refugee Rescue Ship
LEAD: Jordan charged today that an American warship in the Red Sea turned back a ship en route to the port of Aqaba to pick up refugees from Kuwait.


Covington Development Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Covington Development Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,279,000
21,398,000
Net inc
457,000
1,766,000
Share earns
.03
.12
6mo rev
35,073,000
48,193,000
Net inc
811,000
3,417,000
Share earns
.06
.24


A Long-Awaited Pavilion Makes Its Debut Tonight
LEAD: For many who attend the free performances by the New York Philharmonic and the Metropolitan Opera every summer in New York City's parks, the blaring sound and harsh timbres produced by the amplification system the two organizations share have been accepted as the cost of hearing music in the open air.


Advanced Computer Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Computer Tech
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,636,000
1,380,000
Net inc
35,000
b36,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
3,118,000
2,882,000
Net inc
48,000
b176,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


New York Pakistanis Seek Ballot Power
LEAD: Over the wail of a Pakistani folk song and the cries of children imploring their parents for sweets like gulab jamun or rus malai, all along the two-block stretch of Coney Island Avenue reserved for the first Pakistan Day Festival in Brooklyn yesterday, there was a constant exhortation to register to vote.


Monitek Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monitek Technologies
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,834,952
1,848,488
Net inc
4,411
1,952


In Bhutto's Shadow, Women Who Succeeded
LEAD: As rumors began to circulate this week that Pakistan's new caretaker Government was about to name its information and broadcasting minister, one of the first visitors to the likely candidate's house was the editor of the country's newest daily newspaper.


B. F. Skinner, the Champion Of Behaviorism, Is Dead at 86
LEAD: B. F. Skinner, who studied human and animal behavior in ingenious experiments and hoped that his findings would foster creativity and curtail repression, died Saturday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 86 years old and lived in Cambridge.


Fledgling U.S.-Iraqi Trade Group Says It Feels Betrayed and Embarrassed
LEAD: As dismay gives way to anger over Iraq, a fledgling American organization devoted to expanding commercial relations between Iraq and the United States is experiencing embarrassment and a sense of betrayal as well.


XL-Datacomp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* XL-Datacomp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
120,446,000
88,570,000
Net inc
2,029,000
4,320,000
Share earns
.17
.36
9mo rev
332,370,000
243,884,000
Net inc
14,289,000
11,973,000
Share earns
1.20
1.01
Latest 9-month results included a one-time gain of $4.8 million, or 40 cents a share, resulting from settlement of a re-negotiated contract with International Business Machines Corp.


Essef Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Essef Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
33,805,000
41,777,000
Net loss
1,787,000
b1,645,200
Share earns
-
.34
9mo sales
112,488,000
98,175,000
Net loss
2,120,000
b472,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


Proposal to Execute Drug Kingpins Appeals Strictly to Fear
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mallon Resources Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mallon Resources Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
427,351
748,802
Net loss
590,255
1,036,849
6mo rev
1,042,060
1,586,802
Net loss
856,765
1,734,408


Results Plus
LEAD:
Horse Racing
Triple Crown for Izvestia: Izvestia yesterday captured the Canadian Triple Crown with a 6 1/2-length victory in the Breeders' Stakes at Woodbine in Toronto.
This was the second Canadian Triple Crown in a row for Kinghaven Farms, which swept the three races - the Queen's Plate, the Prince of Wales Stakes and the Breeders' Stakes - with With Approval last year.


Business and the Law;   A Favored Shield In S.&amp; L. Cases
LEAD: THE business judgment rule, the well-worn legal shield that protects those executives who are foolhardy along with those with foresight, is expected to play a large role in many negligence cases brought by the Government against savings and loan officials.


Reviews/Music;   Yevgeny Nesterenko With Songs of Home
LEAD: Every so often an occasion of sheer delight comes along to reward a weary critic in spite of his sins.
The recital this evening by the veteran bass Yevgeny Nesterenko in the Nicholas Music Center here offered that promise, but no guarantees.
The 52-year-old Russian had not appeared in the United States much of late, and recent reports of his vocal state were mostly discouraging.


Applied Bioscience InternaFtional Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Bioscience InternaFtional Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,004,000
13,782,000
Net inc
1,465,000
1,201,000
Share earns
.42
.36
6mo rev
31,604,000
26,654,000
Net inc
2,868,000
2,313,000
Share earns
.83
.70


Eateries Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eateries Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,904,700
2,413,500
Net inc
19,000
b61,900
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
5,459,100
4,695,400
Net loss
18,300
108,100
b-Net loss


Reviews/Music;   A Mass and a Requiem
LEAD: By JAMES R. OESTREICH


Town Astir As Critics Link Cancer To Electricity
LEAD: This town on Long Island Sound, which has one of the largest collections of historic homes in New England, was founded in 1639 by what a historian has called ''an oppressed but optimistic band of English puritans.'' Today a small band of residents is again feeling oppressed.


Midwest Quake Is Predicted; Talk Is Real
LEAD: Life on the fault line is always interesting, as people in this trembly old Mississippi River town often say, but a prediction by a man named Iben Browning is making life hereabouts downright exciting.


Bob Knight Recalls Len Bias
LEAD: THE conversation on a plane flight recently between two strangers seated together, one a sportswriter with some gray in the sideburns of his unruly hair and the other a sophomore in college, got around to drugs on campus. ''It's still a major problem,'' said the young man. ''You wonder,'' said the sportswriter, ''whether the death of Len Bias made any impact at all.


Net Down 12% At Ciba-Geigy
LEAD: Ciba-Geigy A. G., Switzerland's largest chemicals and pharmaceutical company, reported Friday that its profit dropped 12 percent in the first half of the year because of economic conditions.
Earnings fell to 1.22 billion


Treasury to Sell Bills and One-Year Notes
LEAD: Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and an auction Thursday of one-year Treasury notes.


Health Insurance of Vermont reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Insurance of Vermont
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
143,432
136,136
Share earns
.26
.24
6mo net inc
241,770
258,202
Share earns
.44
.46
Shares outst
545,887
555,868


Social Democrats Quit East German Coalition
LEAD: East and West Germany stumbled again today over a partisan political obstacle on the path to unification when the East German Social Democratic Party quit the governing coalition in East Berlin, apparently denying the coalition, which is led by Christian Democrats, a ruling majority.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television;   ABC Thrives on Its Edge in News
LEAD: An extraordinary thing happened on television this month: the networks' evening newscasts received higher ratings than the average prime-time entertainment show.


Xtra Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xtra Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
54,063,000
51,587,000
Net inc
b1,144,000
c1,031,000
9mo rev
164,969,000
158,553,000
Net loss
b6,189,000
cd11,445,000
Share earns
-
1.24
b-Included a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $849,000 for both periods, and the 9 months also included a loss from discontinued operations of $3,500,000.


Jessica Decker Is Married
LEAD: Jessica Sue Decker and David Joshua Kramer were married yesterday at Stouffer's Hotel in White Plains by Rabbi Bernard M. Zlotowitz.
The couple's parents are Dr.
Jack Decker of Tarrytown, N.Y., and Dr.
Ona Robinson of White Plains and Nicole Martin of Erie, Pa., and the late Morton Kramer.


Review/Photography;   Warsaw Ghetto in a German Soldier's Lens
LEAD: Forty-nine years ago, a German soldier stationed in Poland decided to spend his birthday taking pictures in Warsaw.
The soldier, Heinz Jost, who had been a small-town innkeeper, had seen bodies piled alongside the wall that enclosed the city's ghetto, the now-infamous 2.4-square-mile area in which the Nazi occupation forces had confined 500,000 Polish


Study in Dallas Finds Race Affects Sentences
LEAD: Killers and rapists whose victims were white got more severe punishment than those whose victims were black or Hispanic, according to a newspaper survey of sentencing in Dallas County in 1988.


Question Box
LEAD:
DiMaggio vs. Williams


Asbestos Plan Is Limited
LEAD: A Federal appeals court on Thursday directed a Federal judge in Cleveland to limit his effort to consolidate thousands of asbestos cases from elsewhere in the nation.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I just don't like taking questions on serious matters on my vacation.
So I hope you'll understand if I, when I'm recreating, will recreate.
And then when we're working, which I'm trying to do up here also, I'll work hard.''
- President Bush, on the 18th hole. [A8:2.]


Biomira Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biomira Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
989,980
775,068
Net loss
1,003,209
643,389
6mo rev
2,197,975
1,351,333
Net loss
1,963,370
1,536,400
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Chris Silva, Swimmer, 29
LEAD: Chris Silva, a swimmer and a leading force in attracting blacks to American competitive swimming, was killed Sunday when the car he was driving crashed into a tree.
He was 29 years old.


Parochial Politics on Oil
LEAD: America's unhealthy dependence on imported foreign oil stems mainly from President Reagan's belief that the best energy policy was no policy.
But local politicians have made their own egregious contributions to the debacle without even the fig leaf of ideology.
Just consider the performances of Gov.


Confrontation in the Gulf: Choices Troubling Bush;   It's Force, How Much and What Kind? And When Will Support Start to Wane?
LEAD: The clock is running for President Bush, with the moment drawing ever closer for several major policy decisions in the crisis in the Middle East.


BKLA Bancorp In Shift at Top
LEAD: The BKLA Bancorp, parent company of the Bank of Los Angeles, said today that its president and chief executive, Gerald S. Weisstein, had resigned and would be succeeded by Mark E. Buchman, a former president of the Government National Mortgage Association.


Driver Convicted of Murder
LEAD: A man who drove through a red light and struck another vehicle was convicted of murder today in the death of an 11-year-old girl killed in the crash.
A jury convicted Stephen Padula, 21, of Oneonta, of second-degree murder and leaving an accident scene.
The police said Mr.
Padula's car was traveling faster than 70 miles an hour when it struck a car in which Eleanor Hosley was riding on July 11, 1989, in Oneonta, about 50 miles east of Albany.


Landmark Challenge: West Side Story
LEAD: New York City's Landmarks Preservation Commission surely means to do good on Manhattan's West Side - but so far its good intentions risk paralyzing the welcome development in the large area bounded by Central Park West and Amsterdam Avenue and 62d and 96th Streets.


Market Place;   Prospects for Quick Revival At Cetus Seem to Be Slight
LEAD: The Cetus Corporation, once a leader in biotechnology, is down for the count.
Late last month, an advisory panel to the Food and Drug Administration said data were lacking that would justify approving the company's flagship drug for marketing.
Last week, the company's chief executive, Robert A. Fildes, resigned under pressure and the company announced plans to reduce its work force of 950 by 100.


Trimedyne reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trimedyne (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,743,000
7,128,000
Net loss
3,770,000
546,000
9mo rev
10,199,000
26,644,000
Net loss
6,218,000
b929,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-Net income


3-Year-Old Title: Best Race Around
LEAD: The best horse race this year began a few months ago and will not end until nearly Halloween.
That race is the one for the 3-year-old championship, and it is getting better all the time.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Love Nests
Animals and birds once thought to mate for life are engaging in all sorts of what scientists call extra-pair copulation.
Science Times, page C1.
Exit Steinbrenner
George Steinbrenner, after running the Yankees for 17 1/2 years, said he has signed a letter resigning as the managing partner.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about President Bush's vacation and the Persian Gulf crisis misidentified the Governor of Maine.
He is John R. McKernan Jr.


Cencor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cencor Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,675,000
10,578,000
Net inc
451,000
277,000
Share earns
.08
.05
6mo rev
25,831,000
20,581,000
Net inc
805,000
482,000
Share earns
.14
.08


Payola Trial Is Opening Today For Successful Record Promoter
LEAD: In a case that has already generated enormous alarm in the $9-billion-a-year record-and-music industry and forced changes in its business methods, one of the most powerful and successful record promoters of the 1980's is going on trial here Tuesday in Federal court, charged with racketeering and providing payola.


Eli Lilly's Spending Plans
LEAD: Eli Lilly &amp; Company said yesterday that it would spend $540 million over the next five years to build drug laboratories and plants near the company headquarters in Indianapolis.


Review/Dance;   A Jazzy Revival Of Works By Tharp
LEAD: It is hard to think of a better group than the Hubbard Street Dance Company for Twyla Tharp to have approached about reviving some of her older dances.
A jazz-dance company with a strong ballet base, Hubbard Street has a clarity, sophistication and drive - along with strong dance technique - that is ideal for Miss


Brazilian Capital Blacked Out
LEAD: Most of the capital, Brasilia, was without power today, and the Government said it suspected sabotage by striking electricity workers.
Officials said four of the five transmission lines serving the area of 1.8 million people were out of action, trapping people in elevators and disrupting businesses.


Beef on the Hoof in New York State? Let the World Know, Ranchers Say
LEAD: One hundred cattle ranchers gathered this weekend on one of the largest spreads in New York State here in the Hudson Valley to talk about improving their cows and profits.


Interco Announces a Plan To Revise Its $1.9 Billion Debt
LEAD: Interco Inc., a footwear and furniture maker, will ask its bondholders to exchange their bonds for 95 percent of the company's common stock and other considerations under a complicated plan announced today.


Merrill Officer Stepping Down
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said yesterday that William W. Moore, the senior vice president in charge of its municipal markets group, would step down from his post at the start of next year.


Top Taiwan Military Officers Among 18 Killed in Air Crash
LEAD: An aircraft carrying three Taiwan Air Force major generals and eight colonels crashed in central Taiwan today, killing all 18 people on board, military officials said.


Verdix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Verdix Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,020,747
2,432,280
Net inc
492,311
315,593
Share earns
.04
.03
Shares outst
12,164,770
12,179,039


ATI Pharmaceuticals Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ATI Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,996,613
3,725,450
Net inc
104,083
276,305
Share earns
.01
.03
9mo sales
9,166,579
9,552,199
Net loss
253,783
b1,043,382
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


Goldcorp Investments reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldcorp Investments
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,543,843
1,603,855
Net inc
869,831
b893,261
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
2,754,878
2,740,088
Net inc
1,470,175
b552,246
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Phonetel Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phonetel Technologies
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,284,648
693,354
Net loss
207,598
379,226
Shares outst
4,083,459
2,790,002
6mo rev
2,361,284
1,371,915
Net loss
423,426
578,628
Shares outst
4,037,426
2,790,002


Northgate Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northgate Exploration (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,523,000
4,982,000
Net loss
2,763,000
b880,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
15,995,000
8,977,000
Net inc
547,000
7,841,000
Share earns
.02
.35
b-Net income


Arden International Kitchens Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arden International Kitchens Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,677,705
3,094,018
Net inc
97,980
124,409
Share earns
.03
.04
6mo sales
6,933,048
5,887,351
Net inc
183,030
174,567
Share earns
.06
.06


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
American Express Information Services Corp., New York, a subsidiary of American Express Co., named Gary P. Tobin vice president of communications and public affairs.


New Brunswick Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Brunswick Scientific
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,695,000
8,136,000
Net loss
1,124,000
121,000
6mo sales
15,389,000
16,634,000
Net loss
1,015,000
65,000
Sales represented net sales.


Fisher Business Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fisher Business Systems
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,819,620
1,118,314
Net inc
63,221
b273,982
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
5,282,794
2,133,884
Net inc
154,145
b556,846
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


Bush Signs Curb on Log Exports
LEAD: President Bush today signed into law Federal restrictions on log exports in an effort to offset lost timber jobs and reduced harvests that are expected to result from rules protecting the rare northern spotted owl in the Pacific Northwest.


Cominco Resources InternaFtional Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cominco Resources InternaFtional Ltd.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,440,000
2,863,000
Net loss
8,428,000
3,416,000
6mo sales
11,038,000
5,096,000
Net loss
15,560,000
5,722,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Israeli Court Delays a Plan For V.O.A. Station in Desert
LEAD: The Supreme Court of Israel issued a temporary injunction today against construction of a Voice of America relay station in a southern desert.


Environmental Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Diagnostics
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
658,158
866,247
Net loss
276,312
596,191
6mo rev
1,348,679
1,654,404
Net loss
536,068
1,368,706


Canadian Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Energy Services
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,184,943
29,697,317
Net inc
1,145,629
2,483,634
Share earns
.52
1.27
6mo rev
21,728,470
34,465,013
Net inc
1,323,941
2,670,971
Share earns
.60
1.41
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Astronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astronics Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,145,000
5,052,000
Net inc
52,000
b719,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
10,926,000
10,733,000
Net inc
53,000
b1,136,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, a picture caption yesterday about organizers of the Pakistan Day Festival in Brooklyn appeared twice in some copies.
The lower caption on the page, about a controversy in Guilford, Conn., should have read: ''Joyce Nelson believes her kidney condition was caused by electromagnetic fields radiated from an electric company substation near her home.


Ecologists Turn to Hardy's World View
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cyberoptics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyberoptics Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,085,000
954,000
Net inc
15,000
105,000
Share earns
.01
.04
6mo rev
2,185,000
1,901,000
Net inc
151,000
225,000
Share earns
.06
.09


ATC Environmental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ATC Environmental Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,574,007
2,283,527
Net inc
113,154
67,966
Share earns
.02
.01


Circuit Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circuit Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,267,000
6,557,000
Net inc
362,000
380,000
Share earns
.07
.07
Yr sales
37,181,000
22,134,000
Net inc
1,421,000
1,282,000
Share earns
.28
.24


Panama Drug Smugglers Prosper As Dictator's Exit Opens the Door
LEAD: When invading American troops deposed Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega last December, many Panamanians and Americans hoped for a quick end to the cocaine smuggling that his Government reportedly tolerated and even promoted.


Shasper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shasper Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,121,000
9,922,000
Net loss
331,000
b112,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
24,857,000
26,415,000
Net inc
128,000
234,000
Share earns
.03
.05
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Try International Law in Dealing With Iraq;   Israel's Role
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cam Data Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cam Data Systems Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,488,000
1,665,000
Net inc
56,000
142,000
Share earns
.05
.12
9mo rev
3,730,000
3,889,000
Net loss
580,000
124,000


By Design;   Where Is Sir Walter Raleigh?
LEAD: From Southampton to Saratoga Springs, summertime partygoers dressed for outdoor affairs have encountered an unexpected problem: a sea of mud under the tents.
With all the wet weather, the grass at outdoor parties, especially near the bar and the buffet, can turn into ooze, transforming all those well-dressed swells into literal muckymucks.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   For Kin of Trapped Americans, the One Word They Dreaded
LEAD: Even for families who had been tying yellow ribbons and who thought they were prepared for the worst, hearing President Bush say that their loved ones in Iraq and Kuwait ''are in fact hostages'' was a shock.


Wholesale Club reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wholesale Club (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Sales
177,281,000
134,580,000
Net inc
558,000
1,262,000
Share earns
.07
.15
Shares outst
8,160,000
5,517,000
6mo sales
329,570,000
241,959,000
Net inc
1,345,000
1,042,000
Share earns
.17
.03
Shares outst
8,118,000
5,115,000


Men and Women in Office: on Parity and Equality
LEAD: When Dianne Feinstein made a campaign pledge to appoint women to half the posts in her administration, she set off a ruckus in the California governor's race that may end up reverberating in statehouses across the nation.


Penguin Units Get New Chiefs
LEAD: Penguin Books USA announced yesterday that it had appointed Michael Jacobs president of its Viking Penguin division.
Mr. Jacobs succeeds Morton


Auberges Des Gouverneurs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Auberges Des Gouverneurs
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,983,894
10,129,201
Net inc
514,793
1,159,605
Share earns
.06
.14
6mo rev
20,814,857
18,320,149
Net loss
849,029
b1,036,374
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income


Calanetics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calanetics
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,446,000
764,000
Net inc
151,000
18,000
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
2,856,924
2,394,466
Yr sales
11,783,000
3,566,000
Net inc
521,000
187,000
Share earns
.19
.08


Warriors Sign Two
LEAD: The Golden State Warriors announced yesterday that Tom Tolbert, a restricted free agent, and Kevin Pritchard, a second-round draft pick, have signed contracts.
Tolbert, a 6-8 forward, agreed to a four-year contract, while Pritchard, a 6-3 guard, reached a three-year agreement with the team.
No other terms were released.


Victoria Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Victoria Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,153,000
3,870,000
Net inc
22,000
b23,000
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo rev
10,063,000
7,121,000
Net inc
91,000
b149,000
Share earns
.03
.05
b-Included utilization of tax loss carryforwards of $8,000 and $51,000, or 2 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


American Educational ProdFucts reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Educational ProdFucts
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,237,750
1,017,244
Net inc
138,085
88,909
Share earns
.07
.05
6mo sales
2,029,946
1,668,685
Net inc
184,657
110,282
Share earns
.09
.06


K Mart Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* K Mart Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 1
1990
1989
Sales
7,785,000,000
7,006,100,000
Net inc
148,000,000
145,000,000
Share earns
.74
.72
6mo sales
14,829,200,000
13,074,300,000
Net inc
248,100,000
239,100,000
Share earns
1.24
1.19
Shares outst
200,200,000
200,700,000


CSA Management Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSA Management Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,025,391
782,539
Net inc
189,250
321,796
Share earns
.06
.10
The company said net income was lower due to increased legal expenses and a loss by its unit.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary of Pearl Bailey in some editions on Saturday and Sunday misidentified her Broadway co-star in ''Hello, Dolly!'' He was Billy Daniels, not Cab Calloway.


Buenos Aires Journal;   Where Horatio Alger Heroes Want to Pack It Up
LEAD: For Yolanda and Alfredo Di Sanso, their 10 years as business owners have been a losing struggle against political instability, runaway inflation, recession and government economic policies that were protectionist one day and free-trade the next.


Slater Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Slater Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
97,221,000
105,283,000
Net inc
559,000
2,814,000
Share earns
.06
.34
6mo sales
194,842,000
206,839,000
Net inc
b942,000
c8,091,000
Share earns
.10
.98
b-Included a one-time after-tax charge of $840,000 on the downsizing of the Toronto office and other divisional restructuring.


Cambridge Shopping reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cambridge Shopping
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
66,814,000
62,147,000
Net inc
6,084,000
5,342,000
Share earns
.24
.21
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Woody Hochswender
LEAD:
Avant-Garde Lags Behind


Cel Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cel Communications Inc.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,610,000
5,391,000
Net loss
1,407,000
2,832,000
The company said these results do not include the effects of a subsequent recapitalization which was consummated on May 11, 1990.


American Vision Centers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Vision Centers
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,151,000
9,130,000
Net loss
1,156,000
140,000
6mo sales
18,688,000
17,404,000
Net loss
1,849,000
917,000
Shares outst
8,332,000
6,832,000


International 800 Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International 800 Telecom
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,248,678
1,372,126
Net inc
218,007
b211,330
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
10,467,950
20,004,800
b-Net loss


Visual Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Visual Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,595,175
7,112,861
Net loss
57,771
75,509


Flight of Columbia Is Set for Sept. 1
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today that it would try to launch the newly repaired Columbia on Sept. 1, more than three months after a hydrogen leak grounded the shuttle.


Jays Sign Young Star
LEAD: Chris Weinke of St.
Paul, considered one of the nation's best high school football and baseball players, signed with the Toronto Blue Jays yesterday, 11 days after beginning football practice at Florida State.


Micro General Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micro General Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,197,537
1,666,118
Net loss
189,543
b112,833
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
2,579,028
3,416,337
Net loss
137,560
b318,899
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Design Sought for New Vietnam Monument
LEAD: A competition to design a monument honoring women who served in Vietnam was announced today by officials of the Vietnam Women's Memorial Project.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Few From Left or Right Protest Bush's Big Stick
LEAD: So far, the critics of American military involvement in Saudi Arabia have been few and relatively soft-spoken, pending further developments in the confrontation with Iraq, notably its duration.


Marketing Systems-Amer reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marketing Systems-Amer
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
302,732
615,756
Net loss
238,527
141,494
6mo rev
1,366,835
1,532,247
Net loss
119,353
209,306


Air Wis Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Wis Services (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
53,311,000
45,184,000
Net inc
699,000
1,638,000
Share earns
.08
.18
6mo rev
96,435,000
85,288,000
Net inc
b2,069,000
2,061,000
Share earns
.23
.23
b-Included a gain on retirement of debentures of $293,000, or 3 cents a share.


No Headline
LEAD: When the sun melts into the canyon or a gentle breeze whispers past the ponderosa pine, this national park seems to serve as a tranquil retreat from a noisy world.
That is, until Paul Crawford, a park ranger, pulls on his bulletproof vest.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Sails and Wind Speed


Century Communications reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Communications (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
62,057,000
50,789,000
Net loss
12,679,000
17,289,000
Yr rev
231,242,000
191,171,000
Net loss
63,030,000
35,556,000


U.S. Sues 7 Toy Distributors
LEAD: Seven major toy distributors were sued today by the Justice Department and the Consumer Product Safety Commission for selling imported toys that the Government contended violated safety standards.


Allied Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Research Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
12,469,000
15,132,000
Net loss
474,000
1,275,000
6mo sales
20,862,000
24,199,000
Net loss
2,605,000
2,576,000


The Emerging Unipolar World
LEAD: It took the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait to reveal what should have been obvious all along to foreign policy experts: The bipolar, cold war world has given way not to ''multipolarity'' but to ''unipolarity,'' with the U.S. as the only pole left.


11 Killed Sleeping in South African Hostel
LEAD: Eleven people were killed as they slept in a workers' hostel in the latest eruption of fighting between black factions in South Africa's townships, the police said today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE OIL JOLT
After rising for seven days, the price of oil fluctuated before closing slightly lower in the first trading session after the announcement by the Saudi oil minister that his country would pump an extra two million barrels a day.
But gasoline prices kept rising sharply, and the market remained nervous.


Praise From Grambling
LEAD: On the day that George Steinbrenner was to step down as the managing partner of the Yankees, at least one man, the Grambling State University football coach, Eddie Robinson, chose to praise rather than bury him.
Quoting from Shakespeare's ''Julius Caesar'' to the effect that the evil a man does lives after him while the good is often buried with him, Robinson said he wanted to take the opportunity to credit Steinbrenner with saving the Whitney M.


BEI Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BEI Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
20,870,000
18,349,000
Net inc
1,327,000
1,795,000
Share earns
.20
.38
Shares outst
6,723,000
4,779,000
9mo sales
59,149,000
49,551,000
Net inc
4,875,000
4,565,000
Share earns
.71
.94
Shares outst
6,847,000
4,876,000


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Rubin Defeats Mandlikova
Fourteen-year-old Chanda Rubin, in her first match against a prominent player, yesterday defeated Hana Mandlikova, a former United States Open champion, 6-4, 6-4, in the first round of the Pathmark Tennis Classic in Mahway, N.J.
In the opening match, Peanut Louie Harper took the victory after her opponent, Sandra Cecchini of Italy, in obvious pain from an injury suffered during practice Saturday, decided to drop out of the match.


Beauty Labs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beauty Labs Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,455,988
3,080,945
Net inc
b47,862
c305,250
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
2,942,711
2,434,711
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $20,000, or 1 cent a share.


Millfeld Trading Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Millfeld Trading Co. (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
11,917,227
7,199,024
Net inc
860,643
410,724
Share earns
.22
.22
Shares outst
3,835,371
1,850,000
6mo sales
20,530,489
14,348,992
Net inc
1,101,175
510,018
Share earns
.32
.28
Shares outst
3,482,605
1,850,000


Orange Juice Prices Lowest In Nearly Eight Months
LEAD: Prices on orange juice futures settled at their lowest levels in nearly eight months yesterday after two Brazilian processors cut prices for the first time since a Christmas-time freeze shriveled the Florida orange crop.


Unix Pact Is Disclosed
LEAD: The Santa Cruz Operation, a software company based in Santa Cruz, Calif., which supplies a version of the Unix operating system for personal computers, will announce Tuesday that it had entered an agreement with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the Intel Corporation to produce a standard form of Unix for use on PC's equipped with Intel microprocessors.


Jury Misconduct Charged in Case of Agent's Death
LEAD: Lawyers for four men convicted of kidnapping and other crimes linked to the slaying of an American drug agent in Mexico challenged their convictions today, adding another strange chapter to a trial already complicated by unusual events.


Pepsico Official Gets A Top Toys 'R' Us Job
LEAD: Toys ''R'' Us, the world's largest toy retailer, named a Pepsico Inc. executive, Larry D. Bouts, yesterday to head its fast-growing international business.


Damson Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Damson Energy (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,828,000
15,891,000
Net loss
1,117,000
b189,000
6mo rev
36,967,000
34,014,000
Net loss
306,000
b579,000
b-Net income
The company said net income is distributed between class A and class B units, which created a loss per class A unit in the latest 6 months.


Vanderbilt Gold Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vanderbilt Gold Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
744,000
2,012,000
Net loss
729,000
119,000
6mo rev
2,483,000
3,218,000
Net loss
1,197,000
634,000
Listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange.


Radiant Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiant Technology (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,253,900
2,121,800
Net loss
b436,700
c40,800
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
5,994,100
6,617,500
Net loss
389,500
c180,300
Share earns
-
.07
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $17,700.


Western Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Microwave
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
1,461,000
2,277,000
Net loss
316,000
311,000
9mo sales
6,520,000
7,455,000
Net loss
627,000
524,000


Oil Prices Ease a Bit After Climb
LEAD: After rising for seven days, the price of oil closed slightly lower yesterday, the first trading session after the announcement by the Saudi oil minister that his country would pump an extra two million barrels a day, with or without OPEC approval.
But the price of gasoline continued to rise sharply, and both markets remained nervous.


Subway Improvements Will Be Delayed
LEAD: Repairs to subway stations and tunnels, train yards and other New York mass-transit centers will be delayed for at least a year, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority announced yesterday.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   BUSH VOWS NOT TO BE COWED BY THE TAKING OF 'HOSTAGES'; IRAQ SHIFTS THEM TO TARGETS
LEAD: As Iraq began moving Americans and other foreigners to military and industrial installations, President Bush declared for the first time today that those trapped in Iraq are indeed hostages.
He vowed that ''America will not be intimidated'' by Iraq's efforts to use them as shields against attack.


Net Up 2.1% At K Mart
LEAD: The K Mart Corporation said today that its second-quarter earnings rose 2.1 percent despite lower prices, mainly because of growth in apparel and seasonal hardware sales.


Valspar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valspar Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 27
1990
1989
Sales
160,993,000
146,072,000
Net inc
10,064,000
8,460,000
Share earns
.92
.76
Shares outst
10,935,787
11,154,482
9mo sales
423,455,000
381,009,000
Net inc
19,872,000
17,638,000
Share earns
1.82
1.57
Shares outst
10,930,716
11,203,614


Elexis Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elexis Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,553,585
2,349,481
Net inc
b33,200
cd22,586
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
4,032,561
3,634,680
Net loss
b21,286
d430,278
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $7,348 for the quarter and $7,803 for the 6 months.


Professional Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Professional Care Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,677,000
6,043,000
Net loss
5,273,000
b335,000
Share earns
-
.10
9mo rev
15,204,000
19,092,000
Net loss
4,761,000
b1,039,000
Share earns
-
.31
b-Net income and included income from discontinued operations of $48,000, or 1 cent a share.


Hal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hal Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
79,594,000
84,242,000
Net loss
26,878,000
4,289,000
6mo rev
160,673,000
167,966,000
Net loss
43,037,000
13,044,000
The company said the net losses for the 1990 second quarter and 6 months reflect gains on sale of property of $260,000 and $328,000 respectively; the net loss for the 1989 quarter and 6 months reflect gains on sale of property of $8.44 million and $8.37 million, respectively.


PHLCorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PHLCorp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b5,255,000
3,261,000
Per share
.39
.24
6mo net inc
b14,165,000
11,783,000
Per share
1.05
.87
b-Included a provision of $5,100,000 related to the restructuring of the trading stamp operations for both the quarter and 6 months.


Violence by Bands of Racist Skinheads Stalks East Germany
LEAD: Less than a year after the fall of the Communist Government of East Germany, which had preached ''anti-fascism'' as a central article of faith for four decades, right-wing radical organizations are gathering strength here.
And some of them openly echo Hitler's anti-Semitic slogans.


Gooden Is Puzzled by Mound Woes
LEAD: What's wrong with Dwight Gooden?


FFP Partners reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FFP Partners (AMEX)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
67,458,000
55,968,000
Net inc
b49,000
c697,000
Share earns
.01
.19
6mo rev
121,393,000
102,090,000
Net inc
b100,000
c296,000
Share earns
.03
.08
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $34,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $360,000, or 10 cents a share, for the 6 months.


New Hampshire Reactor Passes Final Tests
LEAD: The Seabrook nuclear power plant has ended five months of reactor tests and has begun regular operation to supply electricity to New England, a plant spokesman said today.


Ex-Wife and Army Deserter Have a Reunion in Nebraska
LEAD: An Army deserter who spent 30 years in East Germany and was arrested when he returned to the United States earlier this year was reunited Sunday with his former wife and their daughters.


CBL Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CBL Medical Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,557,596
1,422,880
Net inc
129,135
148,465
Share earns
.07
.12
Shares outst
2,061,277
1,200,000
6mo rev
3,050,051
2,570,878
Net inc
311,490
227,036
Share earns
.17
.19
Shares outst
2,022,406
1,200,000


Radiation Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiation Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
30,886,000
17,306,000
Net inc
2,118,000
577,000
Share earns
.39
.11
Yr sales
85,230,000
54,914,000
Net inc
5,644,000
3,317,000
Share earns
1.04
.63


Gottschalks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gottschalks Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Revenue
63,717,000
49,720,000
Net inc
79,000
b1,294,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
118,809,000
94,794,000
Net inc
335,000
b943,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


Aritech Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aritech Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
27,528,000
23,143,000
Net inc
23,000
557,000
Share earns
.01
.19
6mo sales
48,856,000
48,234,000
Net loss
973,000
b1,117,000
Share earns
-
.37
b-Net income
Year-ago results are restated to reflect the sale of a division in July 1989.


Board of Estimate Approves Rockaway Housing Complex
LEAD: A proposed housing complex with 7,500 condominium apartments on a two-mile stretch of beachfront in the Arverne section of Rockaway in Queens was approved last night by the New York City Board of Estimate.


Imprisoned Racist Admits to 2 Killings in '80
LEAD: Ten years ago today, two young black men were gunned down as they jogged near a city park.
An avowed racist, Joseph Paul Franklin, was convicted of the murders, and now, in a prison television interview, he had admitted his guilt.


Reviews/Music;   St. Luke's Group vs. the Elements
LEAD: For the sake of valuable musical instruments, if for no other reason, it is high time this meteorologically misbegotten season of outdoor music comes to a close.
By the end of the final concert of the Caramoor season in the Venetian Theater this evening, the instruments of the St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble must have been thoroughly waterlogged.


Designing One Tough Turnstile for New York
LEAD: Grown men are beating turnstiles with sledgehammers, jamming them with paper, splashing them with water and Coca-Cola and exposing them to a gigantic vibration machine and to temperatures from 30 degrees below zero to 150 above in a special rain- and snow-making chamber.


U.S.-Russian Shoemaking Venture Set
LEAD: In a major consumer goods venture with the Soviet Union, a Long Island company has a preliminary agreement to help Russians produce 50 million pairs of shoes over the next decade.


U.S. Promotes Gasohol Use
LEAD: The Energy Department has recommended stepped-up production of ethanol, a corn-based moonshine that is blended with gasoline to make cleaner-burning gasohol.


15 Die in Train Crash in Poland


Critic's Notebook;   How Network Reporters Cover The Gulf, or at Least Some of It
LEAD: Since the beginning of the confrontation between Iraq and the United States, network correspondents have been trying to break through interdictions on coverage by both sides.
All the big guns have been deployed: Dan Rather and Ted Koppel in Baghdad; Tom Brokaw and Sam Donaldson in Saudi Arabia; others in Cairo, Riyadh, Amman, Damascus, Dubai, Ankara, Aqaba, Jerusalem and other points east, moving as close as they can to the action, or at least the activity.


Vidmark Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vidmark Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,680,000
7,220,000
Net inc
393,000
833,000
Share earns
.10
.23
Yr rev
37,228,000
21,610,000
Net inc
4,227,000
2,651,000
Share earns
1.10
.70


NATO's Cousin Organization Will Meet on Crisis
LEAD: Amid criticism that they have not yet developed a coherent response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, key Western European governments are to meet here Tuesday under the auspices of a little-known defense organization that has long been overshadowed by NATO.


Some Link Rikers Melee To a Dismissal
LEAD: When the new Correction Commissioner last month restructured the office that disciplines New York correction officers and dismissed the official who headed it, the move, part of a general administrative shake-up, drew little attention.


Our Towns;   For Mentally Ill, An Alternative To Adult Homes
LEAD: President Bush's domestic experts love to say, ''You don't solve social problems by throwing money at them.'' But the social-service workers struggling to hold things together know the huge difference money can make.
Care for the mentally ill at adult homes versus group homes is a prime example.


Bovar Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bovar Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,168,000
8,753,000
Net loss
b2,273,000
c3,819,000
6mo rev
19,291,000
17,191,000
Net loss
b4,622,000
c7,432,000
b-Included losses from Western Star trucks and mainland oilfield supply of $2,077,000 for the quarter and $4,312,000 for the 6 months.


Taylor Termed 'Not Too Happy'
LEAD: The Giants have offered Lawrence Taylor a contract extension that would pay him $4.2 million over three years.
The perennial All-Pro outside linebacker would settle for $6 million over three years.
George Young, the Giants' general manager, indicates that Taylor is asking for more than $6 million.


Transtector Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transtector Systems
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,269,819
2,094,924
Net inc
15,427
b40,623
6mo sales
4,698,722
4,433,978
Net inc
124,063
75,172
Share earns
.04
.02
b-Net loss


DEALS
LEAD:
FOOTBALL ATLANTA (NFC) - Signed Houston Hoover, offensive lineman, to a series of three one-year contracts.


Comptek Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comptek Research Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
11,944,000
10,526,000
Net inc
338,000
308,000
Share earns
.16
.14


Harry C. Piper Jr., 72, Brokerage Chief, Dies
LEAD: Harry C. Piper Jr., a Minneapolis stockbroker who paid a $1 million ransom for the return of his kidnapped wife in 1972, died on Sunday at his home in Orono, Minn., at the age of 72.
He died of bone cancer, his family said.


Some Liberians Accuse the U.S. of Betrayal
LEAD: As the Liberian civil war nears the end of its eighth month, many Liberians in the United States feel betrayed by the Bush Administration because it has not responded to their pleas for help to end the fighting.


Steinbrenner Says He Has Signed Resignation
LEAD: George Steinbrenner, whose aggressive, bombastic style made him the best-known owner of a professional sports team the last two decades, said yesterday that he had signed his resignation as the managing partner of the Yankees, adhering to the first step of Commissioner Fay Vincent's disciplinary action against him.


Standex International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standex International (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
117,878,000
108,833,000
Net inc
6,594,000
2,736,000
Share earns
.66
.59
Shares outst
10,212,000
11,113,000
Yr sales
460,192,000
443,795,000
Net inc
22,723,000
22,284,000
Share earns
2.23
2.01
Shares outst
10,212,000
11,113,000


Cable Company In Refinancing
LEAD: The United Artists Entertainment Company said yesterday that it had reached agreements with its banks to refinance $2.8 billion in debt.


Going Toe-to-Toe Over Car Insurance Bills in New Jersey
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio won a test of wills with one of the nation's insurance giants last week, but the war over who will ultimately pay the bills for the state's $3 billion auto insurance fiasco is certain to be a long one.


ARCO Keeps Price Freeze
LEAD: The Atlantic Richfield Company said yesterday that it would maintain its freeze on gasoline prices, but would raise its prices for diesel and jet fuel.


Alliance Well Service reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alliance Well Service
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,713,000
772,000
Net inc
10,000
b93,000
6mo rev
3,341,000
1,585,000
Net loss
23,000
219,000


Steady Against Saddam
LEAD: Early in the Persian Gulf crisis, Secretary of State James Baker retorted to the suggestion that the invasion of Kuwait was an Arab issue, for the Arab states to settle. ''No,'' he said, ''it is a world issue.'' So it remains.


Dinkins Reinstates Funds to Bolster Tourism
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that he was reinstating city funds for the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau in an effort to halt the downturn in tourism.


New Victims of the Realty Slump: Insurers
LEAD: The insurance industry is starting to suffer from the slump in real estate that has already hurt many banks and savings and loan institutions.
The delinquency rate on mortgages for office buildings, hotels, shopping malls and other commercial properties held by the nation's insurance companies has increased sharply in recent months, leading to predictions by some in the industry that foreclosures on these types of loans could double over the next three years.


Mating for Life? It's Not for the Birds of the Bees
LEAD: AH, romance.
Can any sight be as sweet as a pair of mallard ducks gliding gracefully across a pond, male by female, seemingly inseparable?
Or better yet, two cygnet swans, which, as biologists have always told us, remain coupled for life, their necks and fates lovingly intertwined.


National Health Care Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Health Care Systems
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,200,000
2,383,000
Net inc
163,000
125,000
Share earns
.04
.03
6mo rev
6,327,000
4,290,000
Net inc
314,000
180,000
Share earns
.07
.04
Shares outst
4,367,053
4,500,125


Major Realty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Major Realty Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
564,000
3,207,000
Net loss
1,549,000
1,904,000
Shares outst
6,893,000
7,335,000
6mo rev
987,000
6,298,000
Net loss
2,845,000
b2,680,000
Share earns
-
.37
Shares outst
6,893,000
7,334,000


Advantage Life Products reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advantage Life Products
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,866,000
2,143,000
Net loss
b79,000
cd323,000
Share earns
-
.07
Yr rev
11,115,000
5,900,000
Net inc
b846,000
d685,000
Share earns
.18
.17
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $82,000 for the quarter and $156,000 for the year.


Steinbrenner Steadfast In U.S. Olympic Role
LEAD: Despite his departure from major league baseball after more than 17 1/2 years as principal owner of the Yankees, George Steinbrenner does not intend to resign as a vice president of the United States Olympic Committee, his spokesman said yesterday.
His intention could put the U.S.O.C. executive committee in the uncomfortable position of recommending that he resign, after a meeting tomorrow in Colorado


Interest Rates Set at Citicorp On a $1.4 Billion Offering
LEAD: In the largest corporate deal in the global arena since the outbreak of hostilities in the Persian Gulf more than two weeks ago, Citicorp announced interest rates yesterday on a two-part, $1.4 billion issue of asset-backed securities.


Notable Notebooks
LEAD: THE Tandy Corporation, whose Model 100 started the whole notebook computer category long before they were called notebook computers, is back with a new machine that weighs six pounds and includes both a hard disk and a floppy disk.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   200,000 Kuwaitis Take Refuge in Other Gulf States
LEAD: More than 100,000 Kuwaitis have taken refuge in Saudi Arabia and perhaps another 100,000 in other gulf nations, representing a third of the native population of the Iraqi-occupied nation, Kuwaiti and Saudi officials say.


Cigarettes Trigger Lung Cancer Gene, Researchers Find
LEAD: CHEMICALS in cigarette smoke will switch on a gene in lung cells that then helps make those compounds far more likely to cause cancer, researchers have reported.


K-III Holdings In Acquisition
LEAD: The publishing concern K-III Holdings said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Reader's Garden Inc., a privately held company that operates special-interest book clubs.
Terms were not disclosed.


U.S. Pact With Northrop
LEAD: A Federal judge today ordered the release of a secret agreement made in February between the Government and the Northrop Corporation.
The pact lists the criminal investigations the Government declined to pursue against the company in exchange for a $17 million payment to settle charges of false testing on the Air Force cruise missile.


N-W Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* N-W Group Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,658,000
2,991,000
Net inc
b148,000
c1,092,000
Share earns
.04
.26
Shares outst
3,778,000
4,209,000
6mo rev
14,551,000
10,385,000
Net inc
b1,132,000
c1,431,000
Share earns
.29
.34
Shares outst
3,851,000
4,209,000


Agencies Set Sights On Europe
LEAD: ROY BOSTOCK, the chairman and chief executive of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, is setting up a new office for himself in London.


Codenoll Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Codenoll Technology (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,402,053
2,330,726
Net loss
578,402
518,348
6mo sales
4,503,035
3,940,867
Net loss
1,156,866
1,291,953


Barden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barden Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1990
1989
Sales
26,246,422
23,510,176
Net inc
b464,462
693,520
Share earns
.24
.36
9mo sales
79,617,633
73,053,124
Net inc
b3,029,911
4,526,856
Share earns
1.57
2.36
b-Included extraordinary credits of $19,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $69,000, or 4 cents a share, for the 9 months.


U.S. Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Technologies
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,751,650
1,924,837
Net inc
25,569
272,427
Share earns
-
.03
6mo sales
3,438,027
3,073,753
Net inc
118,376
348,768
Share earns
.01
.04


CHRONICLE
LEAD: BARRY TUCKWELL, the French horn player, has written ''Duet for Harry and Barry,'' which he says is the only work for tuba and horn.
And he is to perform it tomorrow with HARRY SMITH on ''CBS This Morning.'' Mr.
Smith is a classically trained tuba player and the anchor of the program.
The two will rehearse together tomorrow morning at about the time most people are still snoring happily.


Chess
LEAD: Neither of the two youngest players hailed as having real hopes to reach the select circle of the top 11 in the Interzonal Tournament in Manila succeeded.
Joel Lautier of France, at 16 the youngest grandmaster currently, and Gata Kamsky of the United States via the Soviet Union, who at the same age lacks only the formality of that title, showed that despite their unarguable talent, they need more seasoning.


American Toxxic Control reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Toxxic Control (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
25,141,000
17,636,000
Net inc
383,000
b2,590,000
b-Net loss


International Consumer Brands Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Consumer Brands Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,881,360
2,876,650
Net loss
1,617,895
1,295,227
Shares outst
11,816,765
9,501,310
6mo sales
6,665,495
7,462,310
Net loss
2,913,309
1,744,130
Shares outst
11,814,123
8,065,332


American Science &amp; EngineerFing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Science &amp; EngineerFing Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 27
1990
1989
Revenue
3,798,000
4,092,000
Net loss
68,000
217,000


K-V Pharmaceutical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* K-V Pharmaceutical Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,921,263
9,005,237
Net loss
835,191
b570,292
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


CV REIT Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CV REIT Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,064,000
6,037,000
Net inc
1,779,000
2,424,000
Share earns
.25
.35
Shares outst
7,083,112
6,882,938
6mo rev
11,991,000
12,494,000
Net inc
3,681,000
5,234,000
Share earns
.53
.76


Corrections
LEAD: A report yesterday about the wedding of Diane Sabesin-Tepper and Roger Barrer referred incorrectly to the bride's mother and to the bridegroom's parents.
Mrs.
Barrer's mother, Rose Sabesin, lives in Chicago.
Mr.
Barrer's parents are deceased.


CEM Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CEM Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,075,000
4,304,000
Net inc
649,000
663,000
Share earns
.14
.14
Shares outst
4,748,000
4,669,000
Yr sales
18,638,000
15,761,000
Net inc
2,592,000
2,457,000
Share earns
.55
.53
Shares outst
4,747,000
4,662,000


Cognitronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cognitronics Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,474,000
4,141,000
Net inc
b453,000
c211,000
Share earns
.20
.09
6mo rev
8,847,000
8,502,000
Net inc
b700,000
c575,000
Share earns
.31
.25
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $161,000, or 7 cents a share, for the quarter and $250,000, or 11 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Treasuries Fall in Quiet Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped in very light trading yesterday, as dealers awaited further developments in the Middle East.


Raven Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raven Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
21,432,000
21,808,000
Net inc
1,331,000
1,230,000
Share earns
.42
.38
6mo sales
40,942,000
42,310,000
Net inc
2,335,000
2,136,000
Share earns
.74
.66


CPAC Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPAC Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,100,000
6,800,000
Net inc
380,910
366,500
Share earns
.17
.16


United Inns Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Inns Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
30,984,483
28,857,741
Net inc
b2,635,465
c1,167,708
Share earns
1.00
-
9mo rev
86,951,821
83,780,390
Net inc
b4,431,370
c2,426,736
Share earns
1.68
-
b-Included for the quarter an after- tax gain of $2.7 million from liquidation of company's 30-percent limited partnership interest in two operating hotels in


U.S. Export Rise Forecast
LEAD: Regardless of the impact of events in the Middle East on the cost of oil, Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher believes United States exports will continue to grow and keep the nation's economy out of recession this year.


Aztech International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aztech International Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
979,000
637,000
Net inc
9,000
b62,000
b-Net loss


U.S. Bioscience reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Bioscience (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,036,257
41,136
Net loss
833,053
1,509,494
Shares outst
16,863,199
10,288,489
6mo rev
1,292,564
82,442
Net loss
2,513,694
2,706,348
Shares outst
15,762,404
10,187,303


Try International Law in Dealing With Iraq;   Bush's Leadership
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Fashion;   To Sleep? Chances Are, to Dream.
LEAD: Take three avant-garde designers, ask them for their ideas on lingerie, and you're likely to get the unexpected.
Slips with hems that dip on one side.
Boxer shorts with sheer chiffon backs.
Nightgowns that lace up the back.
A satin housedress.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From President's Remarks to V.F.W. on the Persian Gulf Crisis
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's remarks today to the convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:


CNS Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CNS Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,711,736
1,871,781
Net inc
47,811
45,659
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
5,024,304
4,146,442
6mo sales
3,333,660
2,976,413
Net inc
79,938
b375,067
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
4,677,572
3,126,871


Talks Aimed at Ending Salvador's Civil War Fail
LEAD: Three days of talks between the Salvadoran Government and leftist guerrillas here have failed to produce a cease-fire in their civil war.


NORTHWEST PILOTS ARE FOUND GUILTY OF DRUNKEN FLYING
LEAD: In the first drunken-flying conviction of professional pilots, a Federal jury today found three former Northwest Airlines pilots guilty of flying a jetliner under the influence of alcohol.


Time Squeezes Iraq
LEAD: A frustrated and besieged Saddam Hussein now makes a liar of his Foreign Minister and affronts law and Islamic custom by interning ''foreign guests'' in Iraq and Kuwait.
In fact, as President Bush said yesterday, thousands of innocent citizens are now hostages.
Small wonder that some Americans respond viscerally, urging armed reprisals or even a declaration of war.


To the Noisy And Possible Bitter End
LEAD: A man from New York was talking to a man in the Middle West by telephone yesterday morning, and mentioned that a major news matter here was the status of George Steinbrenner, and whether a judge in Cleveland would issue a restraining order to allow the Yankees' managing partner to continue in that capacity.


Biomagnetic Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biomagnetic Technologies (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,714,000
1,279,000
Net loss
b2,954,000
1,485,000
9mo rev
4,995,000
6,926,000
Net loss
6,556,000
2,924,000
b-Included a one-time expense of $1,058,000 related to the resolution of a dispute with a university medical center.


New Direction in Physics: Back in Time
LEAD: THE possibility of traveling through time, of creating something out of nothing and even of spawning a new universe in a laboratory are notions ordinarily reserved to fiction rather than science.
But a rash of articles in some of the most prestigious scientific publications suggests that theoretical physicists have begun to take such outlandish ideas seriously.


2 Yankee Partners Are Rebuffed in Suit
LEAD: Two partners of the Yankees lost their attempt to have a Federal Court issue a temporary restraining order to stop George Steinbrenner from resigning by midnight tonight as he agreed to do in a negotiated settlement with Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, on July 30.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: In his new book on the Rolling Stones, A. E. HOTCHNER says that witnesses told him that BRIAN JONES was drowned by construction workers who were renovating his house in Hartfield, England.
Mr.
Jones, the guitarist and singer who formed the rock group, was pronounced dead after being taken unconscious from his swimming pool on July 2, 1969, at Cotchford Farm, once the home of the author A.


Barringer Labs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barringer Labs (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,313,000
1,896,000
Net inc
52,000
b75,000
Share earns
.02
.06
Shares outst
2,183,333
1,259,034
6mo sales
3,736,000
3,028,000
Net loss
178,000
b258,000
Shares outst
2,156,169
1,259,034


Indictment Names Man in Killing Tied to 9 Deaths in Massachusetts
LEAD: Kenneth C. Ponte, who has frequently been named in news accounts as a suspect in a homicide case, was charged today with killing one of nine women believed to be victims of a serial killer.


Siberian Prisoners Hijack an Airliner to Pakistan
LEAD: Soviet convicts overpowered their guards on an airliner over Siberia on Sunday and diverted it to this city in western Pakistan today.
They surrendered to security forces a few hours after landing.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Travel Is Discouraged To Jordan and Yemen
LEAD: The State Department advised Americans today to defer nonessential travel to Jordan in view of the Iraqi military invasion of Kuwait and ''continuing unstable conditions in the region.''


Nearly All Customers Get Power Restored
LEAD: All but a single business among the 1,600 electric customers that lost power a week ago when a fire destroyed an electrical substation were back on by yesterday, Consolidated Edison said.


Topics of The Times;   Justice at the F.B.I.
LEAD: By settling a racial discrimination lawsuit filed seven years ago by a black agent against the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Director William Sessions reaffirms his commitment to transform the bureau's culture of minority exclusion.


Success of a Horse Vaccine in China Raises Hope in Fight Against AIDS
LEAD: TWENTY-FIVE years ago, a viral epidemic was ravaging China's horse population.
Many horses had fevers and lacked energy, and a number died.
Other infected horses showed no symptoms, although they could transmit the disease by blood-to-blood contact and through sex.


B.P. to Auction Dutch Gas Unit
LEAD: British Petroleum P.L.C. said it would auction off its gas exploration and production holding company in the Netherlands.


Richard Strout, 'TRB' Columnist And Capital Reporter, Dies at 92
LEAD: Richard L. Strout, the acerbic nonconformist who wrote the ''TRB From Washington'' political column in The New Republic for 40 years and was Washington correspondent for The Christian Science Monitor for more than 60 years, died Sunday at the Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington.
He was 92 years old and lived in


Mesa Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mesa Medical Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
832,000
412,000
Net inc
145,000
16,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
4,282,000
3,570,000


Medicore Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medicore Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,383,697
6,004,352
Net loss
b78,914
c213,829
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
9,838,678
11,967,603
Net loss
b343,190
c464,747
Share earns
-
.11
b-Included extraordinary credits of $40,047, or 1 cent a share, and $58,021, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Minven Gold reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minven Gold (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,995,434
11,198,448
Net loss
1,476,790
291,285
6mo rev
18,628,656
19,867,903
Net loss
4,102,664
917,621
Results are in Canandian funds.


Biomechanics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biomechanics Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
346,164
521,038
Net loss
227,091
b40,910
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
5,560,085
2,576,904
6mo rev
834,276
930,912
Net loss
185,942
b52,883
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
5,072,531
2,576,904


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly
PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR INTERNATIONAL SEABED AUTHORITY AND FOR INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL FOR LAW OF THE SEA - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON PALESTINIAN RIGHTS - 3 P.M.


Breast Cancer Drug May Benefit the Heart
LEAD: TAMOXIFEN, a hormonal drug taken by thousands of women to help prevent recurrence of breast cancer, may also protect them against heart disease, according to a study reported in the current issue of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.
The two-year study, conducted among 140 women past menopause, showed that the medication helped reduce their blood levels of cholesterol and especially of harmful LDL cholesterol.


Alogoma Central Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alogoma Central Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
53,211,000
44,072,000
Net inc
2,258,000
2,473,000
Share earns
.58
.64
6mo rev
66,991,000
60,145,000
Net loss
136,000
b3,455,000
Share earns
-
.89
b-Net income


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.12
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.55
7.49
7.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.45
7.44
7.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.68
8.65
8.23
30-YR.


Amserv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amserv Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,149,213
3,140,415
Net inc
398,664
331,774
Share earns
.13
.11
Yr sales
14,249,152
10,168,461
Net inc
1,494,647
1,153,251
Share earns
.48
.40


Imreg reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imreg (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
286,145
136,565
6mo net loss
377,150
907,676


Confrontation in the Gulf;   TWO IRAQI TANKERS IGNORE PURSUERS
LEAD: American warships continued to shadow two loaded Iraqi oil tankers in waters near the Persian Gulf today as the ships, heading toward the Indian Ocean, showed no signs of reversing course, Pentagon officials said.


Liposome Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liposome Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
837,000
529,000
Net loss
1,648,000
2,193,000
Shares outst
9,346,000
6,950,000
6mo rev
1,396,000
1,392,000
Net loss
3,209,000
4,044,000
Shares outst
9,342,000
6,930,000


Kenneth Germeshausen, 83, Dies; Was Nuclear and Radar Pioneer
LEAD: Kenneth J. Germeshausen, a founder of the technology company E. G. &amp; G. Inc., whose work was considered fundamental in the development of radar and nuclear weapons, died Thursday at his home in Weston, Mass.
He was 83 years old.


Atalanta-Sosnoff reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atalanta-Sosnoff (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,429,000
2,717,000
Net inc
961,000
c1,446,000
Share earns
.11
.17
6mo rev
5,047,000
5,829,000
Net inc
b1,783,000
c2,996,000
Share earns
.20
.35
b-Included an extraordinary gain from repurchase of debentures of $549,000, or 6 cents a share.


Saudi Stake of U.S. Companies
LEAD: The Saudi Arabian port of Yanbu was the site where the boycott and blockade of Iraq were first tested.
Tankers were turned away there without being able to take on oil from Iraq that flows there through a pipeline.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We've been reluctant to use the term 'hostage.' But when Saddam Hussein specifically offers to trade the freedom of those citizens of many nations he holds against their will in return for concessions, there can be little doubt that whatever these innocent people are called, they are in fact hostages.


National Realty L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Realty L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
24,181,000
23,780,000
Net inc
9,743,000
b5,314,000
Share earns
1.11
-
6mo rev
48,951,000
47,824,000
Net inc
10,284,000
b4,242,000
Share earns
1.17
-
b-Net loss


Stratford American reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stratford American (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,018,000
983,000
Net loss
1,109,000
1,102,000
6mo rev
1,657,000
1,590,000
Net loss
1,992,000
2,321,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Seeking a third term, Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO began his television campaign last week - but you'd never know it.
His 30-second political commercial looks like a public service spot: in it, he makes a pitch for the proposed $1.97 billion environmental bond issue.


Specialty Retail Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Specialty Retail Services Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,477,000
7,841,000
Net inc
19,000
c119,000
Shares outst
5,512,500
3,884,591
6mo sales
17,400,000
16,095,000
Net inc
b101,000
c18,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
5,512,500
3,888,888


Gunman in a Livery Cab Shoots An Undercover Officer in Harlem
LEAD: A plainclothes police officer was wounded yesterday afternoon in Harlem when a man in a livery cab he had just stopped pulled a gun and shot him, the police said.


Coradian Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coradian Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,399,000
7,925,000
Net loss
576,000
b35,000
6mo rev
12,729,000
14,370,000
Net loss
822,000
946,000
b-Net income


Hall Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hall Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,265,000
7,761,000
Net loss
2,955,000
b2,935,000
6mo rev
14,834,000
16,161,000
Net loss
3,462,000
1,793,000
Shares outst
3,462,000
1,793,000
b-Included an extraordinary charge from a reversal of net operating loss carryforward of $310,000.


Astral Bellevue Pathe reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astral Bellevue Pathe
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
72,838,000
66,097,000
Net inc
1,656,000
2,041,000
Share earns
.20
.27
Shares outst
8,456,000
7,453,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


North American Vaccine Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North American Vaccine Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,142,038
-
Net loss
561,195
-
Shares outst
9,343,542
-
6mo rev
1,472,136
-
Net loss
755,400
-
Shares outst
6,297,873
-
The company began operations in March.


Teen-Ager Charged In Slaying of Woman
LEAD: A 16-year-old Bronx youth who was out on bail on a murder charge turned himself in yesterday and was charged with killing a 20-year-old woman on Saturday, the police said.


Bridge
LEAD: Deals that permit a defender to be endplayed are common enough, but deals that allow an endplay against either defender are rare.
One such, shown in the diagram, occurred in the World Individual event in Atlantic City in early May.


On-the-Job Training for Traffic Agents


Confrontation in the Gulf;   At U.S. Request, Security Council Holds Preliminary Talks on Crisis
LEAD: The Security Council gathered informally Monday night for preliminary discussion of American proposals for enforcing the trade embargo against Iraq, diplomats said early today.
The talks adjourned without a formal meeting.


Recycling Lags As Focus Shifts To Businesses
LEAD: New York City's effort to expand its mandatory recycling program from residences to businesses has fallen months behind schedule, setting back its drive to recycle 25 percent of the city's garbage by the end of 1994.


Pinnacle Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pinnacle Environmental (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,689,635
1,799,579
Net inc
156,478
100,141
Share earns
.06
.05
Shares outst
1,980,670
1,423,088


Stephen Feldman, 43, Energy Policy Teacher
LEAD: Dr.
Stephen L. Feldman, a professor of energy management and policy at the University of Pennsylvania, died Saturday at the university's hospital.
He was 43 years old and lived in Philadelphia.


10 Die and 25 Are Hurt as Muslims Fight in Beirut
LEAD: Ten people were killed and 25 wounded today when rival Shiite Muslim factions battled with mortar, rocket-propelled grenades and heavy machine guns, the police reported.


Bodies of 4 Are Found In California Air Crash
LEAD: Searchers today found the bodies of two victims of a weekend collision between two light planes over Long Beach Harbor, officials said.


Is Thomas a Fast Study? Jets Wait and Wonder
LEAD: The Jets' absent No. 1 draft pick, Blair Thomas, says he can be ready to play pretty quickly once the Jets sign him.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Libya Denounces Iraq's Decision to Take Westerners as Hostages
LEAD: The Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, today condemned Iraq's decision to make hostages of Westerners in Iraq and Kuwait and said that he would dispatch Libyan troops to the Persian Gulf if the United Nations requested them as part of a blockade against Iraq.


Rent-A-Wreck of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rent-A-Wreck of America
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,184,272
1,077,353
Net inc
13,143
b106,152
b-Net loss
Revenue represents total revenue.
Share earnings are after preferred dividend requirements.


United Medicorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Medicorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
211,886
-
Net loss
1,779,601
-
6mo rev
299,208
-
Net loss
3,455,397
-
Year-ago figures are not available because the company went public in March 1989.


Wearing Their Hearts Under Their Sleeves
LEAD: A small cluster of men and women, many drinking from beer bottles in brown paper bags, watched as Thane Rivera settled uneasily in a chair.


James A. Starr, Hollywood Columnist, 86
LEAD: James A. Starr, who wrote one of the first Hollywood movie columns, died at his home here on Monday.
He was 86 years old.
His wife said he died in his sleep.
Mr.
Starr began his newspaper career in 1924, writing reviews, gossip and features for The Los Angeles Daily Record.
He later moved to The Los Angeles


Pirates Rout the Astros For 6th Victory in Row
LEAD: Neal Heaton pitched six shutout innings for his first victory since June 24 and Gary Redus hit a two-run homer tonight as Pittsburgh beat the Houston Astros, 7-1.
The victory was the Pirates' sixth in a row.


Books of The Times;   A Farmer's Fatal Obsession With Jews and Taxes
LEAD:
Bitter Harvest
Gordon Kahl and the Posse Comitatus: Murder in the Heartland.
By James Corcoran
Illustrated. 274 pages. Viking. $18.95.


Bull Run Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bull Run Gold Mines (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,364,001
2,815,944
Net loss
553,923
72,044
6mo rev
5,367,880
4,172,156
Net loss
935,705
110,483


Teeco Properties L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teeco Properties L.P.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
13,000
51,000
6mo net loss
14,000
120,000


Coopers Names New Deputy
LEAD: Coopers &amp; Lybrand, one of the leading accounting firms, said yesterday that Stephen W. McKessy would become its deputy chairman for operations with responsibility for day-to-day operations of the firm's six regions.


Announcement On 'Miss Saigon' Expected Today
LEAD: Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of ''Miss Saigon,'' said in London yesterday that he had been meeting with his aides all day and expected to make an announcement today on his decision whether to reinstate the Broadway production of the hit London musical.


Mary S. Shorb, 83; Helped to Discover Vitamin B12 in 40's
LEAD: Mary Shaw Shorb, a microbiologist whose research led to the discovery of vitamin B12 in 1947, died Saturday at Greater Laurel-Beltsville Hospital in Maryland.


Try International Law in Dealing With Iraq
LEAD: To the Editor:


People
LEAD: *
William Hallowell, Tobi Hochman, James Overend, Crosby Renwick and Susan Rudolph have been named vice presidents and account supervisors at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., Backer Worldwide's North American division.


Connors Is Pondering U.S. Open Appearance
LEAD: When the draw for the W.C.T.
Tournament of Champions was announced yesterday, Jimmy Connors was on hand to offer some nebulous insight into his plans.
The 38-year-old five- time United States Open champion was sidelined with a wrist injury in Milan on Feb. 6 that made questionable his appearance at this year's


Dynatronics Laser Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynatronics Laser Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,559,691
2,034,444
Net inc
171,648
b159,253
Share earns
.02
.02
Yr sales
6,612,692
7,406,534
Net inc
500,379
b703,113
Share earns
.07
.09
b-After an extraordinary charge of $23,001 from an adjustment to compensate for over-credited tax loss carryforwards in previous quarters for the quarter and an extraordinary tax credit of $21,800 for the year.


Imperial Chemical
LEAD: Imperial Chemical Industries of Britain said it was setting up a wholly owned subsidiary in Poland, its first in Eastern Europe.
Peter Schellinck, director of ICI Poland Ltd., said the new company would provide a base for the whole group to explore opportunities in Poland, especially for its agrochemicals and paints businesses.


Fortune Petroleum Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fortune Petroleum Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
199,000
283,000
Net loss
102,000
b8,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
451,000
504,000
Net loss
129,000
39,000
Shares outst
1,223,000
756,000
b-Net income


Harken Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harken Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
281,073,000
312,519,000
Net loss
23,155,000
b3,605,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
32,757,000
37,313,000
6mo rev
560,787,000
566,938,000
Net loss
25,338,000
b2,426,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
31,470,000
37,108,000


Comstock Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comstock Resources (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,062,588
2,210,521
Net loss
b914,019
c411,521
Share earns
-
.18
6mo rev
2,858,170
4,241,817
Net loss
b636,900
c730,715
Share earns
-
.32
b-Included an extraordinary tax charge from early retirement of debt of $734,969 for both the quarter and 6 months.


Lund International Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lund International Holdings
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,206,901
3,587,198
Net inc
602,353
734,502
Share earns
.13
.15
Yr sales
13,250,878
12,074,675
Net inc
1,893,510
2,045,959
Share earns
.39
.44


Code-Alarm Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Code-Alarm Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
10,203,000
7,144,000
Net inc
536,000
555,000
Share earns
.21
.26
6mo sales
21,778,000
14,023,000
Net inc
1,223,000
802,000
Share earns
.47
.38


Parker &amp; Parsley DevelopFment Partners L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker &amp; Parsley DevelopFment Partners L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
15,908,000
15,649,000
Net inc
1,930,000
1,937,000
Share earns
.37
.33
Shares outst
5,217,000
5,825,000
6mo rev
31,512,000
32,982,000
Net inc
3,270,000
5,380,000
Share earns
.61
.91
Shares outst
5,299,000
5,825,000


Harleysville to Buy a USLico Unit
LEAD: A Pennsylvania insurance company announced today that it planned to buy the property and casualty insurance operations of the USLico Corporation for $135 million in cash and notes.


American Colloid Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Colloid Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
32,565,000
32,123,000
Net inc
666,000
1,289,000
Share earns
.13
.24
6mo sales
63,289,000
63,136,000
Net inc
863,000
2,088,000
Share earns
.16
.39


Pemex Re-enters U.S. Debt Market
LEAD: After an absence of about eight years, Petroleos Mexicanos, also known as Pemex, the Mexican national oil company and one of the world's largest industrial companies, has returned to the American private placement market with a $100 million note issue.


The Home Weatherman
LEAD: AMERICANS SEEM to be preoccupied with the weather.
There are frequent reports and forecasts on the radio and, on local television, the weatherman or woman gets star billing.
There is a special 900 telephone number if you can't wait for Willard or Frank, and even a cable television channel devoted to weather, 24 hours a day.


Review/Music;   Contrasting Styles in a Heavy-Metal Battle of the Bands
LEAD: Friday night's show at the Beacon Theater shaped up like a heavy-metal battle of the bands, with the headliner, Danzig, facing pressure from Soundgarden, the contender.
The audience wore its tribe membership in the form of strict all-black dress with tattoos or band T-shirts proclaiming allegiance to favorites like the Cro-Mags or Slayer.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Babcock &amp; Wilcox Industries Ltd., Burlington, Ontario, a maker of various industrial products, said it had been awarded a $44 million contract from Malette Inc., Timmons, Ontario, for a chemical recovery boiler island.


Looking for Better Life, They Found Welfare
LEAD: Cecelia D. Fernandes and her husband moved to New Hampshire 10 months ago, seeking a better place to raise their two children.
They left a second-floor apartment in Lowell, Mass., looking for a backyard and lower rents.


Cheni Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cheni Gold Mines
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,424,000
6,592,000
Net inc
1,267,000
497,000
Share earns
.11
.04
6mo sales
16,298,000
9,381,000
Net inc
2,468,000
901,000
Share earns
.22
.08
Some year-earlier figures have been restated.


New Research Station Exploring the Ecology Of a Pristine River
LEAD: UNTIL now, relatively few studies have been made of the complex ecology of rivers, despite the fact that they sustain many endangered plants and animals and are an important source of water, food and fun for millions of Americans.


Quiksilver Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quiksilver Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
24,670,000
19,332,000
Net inc
2,589,000
1,867,000
Share earns
.41
.30
9mo sales
72,602,000
54,828,000
Net inc
7,627,000
5,406,000
Share earns
1.21
.86


Northwest Gold reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwest Gold
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
717,000
2,484,000
Net loss
923,000
b1,051,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
36,482,326
15,977,945
6mo rev
1,976,000
4,438,000
Net loss
1,369,000
b2,592,000
Share earns
-
.17
Shares outst
36,459,178
14,971,866


We Can Afford to Fight Iraq
LEAD: While the cost of Operation Desert Shield will be high, it's nothing the U.S. can't bear.
And we can do this without placing a substantial additional burden on taxpayers and while still paring down the military.
But it will require some creative thinking about deployments as well as financial contributions from our allies.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Citizens Being Moved Just Some of Those at Risk
LEAD: The 47 Americans in Iraq and occupied Kuwait who have been picked up and transferred to unknown locations are among a far larger group of foreigners, numbering in the hundreds, taken from hotels and residences and apparently placed in strategic military and industrial installations.


Honeywell Fills Post
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. said today that Steven G. Rothmeier, the former chairman of NWA Inc., the parent company of Northwest Airlines, would serve as the chairman of Alliant Techsystems Inc., a new company being spun off by Honeywell.


Callahan Mining Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Callahan Mining Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,796,000
6,984,000
Net loss
102,000
1,285,000
6mo rev
7,234,000
14,141,000
Net loss
1,001,000
2,537,000


Data Design Labs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Design Labs (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,528,000
22,948,000
Net loss
b2,488,000
c1,707,000
Yr sales
91,243,000
89,819,000
Net loss
b2,938,000
c12,173,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $698,000, or 10 cents a share, for the quarter and $3,074,000, or 46 cents a share, for the year, and extraordinary credits of $758,000, or 11 cents a share, and $2,997,000, or 45 cents a share, for the quarter and year, respectively.


Castle Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Castle Energy Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,568,060
1,856,286
Net inc
959,059
401,373
Share earns
.12
.11
Shares outst
7,927,456
3,689,736
9mo rev
6,625,057
5,326,229
Net inc
1,791,742
925,092
Share earns
.27
.25
Shares outst
6,593,001
3,683,278


Ex-General, a Soviet Maverick, Claims Victory
LEAD: A maverick former K.G.B. general said today that he had won the first round of an election to the Soviet Parliament.


Unigene Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unigene Laboratories
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
108,000
-
Net loss
575,000
584,000
Shares outst
13,394,292
13,248,492
6mo rev
271,000
533,000
Net loss
1,145,000
601,000
Shares outst
13,394,292
13,250,304


Bio-Medicus Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Medicus Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,085,000
7,658,000
Net inc
1,547,000
1,189,000
Share earns
.20
.15
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Topics of The Times;   Whistling a Whistle-Blower
LEAD: A lawyer named Michael Dowd helped prosecutors crack open the New York City corruption scandal in 1986 when he admitted paying kickbacks to city officials.
Mr.
Dowd has now been suspended from practicing law for five years.
His friends find the penalty excessive and fear it will discourage other whistle-blowers.


Gay Men's Chorus Audition
LEAD: The New York City Gay Men's Chorus will hold auditions for its 11th season on Sept. 11 and 12 at 7 P.M.
The 150-voice company will present concerts at Carnegie Hall and Alice Tully Hall during the 1990-91 season.
A prepared song is required, and applicants will undergo sight-reading and voice-placement tests.


Aurora Environmental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aurora Environmental Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,574,508
2,393,224
Net inc
59,762
50,547
Share earns
.01
-


Computer Network TechFnology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Network TechFnology
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,845,638
2,892,801
Net inc
445,907
214,291
Share earns
.03
.02
6mo rev
6,172,543
4,165,147
Net inc
201,304
b428,600
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Liberia Leader, Rejecting Truce Offer, Won't Quit
LEAD: Negotiations for a settlement of the Liberian civil war made little headway today, amid indications that President Samuel K. Doe is unwilling to yield power in order to gain a cease-fire.


Star States Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Star States Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b26,571,000
c610,000
Per share
-
.13
6mo net loss
b30,298,000
c1,634,000
Per share
-
.35
b-Included a write-off of $1.8 million related to the company's decision against building a new headquarters, a charge-off of $7.4 million of non-performing loans against the allowance for loan losses, and a $7.1 million write-off of real estate owned and non- performing investments in joint ventures.


Flake Pleads Not Guilty to All Charges
LEAD: As hundreds of his supporters packed the courtroom and filled the air with hymns on the sidewalk outside, Floyd H. Flake, the Congressman and minister from Queens, pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges that he had embezzled funds from a federally subsidized housing complex and cheated on his income taxes.


Delta Is Firm on New Planes
LEAD: The chairman of Delta Air Lines said today that the carrier would not abandon any of the orders and options it had for new aircraft, despite indications that the airline industry was facing lower profits.


Investor Increases Stake in Henley
LEAD: Libra Invest Ltd., a Swiss investment concern controlled by a Lebanese investor, Toufic Aboukhater, has raised its stake in the Henley Group Inc. to 11.27 percent from 9.1 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Aboukhater said that he was granted clearance by Government antitrust regulators on Aug.


Petrominerals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petrominerals (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,602,000
1,667,000
Net loss
109,000
41,000
6mo rev
3,426,000
3,133,000
Net loss
62,000
283,000


Bush's Warning to Iraq Spurs Gain by Dow
LEAD: President Bush's warning yesterday that he would hold the Iraqi Government responsible for the safety of American hostages being held in Kuwait and Iraq helped give the stock market its first lift since Wednesday.


Careers;   Better Times Expected for Southwest
LEAD: ARE Southwestern states like Texas, Arizona and New Mexico, long in the economic doldrums, about to come alive again?


Asamera Minerals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Asamera Minerals
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,510,000
9,225,000
Net inc
204,000
489,000
Share earns
.01
.02
6mo sales
17,083,000
18,039,000
Net inc
601,000
1,459,000
Share earns
.02
.06
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Proffitt's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Proffitt's Inc.
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Revenue
21,136,835
19,923,367
Net inc
37,469
b357,125
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
42,814,380
38,672,809
Net inc
541,739
b285,162
Share earns
.14
-
b-Net loss


A Treat for Night Owls in Poland
LEAD: It is midnight on a Wednesday and the line is forming for lemon-flavored Perrier, imported muesli, German beer and even Arab cheese.
The counters gleam, the blue-frocked saleswomen beam, and business is transacted at a pace that startles people in this service-starved city.


Analytical Surveys Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analytical Surveys Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,712,585
2,173,531
Net loss
44,123
b35,965
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
5,510,831
5,934,585
Net loss
247,293
b264,114
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income


Shift in Computer Security
LEAD: The National Security Agency said yesterday that it was restructuring its National Computer Security Center by moving about 300 employees to the agency's communication security division.


Billy Ripken Returns
LEAD: The Baltimore Orioles reinstated Billy Ripken yesterday from the 15- day disabled list and optioned Jeff McKnight to Class AAA Rochester.
Ripken had been on the disabled list since Aug. 5 with a stress fracture of the right foot.
In his two weeks with the Orioles, McKnight appeared in nine games and batted .333, going 7 for 21 with two runs batted in.(


How Ivy League Philanthropy Aids the Needy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   In Israel, the Feeling That It's Best to Use Force Without Delay
LEAD: Israeli political and military leaders are saying that time is not on the side of the United States in the Persian Gulf crisis, and that it should act now.


Puzzle in Infant Mortality
LEAD: For more than a decade researchers have said blacks have the nation's worst infant mortality rate because pregnant black women receive the poorest prenatal care.
But a new study of other ethnic groups suggests that other factors may play a larger role than expected.


Talking Business with Lipsky of Salomon Brothers;   Help for Dollar Called Unlikely
LEAD: The dollar has reached a new low against the German mark and it is close to touching its record low against the Swiss franc.


Convergent Solutions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Convergent Solutions Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,379,839
1,428,324
Net loss
32,124
b220,888
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
5,389,025
5,940,566
9mo rev
4,145,212
3,999,532
Net inc
69,314
c791,967
Share earns
.01
.14
Shares outst
5,389,025
6,437,847


Accounts
LEAD: *
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Ill., to the Chicago office of Bozell, for the trade advertising of its diagnostic instruments and products division.
The account was formerly split between two New York agencies, SJ Weinstein Associates and Sutton Healthcare Group.
The billings were not disclosed.


Pakistan Said to Have Fired on Indian Troops
LEAD: Pakistani troops fired heavy artillery at Indian Army positions this morning in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir, the Indian Defense Ministry announced.


Ecologists Turn to Hardy's World View;   Humanity Off the Hook
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Atlanta Police Chief
LEAD: This city, which has been at the top of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's big-city crime list for two years, got a new police chief today, Eldrin Bell.
Mayor Maynard Jackson said in naming the successor to the retiring chief, Morris Redding, that Mr.
Bell has a ''well-deserved reputation as a tough cop'' and ''is exactly what the doctor ordered.


Met-Coil Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Met-Coil Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,922,000
17,964,000
Net loss
304,000
b555,000
Share earns
-
.25
Shares outst
2,440,000
2,179,000
Yr rev
59,087,000
69,594,000
Net loss
253,000
b1,935,000
Share earns
-
.93
Shares outst
2,437,000
2,072,000


Man Kills Relative And Then Himself
LEAD: A Queens man shot and wounded his wife and daughter and killed his mother-in-law yesterday morning before killing himself, apparently after an argument over his divorce, the police said.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher After Many Days of Decline
LEAD: The dollar closed mostly higher against the world's major currencies in moderate trading yesterday, recovering ground after many days of decline.


Walker Telecomm reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walker Telecomm (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
627,973
438,208
Net loss
834,091
b252,540
Shares outst
4,972,857
5,068,039
6mo sales
1,024,254
611,593
Net loss
1,651,308
b1,266,216
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $402,849 and $152,779 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively; income included gain of $1,058,737 from disposal of discontinued operations.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-17


Manhattan Man Is Arrested In Shooting of a Cabdriver
LEAD: A 27-year-old man was arrested yesterday in the shooting of a gypsy-cab driver, the police said.


Review/Music;   Bernstein Leads His Annual Tanglewood Concert
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein has long been the most intensely emotional, the most nakedly human of conductors.
That means all his concerts are suffused with a power of personality that focuses attention on himself.
In his youth, this insertion of personality could detract from the music; now, in his magisterial maturity - he turns 72 this Saturday - it usually augments the impact of his performances.


Messy Research Monkeys Vex Florida Keys
LEAD: More than a decade ago Bausch &amp; Lomb in a business venture put thousands of rhesus monkeys on two small deserted islands to breed.
For the State of Florida and residents of nearby keys, however, the breeding has been far too successful.


$300 Million Sale Of Carr-Gottstein
LEAD: An investment firm set up by a former partner in Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen, a prominent leveraged buyout firm, has acquired Alaska's largest food and drug wholesaler for $300 million.
The acquisition is the first by Leonard Green &amp; Partners, a private merchant bank set up to organize management buyouts.


Gensia Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gensia Pharmaceuticals Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,155,000
2,403,000
Shares outst
11,030,000
7,167,000
6mo net loss
5,821,000
4,658,000
Shares outst
10,579,000
7,140,000


Export Restrictions Fail to Halt Spread Of Supercomputers
LEAD: The growing ease with which it is possible to design and build supercomputers is making it increasingly difficult for the United States and Japan to keep the powerful machines from proliferating.
That raises the possibility that more nations may be able to use supercomputers to design advanced weapons systems.


Hathaway Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hathaway Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,089,000
11,355,000
Net inc
b67,000
cd910,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
51,302,000
48,098,000
Net loss
b465,000
d1,397,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $232,000 for the quarter and $478,000 for the year.


Republic Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Capital (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
731,000
b550,000
Per share
-
.43
Yr net inc
1,091,000
2,719,000
Per share
.64
1.63
b-Net income


United Security Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Security Financial
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,100
b1,005,300
Per share
-
.11
6mo net inc
297,800
b1,060,000
Per share
.03
.12
b-Included $770,000 in gross income recorded for the sale of Pilgrim Life Insurance Co.


National Gas &amp; Oil reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Gas &amp; Oil (AMEX)
12mo June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
34,827,970
34,242,954
Net inc
3,079,985
3,163,945
Share earns
.90
.92
Prior 12-month revenue figures were restated.
Share earnings have been adjusted for 7-percent stock dividend paid in December 1989.


Polymerix Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polymerix Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,000
105,000
Net loss
837,000
598,000
The company commenced in June 1990 a private placement of Series B 10-percent cumulative convertible preferred stock; company has received $775,000 of gross proceeds from this offering to date.


Applied Biosystems reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Biosystems (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
38,684,000
39,634,000
Net loss
687,000
b4,200,000
Share earns
-
.30
Yr sales
158,890,000
158,055,000
Net inc
6,088,000
19,262,000
Share earns
.43
1.38
b-Net income


Aide Who Threatened Bishop Offers Resignation in Kenya
LEAD: Kenya's Labor Minister, under severe criticism in the death of an outspoken Anglican bishop, announced today that he had offered to resign.


Defense in 2d Jogger Trial Plans a More Vigorous Fight
LEAD: Lawyers for the remaining three defendants in the Central Park jogger case are promising a tougher, more argumentative fight than the defense waged in the first trial.


Pacific National Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific National Financial
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,618,000
10,507,000
Net loss
277,000
b1,469,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.
The company attributed the earnings loss to the high level of Canadian interest rates and said the impact on earnings of a narrowing of the spread between lease rates obtained on new business and the rate at which the leases were sold was about $1 million pre-tax in the quarter.


Hurco Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hurco Cos.  (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
24,676,000
23,537,000
Net inc
1,055,000
2,246,000
Share earns
.19
.45
Shares outst
5,693,000
4,937,000
9mo rev
72,230,000
63,814,000
Net inc
5,771,000
5,311,000
Share earns
1.01
1.17
Shares outst
5,686,000
4,472,000


Chip Manufacturer May Close Plant
LEAD: The National Semiconductor Corporation may close a computer chip plant and lay off as many as 2,000 employees in cost-cutting measures.
The company is considering closing its chip manufacturing plant in Puyallup, Wash., industry sources said.
The plant produces memory chips and logic semiconductors for supercomputers.


Linpro Specified Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linpro Specified Properties (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
75,416
13
Net inc
15,503
b24,341
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
97,507
47,513
Net inc
21,044
b8,052
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Mary Whitcomb DeGrange, Music Teacher, 90
LEAD: Mary Whitcomb DeGrange, the director of the Federal Music Project in New York City, which taught thousands of people during the Depression, died on Wednesday at the National Orthopedic Hospital in Alexandria, Va.
She was 90 years old and had lived in Greenwich Village for more than 60 years.


Marsam Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marsam Pharmaceuticals Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,025,900
1,081,100
Net inc
482,900
b109,200
Share earns
.10
-
6mo sales
5,589,400
1,965,700
Net inc
910,100
b271,100
Share earns
.18
-
b-Net loss


Randolph Journal;   Asian Refugee Sends Voters a Signal
LEAD: Doorstep after doorstep, night after night, Daniel Lam weaves his way through this mostly white working-class town south of Boston, announcing his campaign for state representative to bewildered-looking voters.


Cabot Oil &amp; Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabot Oil &amp; Gas Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
28,300,000
33,600,000
Net inc
1,600,000
2,600,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
106,200,000
127,100,000
Net inc
15,100,000
23,300,000
Share earns
.65
-
There are no share earnings amounts for 1989 because Cabot became a public company on Feb.


Denison Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Denison Mines
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b97,084,000
c7,967,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo net loss
101,885,000
c9,344,000
b-Included an $80 million write- down of oil interests in Italy and a $4.2 million pre-tax provision for the cost of downsizing its Elliot Lake uranium operations.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Peter Arnell, executive creative director of Arnell/Bickford Associates Marketing, New York, said the agency has added an estimated $24 million in new business since Aug. 1, raising its total billings to nearly $58 million.
The largest of the 10 new accounts, all clothing or accessories business, is the worldwide advertising for the Italian company Byblos, for its men's and women's clothing and perfumes.


Ault Inc.  reports earnings for Year to May 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ault Inc.
Year to May 27
1990
1989
Sales
17,096,000
17,635,000
Net loss
168,000
b594,000
Share earns
-
.30
b-Net income


Confrontation in the Gulf;   A Few Westerners Flee From Iraq to Jordan
LEAD: Small groups of Westerners, reportedly including eight Americans, fled today from Baghdad to Amman, the Jordanian capital.


Hauser Chemical Research reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hauser Chemical Research
Year to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,031,326
2,171,636
Net loss
127,504
b80,215
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income
The company said the net loss at year's end was due to recognition of losses sustained in natural product processing as a result of contaminated process chemicals received from a supplier.


Maurice Gendron, a Cellist, 69; Known as Soloist and Conductor
LEAD: Maurice Gendron, the French cellist and conductor whose lyrical style brought him international renown, died yesterday at his home in Grez-sur-Loing, near Paris.
He was 69 years old.


Stumbling Mets Lose More Than A Game
LEAD: The losses poured in on the Mets tonight as they continued to stumble through the West.


Reviews/Music;   City Opera's 'Figaro' Gets a Mostly New Cast
LEAD: The New York City Opera is taking a more sweeping approach to cast changes this season than it has in the past.
Instead of replacing a few singers at a time, the company is presenting first and second casts as independent ensembles.
On Sunday afternoon, the second cast of Mozart's ''Nozze di Figaro'' was to take over, and for the most part, it did.


Dinkins Begins Multilingual Bias Hot Line
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday began a bias hot line that, in 140 languages, will offer referrals to victims and witnesses of bias-related incidents and will be ''an early warning system'' on race crimes.


Control Resources Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Control Resources Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,686,000
10,327,000
Net inc
b312,000
209,000
Share earns
.06
.04
6mo rev
15,631,000
16,868,000
Net inc
b352,000
c77,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $35,000, or 1 cent a share for the quarter and $48,000, or 1 cent a share for the 6 months.


Little Dissent in U.S.
LEAD: If war is in the offing, few Americans are voicing opposition.
While some people have reservations, many opponents of previous military commitments are supportive.
Page A16.


National Techteam Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Techteam Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,700,000
1,700,000
Net loss
b128,000
c295,000
6mo rev
3,400,000
3,400,000
Net loss
b163,672
c493,477
b-Included a write-off of about $140,000 of expenses incurred in connection with a planned merger abandoned in June for both the quarter and 6 months.


Man Is Dead After Drinking Beverage Laced With Cocaine
LEAD: A man who went into a coma after drinking a Colombian soft drink that had been laced with cocaine died today after doctors turned off his life-support equipment.


TSC Shannock reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSC Shannock
Year to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
28,600,000
-
Net inc
401,000
-
Share earns
.16
-
The company recently changed its fiscal year-end to May 31 from Sept. 30.
For the eight months ended May 31, 1989, the company had net income of $94,000, or 4 cents a share, on sales of $16.6 million.


Devils Add Goal Coach
LEAD: The Devils hired Warren Strelow as goaltending coach yesterday.
Strelow, 56 years old, spent last season working as an independent consultant after six years as the goalkeeping coach for the Washington Capitals.
In 1980, he coached the goalies for the United States Olympic team, which won a gold medal.


Vestro Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vestro Foods Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,666,000
4,680,000
Net inc
b92,000
10,000
6mo sales
15,333,000
9,095,000
Net inc
b158,000
c160,000
b-Included a tax credit of $67,000 and $116,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Partner Limits Duties At Goldman, Sachs
LEAD: Robert N. Downey, who over the last 11 years helped to make Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company the leading municipal bond underwriting firm on Wall Street, will retire as a general partner on Nov. 30, John L. Weinberg, senior partner at Goldman, Sachs, announced yesterday.


Yanks Top Blue Jays In 11 on Espinoza Hit
LEAD: ''Aug. 20, 1990. A Great Day For The Yankees.''


Confrontation in the Gulf;   20,000 Egyptians Stranded in Aqaba


New Method of Analyzing Health Data Stirs Debate
LEAD: INCREASING use of a controversial statistical method to evaluate medical therapies and surgical procedures is beginning to affect profoundly the care of pregnant women and patients with cancer, heart disease and many other common conditions.


Uncertain Options Confronting the Players
LEAD: Late in the evening of New Year's night 1988, at the end of Russell Maryland's freshman season at the University of Miami, he played a satisfying if minor role as part of a championship team.
But even as Miami's Orange Bowl celebration began, Maryland was reminded how quickly the party can end.


NAZI COMMANDANT INDICTED BY BONN
LEAD: Josef Schwammberger, who spent nearly 40 years as a fugitive from prosecution for Nazi war crimes, was indicted today in the deaths of more than 3,400 people in Poland during World War II.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Preferred Stock


Michael Is Named Yanks' General Manager
LEAD: George Steinbrenner, in the last official baseball move of his controversial and unpredictable ownership of the Yankees, yesterday appointed Gene Michael as the team's general manager, replacing Harding (Pete) Peterson.


Europe Plane Deal By AMR Unit Seen
LEAD: AMR Eagle Inc., the largest United States commuter air carrier and a subsidiary of the AMR Corporation, will buy $1 billion worth of European-made aircraft in one of its largest purchases ever, sources said.
The company refused to confirm or deny the reports by Reuters that AMR Eagle would buy 100 twin-engine turboprop planes from ATR, the French


Communications TransmisFsion reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications TransmisFsion (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
95,200,000
101,300,000
Net loss
16,400,000
7,800,000
6mo rev
193,200,000
206,400,000
Net loss
25,100,000
9,100,000
The company said the 1990 6-month loss was increased by certain one- time expenses associated with a restructuring.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Cheney, on Quick Tour, Reaches Agreement on More Bases in Gulf
LEAD: The United States moved today to enlarge its network of bases in the Persian Gulf region to back up its large troop deployment in Saudi Arabia.


New York Disgraces Democracy With Uncontested Elections
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Base With No Name: U.S. Puts It on the Map
LEAD: The following report was filed under the ground rules that govern American correspondents accredited to the Pentagon who are working in Saudi Arabia.
The ground rules prohibit the reporting of exact numbers of troops or weapons, their exact locations or the names of enlisted personnel.


Cereal Makers Settle Lawsuit
LEAD: The Kellogg Company, the world's largest maker of breakfast cereal, and Nabisco Brands Inc., the large biscuit and cereal maker, said yesterday that they had settled Kellogg's lawsuit over shredded wheat out of court.


Policy Set on Giving Away Property Seized in Bailout
LEAD: Federal regulators today approved what once might have seemed unthinkable -guidelines for giving away property the Government has seized from the wreckage of the savings industry.


Estimate Board Approves Audubon Ballroom Plan
LEAD: As New York City's Board of Estimate continued its fade into oblivion early this morning, it approved the creation of a biomedical research center on the site of the Audubon Ballroom in Washington Heights and, early yesterday, a plan by the developer Peter S. Kalikow to demolish part of a tenement complex designated a landmark.


Rinfret, Stalking Governor, Gets Lecture but No Debate
LEAD: For the second time in five days, Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican gubernatorial candidate, ambushed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today by making a surprise appearance at one of the Governor's public events.


Gerald F. Stevens, 52, Connecticut Legislator
LEAD: Gerald F. Stevens, a lawyer, former Connecticut legislator and a 1978 Republican candidate for governor of Connecticut, died on Monday at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 52 years old and lived in Milford, Conn.


Venezuela Debt Accord
LEAD: Venezuela's public foreign debt will be lowered by more than 20 percent under an agreement reached with creditor banks, Venezuelan officials announced today.
The deal covers $20.5 billion of the nation's $26 billion of public-sector debt.
The country owes about $35 billion in public- and private-sector debt.


Medicare Delays Predicted if Budget Impasse Causes Spending Cuts
LEAD: Bush Administration officials said yesterday that automatic spending cuts that would result from failure to reach a budget agreement with Congress would mean a severe delay in Medicare payments to hospitals, doctors and the program's millions of elderly beneficiaries.


Tokyo Stocks Plunge Over Crisis in Mideast
LEAD: The Tokyo stock market plummeted today in reaction to the continued tensions in the Middle East and the tumbling prices on Wall Street.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   At Wendy's, Folksiness Is Effective
LEAD: DAVE THOMAS, the founder of Wendy's International and its folksy spokesman, was not a success when he started appearing in commercials for the fast-food chain.
Within the advertising industry, his awkward and stilted performance was widely criticized.


Soviets Urge Iraq to Aid Trapped Foreigners
LEAD: The Soviet Union urged a senior Iraqi envoy today to provide guarantees for all foreigners remaining in Iraq and Kuwait and ease evacuation of Soviet citizens from the Persian Gulf region.


Washington Considers a Clear Iraqi Defeat To Be Necessary to Bolster Its Arab Allies
LEAD: Iraq called today for negotiations on ending the Persian Gulf crisis, but did not offer to pull its troops out of Kuwait.
The White House quickly responded that no talks were possible until Iraq unconditionally carried out the United Nations demand that it withdraw its forces from Kuwait.


Little Change In Phone Rates
LEAD: Prices for long-distance telephone service, which have plunged more than 40 percent since the breakup of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in 1984, may not decline much more, according to a study by the Federal Communications Commission.


Envoys at U.N. Say Soviets Block Endorsement of Force Against Iraq
LEAD: Soviet objections have so far been the main cause of the United States' inability to win Security Council backing for the use of force to uphold the embargo of Iraq, diplomats here say.


College Football In Transition;   Familiar Sort of Scrutiny For New TV Deal
LEAD: When the five members of the Federal Trade Commission return from recess after Labor Day, they may have on their minds a subject dear to many at this time of year both inside and outside the Washington Beltway: college football on television.


Ivanisevic Seeking To Shed Bad-Boy Image
LEAD: Goran Ivanisevic, the tempestuous 18-year-old Yugoslav who most reminded Boris Becker of a young, ruthless Boris Becker just after defeating him in the first round of the French Open, has decided to exchange his temper for a top-10 ranking.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Advertising pages for the magazines monitored by the Publishers Information Bureau were down by 5.8 percent last month, compared with the corresponding period last year.
Ad pages for January to July fell by 3.6 percent, compared with the 1989 period.
But because of large rate increases, revenues for the first seven months of the year were up by 1.6 percent from the period last year.


West African Force Sent to Liberia
LEAD: Five West African nations began sending troops to Liberia today amid indications that negotiations for a cease-fire in the eight-month-long civil war were deadlocked, African diplomats said.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
For Nibbling or Partying


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Civil Suit Against Secord Goes to the Jury
LEAD: A Federal jury began deciding today whether Richard V. Secord, a leading figure in the Iran-contra affair, must pay compensation to the sole survivor of a 1986 airplane crash in Nicaragua and to the family of the plane's co-pilot.


Keep Hanford's Radiation Risk in Perspective;   Cover-Up at Chernobyl
LEAD: To the Editor:


Official Denies Interference in Agent Orange Study
LEAD: A top Federal health officer today denied a Congressional charge that the Reagan White House had interfered with a study of the chemical Agent Orange's effects on soldiers in Vietnam.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Inquiry on F.B.I. Bias
Its highest-ranking black field agent will look into charges of a cover-up of racial bias at the bureau.
Page A18.
Plan for Ballroom Passes
The New York City Board of Estimate approved a research center on the Audubon Ballroom site.
Page B1.
Mantovani as a Weapon
Some 7-Eleven stores now use light music to disperse teen-age loiterers.


Studies Dispute View of Dyslexia, Finding Girls as Afflicted as Boys
LEAD: Despite a widespread belief to the contrary, girls are just as likely as boys to have the reading impairment dyslexia, three studies say.


Douglas Defense: A Financial Outlook
LEAD: Is the title defense of James (Buster) Douglas against Evander Holyfield on Oct. 25 destined to be a financial flop?


The Revolt in New Jersey
LEAD: After years of calm under Gov.
Thomas Kean, New Jersey suddenly seethes with revolt.
It was prompted by his successor, Jim Florio, with a bold but highly complex package of stiff new taxes.
Widespread resistance demonstrates that Mr.
Florio has so far failed to convince New Jerseyans that the new taxes are necessary.


Keep Hanford's Radiation Risk in Perspective;   Dangers Exaggerated
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Dollar Closes Mixed In U.S. After Drop Abroad
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed after falling overseas yesterday in a volatile session that saw the currency buffeted by conflicting reports about the prospects for stability in the Middle East.


Notre Dame Accused
LEAD: Steve Huffman, a former lineman for Notre Dame who quit the team during preseason practice in 1987, has charged there was widespread steroid use on the football team and that Coach Lou Holtz ''had to have known'' about it.


The President and the Hasty Hawks
LEAD: A cynical theory making the rounds in Washington holds that Americans will soon tire of President Bush's intervention in the Persian Gulf.
Therefore, the theory goes, Mr.
Bush should quickly exploit his high standing at home and abroad by undertaking, in Henry Kissinger's words, the ''surgical and progressive destruction of Iraq's military assets.


Bucharest Journal;   In a Dispirited Land, a Dash of Initiative and Verve
LEAD: In the dark, dreary terrain of Romania's impoverished economy, Anda Baldau, a secretary turned shopowner, and Petru Rares, a Western-educated economist turned technocrat, are two bright spots.


San Francisco
LEAD: THE emphasis is on the olive in many restaurants here these days, with glass bowls of olive oil replacing crocks of butter on tables.
Traditional sauces have been displaced by olive-oil vinaigrettes, and house-made olive breads, laced with olive oil and studded with green and black flecks of kneaded-in olives, are the bread of choice.


Review/Pop;   Intelligent Rap With a Message
LEAD: ''How many intelligent people are in the house?'' K. R. S.-One, the rapper who leads Boogie Down Productions, asked a packed house on Monday night at S.O.B.'s.
When not enough hands went up. he asked it again.
K.
R.
S.-One, otherwise known as Kris Parker, wants to use rap, as he said onstage, to ''defend the side of the light, the side of truth and justice.


Gerard A. Fulham, 70; Led Holding Company
LEAD: Gerard A. Fulham, former chairman of the Pneumo Corporation, a concern with holdings in the aerospace and military industries and food and drug distribution, died Sunday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 70 years old and lived in Oyster Harbors, Mass.


Woman Dies After She Is Hit By Car Driven by 11-Year-Old
LEAD: A 58-year-old Stamford woman died on Monday after being struck and pinned under a car driven by an 11-year-old girl, the police said.


Yanks Add To Streak As Cary Triumphs
LEAD: Chuck Cary, who did not win any of his last 10 starts of the George Steinbrenner regime, won last night in the first game the Yankees played without Steinbrenner in command.
There was, however, no cause and effect.


An Appeal From Mubarak
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt made an emotional appeal today to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to withdraw his occupying troops from Kuwait.


Oil and Gas Prices Rise Slightly
LEAD: Prices for oil and gasoline rose slightly yesterday after swinging sharply during the day.
They surged early in the day but then fell back after a statement by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq that traders said was less aggressive than expected.


In a Surprise Move, Hess's Chief Retires
LEAD: In a move that surprised the industry, Irwin Greenberg has retired as president and chief executive of Hess's Department Stores.
He spent 14 years as president of the chain and also served as chief executive for the last five.


Tillicum Journal;   This Music Is Intended To Make Youths Walk
LEAD: A cluster of noisy teen-agers clad in Bart Simpson T-shirts, the uniform of the moment, gathered in the convenience store parking lot to show off their modified Mohawk haircuts and just hang out on a hot August night.


Harry Adelberg; Lawyer, 84
LEAD: Harry Adelberg, founder of the law firm of Adelberg, Rudow, Dorf, Hendler &amp; Sameth in Baltimore, died Sunday at his home in Baltimore.
He was 84 years old.


Review/Film;   A Rebellious Teen-Ager Takes to the Airwaves
LEAD: ''Pump Up the Volume'' asks the question: what's a poor younger generation to do when the traditional modes of teen-age rebellion -sex, drugs and radical politics - have already been used up by its elders?
A fanciful, romantic solution, proposed by the film's writer and director, Allan Moyle, is that the M


'Junk Bonds' Post Sharp Price Decline
LEAD: Prices of some high-yield ''junk bonds'' fell sharply yesterday as investors reacted to the uncertainty in the Mideast and to concerns about a possible recession.
Some mutual fund portfolio managers sold these speculative bonds to meet an increase in redemptions by nervous individual investors, traders said.


A Life's Work Stolen: A Professor Tries to Cope
LEAD: It was, after all, just another break-in, like so many others that have made an industry of removable car radios.
And it certainly does not rank with the acts of mindless violence that have sent shudders through New York City in recent months.


Real Estate;   Building Plan In Detroit Starts Debate
LEAD: COMERICA INC., one of Detroit's largest banks, has won approval for a controversial plan to tear down a riverfront auditorium that was donated by the Ford family to the city and put a new corporate headquarters on the site.


In the Wine Country of Long Island, a Rising Star: Merlot
LEAD: Long Island merlot may not be as familiar as California cabernet, but recent vintages of these lush, smooth, fruity wines are gaining a fine reputation.


U.S. and Mexico Take On a Joint Burden: Sewage
LEAD: When the Tijuana River ripples down the hillside from Mexico into the United States, it brings each day millions of gallons of raw sewage, a thick black stream that meanders, bubbling and stinking, past stables and farmland to empty into the ocean off San Diego.


Panel Issues Broad Attack On U.S. Response to AIDS
LEAD: In the strongest language it has used so far, the top Federal advisory panel on AIDS issued a three-part report today assailing the Government's drug testing programs, the nation's rural health care system and the ''shocking number'' of medical professionals it said were unwilling to treat people infected with the virus.


Extension of Offer For Kansas Gas
LEAD: The Kansas City Power and Light Company said it had extended its $857 million tender offer for Kansas Gas and Electric Company stock until Sept. 14, saying that about 43 percent of Kansas Gas shares had been tendered.
Kansas City Power said that about 13.7 million of the 31.7 million outstanding shares of Kansas Gas had been tendered as of the previous deadline of midnight


Chronicle
LEAD: CAROLYN SKELLY was robbed of more than $1 million in jewelry over the weekend, the sixth time she has been robbed.
Rings, necklaces and a diamond bracelet were stolen from her jewelry box 15 feet from where she slept early Saturday night in her mansion in Newport, R.I.


52 Rich Hong Kong Investors To Be East German Citizens
LEAD: Fifty-two rich Hong Kong executives will pay $960,000 each and invest nearly $10 billion more in return for East German citizenship, the East German Government said today.


Egyptians Tell of Iraqi Rule in Kuwait
LEAD: Every day thousands of Egyptian workers fleeing Kuwait are pouring through this tiny port city tired, dirty, thirsty and broke - but most of all angry.


Change Starts to Sink In For Yanks
LEAD: On the first day of the rest of the Yankees' life without George Steinbrenner, Stump Merrill said that things would be different.


Her Outing Is Brief but Historic
LEAD: The first female starting pitcher in a Little League World Series game lasted just three batters today, but a teammate came to the rescue with six innings of relief and pitched Trail, British Columbia, to an 8-3 victory over Matamoros, Mexico.


S.&amp;P. Cuts AMR Rating And Unit's
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation announced yesterday that it had reduced the rating on about $2.6 billion debt issued by the AMR Corporation and its American Airlines Inc. subsidiary.
The rating agency cited pressures on the airline company from rising costs, heavy capital expenditures financed mainly by debt, and leased equipment and property not carried on balance sheets.


Man Is Dead After Drinking Beverage Laced With Cocaine
LEAD: A man who went into a coma after drinking a Colombian soft drink that had been laced with cocaine died Monday after doctors turned off his life support equipment.


Leo Dana Dies at 94; Aide at Union Carbide
LEAD: Dr.
Leo I. Dana, a former Union Carbide research executive who specialized in low-temperature physics, died on Thursday in Canton, Ohio, at the age of 94.


Philadelphia Mayor Seeks Taxes to Avoid Deficit
LEAD: Mayor W. Wilson Goode says Philadelphia is not bankrupt and can avoid a $206.4 million deficit if the state and City Council work with him to raise taxes and cut spending.


Whom Trump Likes (Himself) and Hates (Many) Floyd Norris
LEAD:
Trump
Surviving at the Top
By Donald J. Trump with Charles Leerhsen
Illustrated. 236 pages. Random House,$21.95.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: LETTER from our friend, the fearless gourmet:


A Kinder, Gentler Stadium?
LEAD: George Steinbrenner has been kicked out of Yankee Stadium, but he does not seem to know it.
The question is: does everybody else?


OREGON CONSIDERS TAX CREDITS TO AID PRIVATE SCHOOLING
LEAD: In the most ambitious plan yet to give parents a choice of schools for their children, an Oregon proposal would grant tax credits to cover tuition for private school or expenses for educating a child at home.


Dozens Are Injured In Further Outbreak Of Rikers I. Unrest
LEAD: At least 50 prison inmates and 30 guards were injured last night in a melee at the Correctional Institution for Men on Rikers Island after prisoners barricaded themselves inside a dormitory and set fires, a prison spokeswoman said.


Chip Maker Plans Layoff; 2,000 to Go
LEAD: The National Semiconductor Corporation, still in search of sustainable profitability, said today that it would reduce its work force by 2,000 people, shut two production operations and take a $140 million charge against earnings in the quarter that ends on Sunday.


New Jersey Backs Plan For Trump
LEAD: The New Jersey Casino Control Commission unanimously, if somewhat reluctantly, approved a bank loan package yesterday to help rescue Donald J. Trump's real estate and gambling empire.


Gold Surges, Then Falls On Conflicting Gulf Signals
LEAD: Traders wary of events in the Middle East sent gold futures prices into a strong rally yesterday and then a sharp reversal as Persian Gulf developments continued to send conflicting signals to the trading pits at the Commodity Exchange in New York.


THATCHER OPPOSES DEAL ON HOSTAGES
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said today that Britain would not negotiate over the thousands of Western nationals trapped in Iraq and Kuwait and that she was considering sending more forces to the Persian Gulf.


Astros Stop Pirates' Streak at Six
LEAD: Danny Darwin won his eighth game in a row and Eric Yelding singled to break an eighth-inning tie as the Houston Astros ended the Pittsburgh Pirates' winning streak at six games tonight with a 2-1 victory.


In South Africa, Joint Plea to End Black Strife
LEAD: The South African Government and the leaders of two black homelands jointly pleaded for peace today after fighting between black factions that has killed nearly 400 people and wounded more than 1,500 in weeklong battles.


With Embargo, Cheaper Tea
LEAD: The price of tea has been hit by the Persian Gulf crisis.
The United Nations trade embargo against tea-drinking Iraq has helped push it down to two-year lows.


Magellan Offers an Image of Venus


Slaves to Oil
LEAD: We are all hostages now, and by our own consent.
It is our addiction to imported oil that has undone us. ''Just say no,'' Nancy Reagan used to advise the young tempted by drugs.
Neither her husband nor anyone else of public consequence dared issue the same good advice to a vast public of all ages that was hopelessly hooked on oil.


For Centuries, Hostages Have Been Used, and Misused, During Wartime
LEAD: United States officials have been dogged politically by the problems of freeing Americans held hostage abroad since even before George Washington took the oath of office as President.


Armenian Parliament Weighs Independence
LEAD: Armenia's parliament debated a declaration of independence today and considered setting up its own army for protection from neighboring Azerbaijan, the Soviet new outlets reported.


Taking A Loftier View of the Timberland
LEAD: Until recently, forest products companies surveyed timberland by sending workers out in pickup trucks to study the land acre by acre.
But now, pinpointing the age, firmness and species of trees is accomplished much more quickly and more precisely from a much higher vantage point.
Under technology developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the International Paper


Frank Viola, 78, Dies; Was Bronx Postmaster
LEAD: Frank J. Viola, a former Postmaster of Bronx County, died yesterday at his home in New Fairfeld, Conn.
He was 78 years old.


Prices of U.S. Securities Lower
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved lower in thin, volatile trading yesterday, as dealers used movements in oil prices as their major indicator to buy or sell securities.


Scientists Back Smaller, Simpler Satellites for Monitoring Climate
LEAD: A panel of experts told the White House today that smaller, simpler satellites that can monitor the Earth's climate should soon take priority over the huge Earth Observing System, an elaborate $30 billion array of six large satellites the space agency plans to place in orbit starting in 1997 or 1998.


Circle K Is Closing Unprofitable Units
LEAD: The Circle K Corporation has begun closing 201 unprofitable stores and will complete the job by the end of the month, Ray Cox, a company spokesman, said.


Chronicle
LEAD: QUEEN ELIZABETH II dusted off a rare honor and gave it to her baby sister yesterday.
The Queen invested PRINCESS MARGARET with the Insignia of the Royal Victorian Chain, as a personal honor on her 60th birthday.
ELIZABETH, THE QUEEN MOTHER, is the only other member of the royal family to have received the insignia.


European Bank Plan
LEAD: The European Community's executive body today endorsed a blueprint for forming tighter economic and monetary links that would include an American-style central bank in 1993.
It would also lead to creation of a single currency to be used throughout the dozen nations of the trading bloc.
The plan was offered to guide the nations at a special conference opening in December to make any needed changes in their founding Treaty of Rome to forge an economic and monetary union.


Twitterpated Lice?
LEAD: No, birds don't do it.
Neither do bees.
Nor educated fleas.
Fall in love, that is.
According to this week's Science Times section, falling in lust is more like it.
Mammals, all but a few species, are a faithless bunch; and bird behavior is a scandal.
Thirty percent of those cute little eggs that Papa


Economic Scene;   Baby Boomers' Free Lunch?
LEAD: EVERYONE knows that America's rapidly aging baby boomers are burning the candle at both ends, consuming when they should be saving for retirement.
Everyone also knows the boomers are depending on the rapid accumulation of cash in the Social Security trust fund to save their bacon.


Review/Music;   To the Beaux Arts Trio, Mozart Isn't Everything
LEAD: The Mostly Mozart Festival has found modest ways to reinvent itself over the years.
It has increasingly allowed its performers to stray into the early Romantic repertory, and occasionally beyond.
It has offered early-instrument concerts, and in recent years it has increasingly brought in outside orchestras to alternate with its resident ensemble.


Hartford, Its Boom Over, Sees Downtown Decaying
LEAD: The hundreds of millions of dollars that poured into Hartford in the 1980's changed the skyline and tripled the amount of office space downtown, but the makeover appears now to have only masked a continuing decline in the heart of Connecticut's capital.


Albert Whitaker, 82, Secret Service Official
LEAD: Albert E. Whitaker, a retired special agent of the Secret Service who was in charge of the New York district for many years, died on Monday in Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre, L.I.
He was 82 years old and lived in Wantaugh, L.I.


Review/Music;   The Philharmonic and Its New High-Tech Shell
LEAD: Given the cold, blustery, intermittently rainy evening, Monday's final free summer parks concert by the New York Philharmonic in Central Park turned out to be more ceremonial and technical than musical.
But what music there was sounded nice enough, in two senses of the word ''sound.''


In Kuwait, Quiet but for Troops
LEAD: Kuwait City was described in a Washington Post article today as quiet, with Iraqi troops advancing toward the border with Saudi Arabia past hundreds of empty houses, ruined royal palaces and smoldering trash fires in vacant lots.


41 Charged in Mob Case Based on Informer
LEAD: Forty-one people, including members of six organized-crime families and two of their bosses, were charged with racketeering today on the basis of almost 400 conversations secretly recorded by one informer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


USAir to Drop More Workers
LEAD: USAir, which said last week that it would lay off 200 pilots, reported yesterday that it was cutting another 1,500 workers, or 2.7 percent of its work force, as it pares back expansion plans.


$501 Million Issue From Freddie Mac
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac, priced $501 million in floating-rate and inverse floating-rate funding note pass-through certificates yesterday in a sale managed by Lehman Brothers.


4 Honored With Fields Medal in Mathematics
LEAD: Fields Medals, the most prestigious international awards in mathematics, were bestowed yesterday upon two mathematicians from the United States and one each from Japan and the Soviet Union.


Keep Hanford's Radiation Risk in Perspective;   'Still Classified'
LEAD: To the Editor:


C.D.'s, Bank Funds Mixed
LEAD: After declining for more than three months, yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were reported mixed in the week that ended yesterday.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Nevilles on the Record


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of books by B. F. Skinner on Monday, with his obituary, misstated the date of ''Walden Two'' in some copies.
It was published in 1948.


Second Thoughts
LEAD: Elden Campbell, a 6-foot-11-inch former Clemson star who was the Los Angeles Lakers' first-round draft choice in June, spent last week in Europe, practicing with an Italian team and spawning rumors that he would spurn the Lakers and join the Italian League.
Yesterday, Campbell cashed in on the rumors.


Fears of Mideast Conflict Push the Dow Down 52.48 Points
LEAD: Stocks gyrated wildly yesterday in heavy trading amid fears of war in the Middle East, with the New York Stock Exchange intervening three times to keep the price decline from feeding on itself.


Yemen Agrees to Block Iraqi Oil; Missile Flow to Kuwait Reported
LEAD: The mounting confrontation between American warships and two loaded Iraqi oil tankers in waters near the Persian Gulf was at least temporarily defused today when Yemen said it would not allow the tankers to unload their cargo in its port of Aden.


Raiders Not About to Move
LEAD: An official of the Los Angeles Raiders says they will be staying put this year.


Surgery Gives Man 2 Hearts
LEAD: A rare operation has left a man with two functioning human hearts and a clean bill of health, the University of Wisconsin Hospital said today.
Surgeons placed a human donor heart in William Rammer, 53 years old, of Kaukauna, on July 21 to supplement his diseased heart, said Dr.
Barry Fields, the hospital's chief heart transplant surgeon.


Mitchell R. Cutler; Book Dealer, 39
LEAD: Mitchell R. Cutler, a dealer in rare art books, died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Bush Regains Record Rating in Crisis
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis has propelled public approval of President Bush back to its highest level, with support for his stand against Iraq's invasion of Kuwait overwhelming misgivings about his handling of domestic problems, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll has found.


300th-Ranked Player Knocks Out Wilander
LEAD: Mats Wilander, once ranked No. 1 in the world, was upset by 300th-ranked Todd Martin, 0-6, 6-4, 7-5, last night in the opening round of the W.C.T.
Tournament of Champions, an exhibition event at the West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills, Queens.


Irving X. Fabrikant; Diamond Importer, 86
LEAD: Irving X. Fabrikant, the president of M. Fabrikant &amp; Sons, a leading diamond importing and manufacturing concern, from 1930 to 1980, died on Saturday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Rabies Vaccine Is Tested on Deserted Island
LEAD: In the first field test of a genetically engineered rabies vaccine in the United States, 26 scientists took boats to Parramore Island on Monday and put out 4,000 baited doses of the vaccine.


I.B.M. Introduces Midrange Models
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation announced two new lower-priced models of its popular midrange Application System-400 computer line, as well as software enhancements designed to improve the computers' performance.
The cheapest of the models is priced at $18,250, 27 percent below the previous lowest-cost AS-400, I.B.M.


Magellan Radio Link To Earth Lost Again
LEAD: Engineers lost radio contact with the Magellan spacecraft tonight for the second time in five days, the national Aeronautics and Space Administration said late tonight.


Japan Trade Group Fills Top Post in New York
LEAD: The Japan External Trade Organization has named Tetsuo Matsufuji president of its New York office.
Jetro is one of the leading Japanese Government agencies that promote trade relations between Japan and other countries.


Cuomo Ambushed by Republican Foe, Again


MORE EUROPEANS TO JOIN GULF FORCE
LEAD: Anxious to demonstrate full support for American moves to isolate Iraq, Western European governments decided today to increase and coordinate their naval activities in the Persian Gulf and to reject Baghdad's demands that they close their embassies in Kuwait.


Chronicle
LEAD: ELIZABETH LEDERER, the lead prosecutor in the Central Park jogger trial that concluded Saturday, is also embroiled in personal court matters.


Efficient ARCO Gains From Its Price Freeze
LEAD: At an ARCO station on a busy corner in suburban Torrance, Calif., drivers are lining up this week to buy regular unleaded gasoline for $1.13 a gallon - 8 cents less than at the Exxon station across the street.
Throughout the West, people have been flocking to other ARCO stations to buy gasoline at prices 4 to 12 cents below those of competing stations.


Boeing Gets Order From the Japanese
LEAD: The All Nippon Airways Company of Japan has ordered 17 more Boeing 747-400's in a deal valued at $3.5 billion, including parts and related equipment, the Boeing Company said on Monday.
Delivery of the aircraft, the world's largest passenger jetliners, is scheduled to begin in 1995.


For Gay Travelers, More Places to Go
LEAD: ON a blistering August day the lounge chairs around the swimming pool at the Rainbow Mountain Resort here are overflowing with bare arms and legs.
The smell of coconut oil and the sounds of ''I Got You Babe'' fill the air.
Everything about this middle-class enclave seems typical of life in a Pocono Mountain resort except for one thing: nearly all the guests are gay.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.97
8.00
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.58
7.55
8.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.48
7.45
8.01
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.72
8.68
8.33
30-YR.


Richard Little Purdy; Professor, 86
LEAD: Richard Little Purdy, a retired professor of English at Yale University, died on Aug. 7 in a nursing home in Chatham Township, N.J.
He was 86 years old and lived in New Haven.


About New York;   Where Hizzoner Holds Court Beneath a Tree
LEAD: Some of the most important civic business of the Crotona section of the South Bronx is conducted beneath a tree that rises out of a trash-strewn vacant lot at the corner of 181st Street and Prospect Avenue.


WINE TALK
LEAD: SONOMA-CUTRER, Jordan and Robert Mondavi.
Familiar names?
If you eat out and if you drink wine when you do, they should be.
According to a survey by Wine and Spirits magazine, a trade publication, they are the wines American diners order most: as Wine and Spirits put it, ''the most popular wines in the most popular restaurants.


Keep Hanford's Radiation Risk in Perspective;   Hazardous Uranium
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dempsey Suspended
LEAD: Rick Dempsey, the Los Angeles Dodger catcher, was suspended for one game by the National League yesterday and was fined an undisclosed amount for fighting.
Dempsey and Len Dykstra of the Philadelphia Phillies were ejected in the seventh inning of Monday's game in Los Angeles.(AP)


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Cluett, Peabody &amp; Co., New York, a manufacturer of men's and women's apparel and a subsidiary of Bidermann Industries Corp., appointed Robert E. Briefel president of its hosiery group.
The company also announced the retirement of William Droeger as president of its Gold Toe hosiery division.


John Fox; Writer, 38
LEAD: John Fox, a novelist and short-story writer, died of AIDS on Aug. 14 at his home in Manhattan, a family spokesman said.
He was 38 years old.


Group Home Offers Mentally Ill Security
LEAD: To the Editor:


Czechoslovakia Marks 22d Anniversary of Prague Spring


Review/Theater;   Moss Hart's Valentine To the Craft He Adored
LEAD: Moss Hart's love affair with the theater, so movingly chronicled in his memoir, ''Act One,'' did not blind him to the inequities of his profession.
In the theater, a private or collaborative act of creativity is subjected to the capriciousness of actors, producers, audiences and, of course, critics.


John Stalnaker, Ex-Administrator Of Merit Scholarships, Dies at 87
LEAD: John M. Stalnaker, a psychologist, educator and former president of the corporation that selects high school students as National Merit Scholars, died Sunday at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 87 years old.


Embargo Turns Aqaba Into Port of Little Import
LEAD: The trim little port here, Jordan's only outlet to the sea and historically an important site for Iraq, was virtually at a standstill today as a result of United Nations sanctions and a United States naval blockade.


Suspense Over Giants' Holdouts Continues
LEAD: Bill Parcells is either convinced that one of his four defensive holdouts will not play this season or the coach of the Giants is making an attempt to put pressure on someone through the news media.


Jazz Group to Open Miller Theater Season
LEAD: The New York debut of the Richard Tee Committee, a jazz ensemble, will open the season at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, Columbia University, Broadway and 116th Street, on Sept. 22.
The group features Mr.
Tee, a pianist; Steve Gadd, a drummer; Lenny Pickett, a saxophonist; Will Lee, a bassist; John Tropea, a guitarist, and Ralph Ma


Pakistanis Race to Save Indus Valley Ruins
LEAD: The Pakistani Government, racing against time to save the Indus Valley ruins of Mohenjo-Daro, the site of one of the world's oldest but most mysterious civilizations, is planning an international appeal for help.


Target of Paper's Barbs Resigns at Dartmouth
LEAD: A Dartmouth College music professor who frequently clashed with a student newspaper has resigned, putting an end to one of the college's most painful public quarrels.


Market Place;   2 Companies Gain In Mideast Woes
LEAD: IT is an old tradition on Wall Street that even an ill wind can whip up a nice profit for someone.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: I HAVE been amazed by the variety of fresh salmon in markets around the country, each with its own texture and flavor.
Once you get to know them, you can bring out their best qualities.


SUNY to Impose New Fees In Face of Budget Problems
LEAD: The 380,000 students at the State University of New York, who have successfully opposed proposals to raise their tuition in the last few years, will be hit with new and higher fees this fall that could exceed the tuition increases they have fended off.


Jet Skids to Safe Landing
LEAD: A United Airlines Boeing 737 jetliner with 107 people aboard was unable to lock its right landing gear but skidded to a safe emergency landing at Los Angeles International Airport today.


Brooklyn Girl, 3, Is Struck by a Stray Bullet
LEAD: A 3-year-old girl was shot and critically wounded last night on a street in the East New York section of Brooklyn when she was caught in the cross-fire of two feuding groups of youths, the police said.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-15
President Bush will call up reserves, Administration officials said.
He is expected to order 40,000 Americans placed on active duty in the first call-up since the Vietnam War.
Page A1


Fake Bomb Used in Long Island Bank Holdup


Uncovered Short Sales Climb 4.1% on Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that short interest for the month ended Aug. 15 increased by 26.37 million shares, or 4.1 percent, to a record 668.96 million shares.


A Day Short of Death, a Georgia Killer Is Given Life
LEAD: Just a day before a 39-year-old convict was to die in the electric chair, the Supreme Court granted a stay of execution today, and hours later the Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles granted clemency and commuted the man's sentence to life imprisonment.


Challenge To Microsoft Advancing
LEAD: The effort to challenge the domination of the Microsoft Corporation's software that allows desktop computers to operate popular programs like word processors and spreadsheets gained momentum yesterday as three companies agreed on a single standard for the rival Unix software.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD
Kingdom Defeats Nehemiah
Roger Kingdom, the world-record holder, edged his longtime rival, Renaldo Nehemiah, yesterday in the 110-meter hurdles in the Rovereto meet in Italy.
Kingdom, who is recovering from a hamstring injury, won with a time of 13.27 seconds.
Nehemiah, a former world-record holder, was second in 13.29.Peter Eliott of Britain warmed up for the


India Sends Soldiers to the Pakistani Border
LEAD: The Indian Army dispatched tanks and troop reinforcements today to the frontier with Pakistan, where soldiers from the two nations have been exchanging artillery fire for two days, officials and witnesses said.


A Major Revival in Research on Vaccines
LEAD: New strategies for developing the next generation of vaccines are resurrecting investment in a medical field that has been in the doldrums for years.


Souter Approval Urged By Conservative Groups
LEAD: The preliminary jousting over President Bush's nomination of Judge David H. Souter to the Supreme Court continued today, with a conservative coalition calling for quick and unanimous confirmation.


Dick Strout's Two Lives
LEAD: In every sense, Richard L. Strout stood out in the innumerable press conferences he attended during his six decades as a Washington reporter.
Nobody could miss this six-footer with a bemused expression and guardsman's mustache.
Besides that, Mr.
Strout, who died Sunday at the age of 92, was a singular figure who led a dual journalistic existence and came to occupy an unusual niche in the nation's capital.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Cyanamid Co., Wayne, N.J., a medical, agricultural and consumer products company, said its board had approved the repurchase of 10 million to 12 million shares of its common stock.


Town's Cancer Rate Is Termed Not Unusual
LEAD: State officials say they have definitively ruled out a higher than usual rate of cancer in this town, despite fears that an electric substation has caused illness along one street.


On the Politics of Green-Bean Cookery
LEAD: OH, the green bean.
The sensible, long-suffering legume.
Requiring little for itself in terms of glory or kid-glove treatment, Phaseolus vulgaris is the unsung handmaiden of cuisine.
The green bean sings to the cook: ''Steam me, boil me, blanch me, do what you want to do; pickle me, stir-fry me. .


Keep Hanford's Radiation Risk in Perspective
LEAD: To the Editor:


This Time, Will We Learn Our Lesson on Oil?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Land of Ancient Vineyards Takes On the Giants
LEAD: ''THE Rhone,'' said Francois Perrin, ''will be the new Bordeaux.''


A Bank Expert's Plan for Change
LEAD: When Lowell L. Bryan, head of the banking group at McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consulting firm, ponders the future of the banking system, he recalls his father's explanation of how the failure of four banks in Oklahoma during the early 1930's carried away the family fortune.


Booby Trap Death Brings Fine
LEAD: In a bargain with prosecutors, a 46-year-old Denver man today pleaded guilty to manslaughter for rigging a shotgun booby trap that killed a young man who had broken into his machine tool shop.
He was placed on six years' probation and ordered to pay $9,500 in fines and restitution.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet To Sell I.M.S. Unit
LEAD: The Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation said it was seeking a buyer for the communications division of its I.M.S.
International subsidiary.
The company said it was divesting itself of the division to sharpen Dun &amp; Bradstreet's focus on key markets for its information services.
I.M.S.
International, which was acquired in May 1988, provides market research, data-base and communications services to the pharmaceutical industry.


Critic's Notebook;   Berlin's Museum Intrigue Goes Public
LEAD: In the international museum world, there is at this moment no hotter seat than the one occupied by Dr.
Wolf-Dieter Dube, who has been director general of the West Berlin Museums since 1983.
In a matter not of months but of weeks, he and his colleagues in both West and East Berlin have to agree on a master plan for the unification of the Berlin museums.


Excerpts From Iraqi Chief's Note and Iraqi Official's Remarks
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an ''open letter'' from President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to President Bush yesterday, as transmitted by the official Iraqi News Agency and translated from the Arabic by Reuters, and excerpts from a news conference yesterday by the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, in Amman, Jordan, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of the Cable News Network:


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Sunday about Lee J. Richmond, a poet and teacher at St.
John's University, misstated part of his background as an author.
He did not write the novel ''High on Gold''; the author was Lee M. Richmond.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm out of here, dude. They want to listen to that stuff, they can have it.''
- Felix Mendiola, 14, chased away from a convenience store by elevator music. [A18:6.]


T.W.A. Increasing Domestic Fares
LEAD: Trans World Airlines joined other carriers and said that it would increase domestic fares by 5.3 percent to offset higher fuel costs.


Yankees Begin Post-Steinbrenner Era With a Victory


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 17
Aug. 10
Aug. 18
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.5
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
214.0
212.4
223.9
Distillate stocks
121.6
119.3
115.6
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.2
6.9
Product imports, daily
3.2
1.9
1.8
Crude stocks
375.7
375.9
335.2
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
92.3
94.3
90.0


Bear, Stearns Buys Back Own Stock
LEAD: Bear, Stearns &amp; Company repurchased 2.36 million shares of its own stock when the share price of the Wall Street firm hit a 52-week low.
The buyback, part of a program dating to November 1987, amounted to about 2.4 percent of the firm's common shares outstanding.
The stock was bought from a single, unidentified institutional investor, a spokesman, Jonathan


Franklin and Seiko Distribution Deal
LEAD: Franklin Electronic Publishers Inc. announced that it would sell electronic reference products in Japan under a distribution agreement with Seiko Instruments Inc.
The publishing company, based in Mount Holly, will export electronic speaking dictionaries intended for students of English as a foreign language.


Chronicle
LEAD: BILLIE JEAN KING has managed to find a way to be on hand when she is inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, N.Y., on Sunday.
BARBARA JORDAN, DR.
FLORENCE B. SEIBERT and the late photographer MARGARET BOURKE-WHITE are also being inducted and Ms.
Jordan, a former Congresswoman from Texas, and Dr.


Little Progress Is Seen In Signing of Coleman
LEAD: The Nets have not made significant progress toward signing Derrick Coleman, the No. 1 pick in this year's National Basketball Association draft.
Coleman's attorney, Harry MacDonald, was disappointed with the outcome of a three-hour meeting with the Nets' front office last week.
Coleman is seeking a five- or six-year contract that would make him the league's highest-paid rookie.


Robert W. Trombino; Parks Official, 39
LEAD: Robert W. Trombino, chief of stadium and marina operations for the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation, died on Sunday at his home in East Elmhurst, Queens.
He was 39 years old.


MCI Plans Digital Shift Next Year
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation announced yesterday that it planned to deploy an all-digital long-distance network by the end of next year, and might take a charge of $500 million to $550 million against this quarter's earnings to cover the cost of retiring older network equipment.


Boris Shragin, a Writer On Russians, Dies at 63
LEAD: Boris Shragin, a Soviet human-rights advocate and writer, died on Aug. 15 in La Guardia Hospital in Queens.
He was 63 years old and lived in Queens.
He died of lung cancer, his wife, Natalia Sadomskaya, said.


First Images of Venus Are Better Than Hoped
LEAD: Space agency engineers said today that initial images of the ruptured surface of Venus sent by the Magellan space probe were better than expected and that the craft appeared to be functioning normally again after last week's surprising radio blackout.


New York Violates Welfare Ban
LEAD: New York City welfare officials continue to place homeless families in unauthorized welfare hotels despite a court order prohibiting their placement in any but three designated welfare hotels, city officials and advocates for the homeless said last night.


Pakistan Plans to Try Hijackers Of Soviet Jet, but Moscow Differs
LEAD: Eleven convicts from a Siberian labor camp who hijacked a Soviet jetliner to Pakistan and requested political asylum will go on trial here, Pakistani television said today.
But the Soviet press agency Tass reported that the hijackers would be extradited to the Soviet Union.
There was no explanation for the differing reports.


WILD HORSE PLAN IS CALLED COSTLY
LEAD: A Government program offering wild horses for adoption is becoming increasingly costly, with no evidence that Federal rangeland has benefited, a Congressional study has said.


Deere Profit Up 16.2%
LEAD: Deere &amp; Company said today that its third-quarter earnings rose 16.2 percent from the period last year as sales rose 7.9 percent.
Deere said it earned $114.1 million, or $1.50 a share, in the three months ended July 31, compared with $98.2 million, or $1.30 a share, a year earlier.
The company's fiscal year ends on Oct.


Black Agent to Head Team Investigating F.B.I. for Bias
LEAD: The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, William S. Sessions, has named the agency's highest-ranking black field agent to investigate allegations that evidence of widespread racial discrimination within the bureau was covered up by white supervisors, F.B.I. officials said today.


Incumbent Senator And Governor Win In Wyoming Voting
LEAD: Senator Alan K. Simpson, an incumbent Republican, and Gov.
Mike Sullivan, an incumbent Democrat, handily won their primary races today.


Viktor Tsoi, Singer And Songwriter, 28; Star of Soviet Rock
LEAD: Viktor Tsoi, the lead singer and songwriter for Kino, one of the Soviet Union's most popular rock bands, died in a car crash outside Leningrad on Aug. 15.
He was 28 years old.


How the U.S. Can Vote in Haiti
LEAD: The story seems grimly familiar.
A provisional Government in Haiti is stumbling toward elections.
Violent incidents blaze up with increasing frequency as the election nears, creating an atmosphere of fear.
Washington is betting on the armed forces to insure the security of the voting.
But there seems little will to curb the violence either by the


Mets Miss Opportunity to Close In on Pirates
LEAD: On a night when the Pittsburgh Pirates finally lost a game, the Mets lost even more: They lost their poise, they lost their chance and they lost their own game here when they were zapped by Ed Whitson and the San Diego Padres, 7-0.


East Germans Seek October Unity Date
LEAD: Trying to end a dispute over the timetable for German unity, the East German Prime Minister, Lothar de Maiziere, said today that a majority of the parties in East Germany's Parliament had agreed on Oct. 14 as the date for formal merger with West Germany.


EATING WELL
LEAD: IN a recent rerun of ''Thirtysomething,'' Melissa, a main character, suggested that a friend use margarine rather than butter because it was ''less caloric.'' The fact is, margarine and butter have the same number of calories, and a study released since the program was rerun has cast doubt on margarine's role in reducing cholesterol.


Census May Cut Congress Seats For New Jersey and Connecticut
LEAD: The first rough numbers from the 1990 census are out, and they indicate that even though Connecticut and New Jersey gained population in the last decade, both could lose seats when the House of Representatives is reapportioned.


Review/Television;   Race Relations and Violence's Aftermath
LEAD: The crimes, conflicts and assorted calamities that populate each evening's local news shows give the same kick as prime-time dramas.
The pictures of shaken victims, filled bodybags, grieving relatives, handcuffed suspects, the agitated reporting, the little jolts of excitement and of pathos are plainly aimed at viewers' emotions.


Bridge
LEAD: Experts frequently ask themselves this question during the play: ''Why didn't so-and-so do such-and-such?'' The answer can be illuminating, and was on the diagramed deal for Sidney Lazard of New Orleans, who has been one of America's most formidable performers for four decades.


State Dept. Contract Gives Wang a Boost
LEAD: In its most positive news in more than two years, Wang Laboratories Inc. said yesterday that the State Department had awarded the company a five-year, $841.3 million contract to supply and service a range of desk-top and midrange computers.


Iraq Proposes Peace Talks, Then Lashes Out at the U.S.
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq sent his Foreign Minister here to propose peace talks with the United States today, then delivered another slashing attack on President Bush.


Affirmative Action Has India's Students Astir
LEAD: For more than a week, a student protest has been growing steadily on the campuses of this and other Indian cities, spilling onto roads and railway tracks, parks and bazaars.


U.S. Embassy in Amman Attracts Those Seeking to Flee


Jets Report No Progress With 3 Unsigned Players
LEAD: The Jets announced no progress with their three unsigned players yesterday but they did cut a corner in an effort to get down to next Tuesday's 60-man roster limit.


Producer Demands A Free Hand to Cast 'Miss Saigon' Roles
LEAD: Even though he has finally won approval for the British actor Jonathan Pryce to repeat his role as a Eurasian pimp in ''Miss Saigon,'' Cameron Mackintosh said yesterday that Actors' Equity would have to give him a free hand on other casting decisions before he would bring his hit London musical to


Nazis Didn't Figure in Plot to Kill Hitler
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. TO CALL 40,000 RESERVES TO SUPPORT SAUDI TROOPLIFT; REJECTS IRAQI OFFER TO TALK
LEAD: To fill gaps in the United States military buildup in the Persian Gulf region, President Bush on Wednesday is expected to order a mobilization of reserves that will initially place about 40,000 Americans on active duty, Administration officials said today.


George Chambers, 87; Lost Disputed Election
LEAD: George O. Chambers, an Indiana Republican apparently elected to Congress by 12 votes in 1960 but rejected seven months later by the House of Representatives, died Friday at the Muncie-Ball Hospital in Muncie, Ind.
He was 87 years old and had lived in Anderson, Ind., before moving to Muncie six years ago.


Tokyo Offering By Pepsico Unit
LEAD: Pepsico Inc. said on Tuesday that a Japanese joint venture of its Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant chain had begun selling shares on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.


Currents;   On Feeding Your Fancy (And Birds)
LEAD: FALL bird migration is about to begin and a twiggy birdhouse or feeder is a splendid way to appeal to birds of passage.
It also adds a sculptural note to the garden.


Market Place;   The Big Selloff In O-T-C Stocks
LEAD: THE 400-point decline in the Dow Jones industrial average since mid-July has captured headlines, but the real carnage is taking place in the over-the-counter market.
Investors describe the activity of recent weeks as the worst since the October 1987 crash.


Hog Prices in Big Decline; Bellies Down by 2A Limit
LEAD: A growing supply of pork and a break in cash market prices combined yesterday to send hog futures prices skidding at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.


BRIEFS
LEAD: Debt


Currents;   Tropical Plants Thrive In the Great Indoor Jungle
LEAD: GARDEN shops are now stocking tropical plants suitable to the low light of indoor winter gardens. ''Now's the time to start to look at these plants and see which ones appeal to you,'' said Nancy Tim, horticulturalist at the Central Park Zoo.


Coffee Machines Recalled Over Fire Hazard
LEAD: An estimated 800,000 Proctor-Silex automatic drip coffee makers are being recalled because they pose a potential fire hazard.


Review/Music;   A Conductor Who Transcends the Predictable
LEAD: Neeme Jarvi, who takes over as music director of the Detroit Symphony this fall, made his Mostly Mozart debut on Tuesday night at Avery Fisher Hall with mostly auspicious results.


N.L.R.B. Opposes Inquiry on Daily News
LEAD: The National Labor Relations Board has joined the The Daily News in opposing the New York Department of Labor's effort to create a board of inquiry that would look into the paper's negotiations with its unions.


Electrolux Plans To Lay Off 15,000
LEAD: Electrolux A.B., the Swedish appliance company, said it would cut 15,000 employees, or 10 percent of its work force, over the next two years to bolster falling profits.
The company made the announcement as it reported that profits in the first half of the year fell to $175 million from $346 million in the 1989 period.


Comez Struggles At Hamlet Challenge
LEAD: With less than one week to the start of the United States Open, the reigning French Open champion, Andres Gomez, appears to be in need of a shot of adrenaline and the new giant killer of tennis, Goran Ivanisevic, looks poised to take another Grand Slam tournament by storm.


Correction
LEAD: Because of editing errors, an article yesterday about plans for satellites to measure climatic change misstated the conclusion of a report to the White House and carried an erroneous byline.
A panel said that smaller, simpler satellites could begin monitoring the climate sooner, rather than later, and that they should take budgetary priority over the elaborate Earth Observing System.


Romanians Look Anew at Wartime Dictator
LEAD: For more than 40 years under Communist rule the 23d of August was National Day, marking the day in 1944 when Romania turned against its Nazi allies, declaring a unilateral armistice in its war with the Allies.


Poland Seeks to Revive Its Stately Homes
LEAD: Poland's old noble families, dispersed around the world or reduced to cramped walk-ups in their homeland, have little but memories of their once elegant estates.


The Goals of War
LEAD: The likelihood is that Americans will die in the Middle East -soldiers, pilots flying missions against Iraqi targets or hostages tethered by Saddam Hussein like sacrificial goats.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   West Hopes U.N. Will Back Use of Force in the Embargo
LEAD: Western diplomats expressed hope today about the prospects of winning Security Council endorsement for military action to enforce the embargo against Iraq.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD
Nehemiah Earns Revenge in Hurdles
The former world record-holder, Renaldo Nehemiah, beat the current record-holder, Roger Kingdom, today in the 110-meter high hurdles at an international meet at Linz, Austria.
Meanwhile, Carl Lewis and his Santa Monica Track Club teammates failed again in a bid for a world record in the 400-meter relay.


Washington Phone Venture
LEAD: The Washington Post Company and American Personal Communications Inc., a small cellular telephone company in Baltimore, said yesterday that they had agreed to form a limited partnership to develop a new generation of cellular telephone service in Washington.


Police Protest 2d Inquiry On Shooting in Teaneck
LEAD: After cheering angry speeches in which Gov.
Jim Florio and Attorney General Robert J. Del Tufo were denounced, hundreds of police officers marched through the heart of Teaneck late this afternoon to protest a new investigation by New Jersey into the shooting of a black teen-ager by a white Teaneck policeman on


Cray Research
LEAD: Cray Research Inc. said it had sold a Cray X-MP supercomputer system to Hydro-Quebec, the principal Canadian supplier of hydroelectric power.
It said Hydro-Quebec had installed the computer at its center for numerical network analysis in Montreal.
It will be used to simulate Hydro-Quebec's power networks.


Judge Found Guilty in Obstruction of Justice
LEAD: A Federal District Court judge was convicted today of illegally disclosing a wiretap to its target and lying to the Federal Bureau of Investigation with the intent to obstruct a grand jury investigation.


Topics of The Times;   The House That Roared
LEAD: New Yorkers have learned to swallow the lump in the throat that rises each time a movie revival house is closed.
Silly, they think, to feel sentimental about those rundown places, with their peeling paint, lumpy seats and threadbare curtains.
Why sniffle over the shutting of the Bleecker Street Cinema, now that the Thalia, the New Yorker and the


Reagan Set Table for Savings and Loan Orgy;   President and Son
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   G.I.'s Learning to Conquer the Desert
LEAD: The following report was transmitted under rules imposed in Saudi Arabia by the Defense Department for American correspondents accredited to the Pentagon.
The rules prohibit reporting of exact numbers of troops or weapons, their exact locations or the names of enlisted personnel.


Merc May Trade in Rubles
LEAD: The Chicago Mercantile Exchange said today that it was working with Soviet officials and economists to develop futures and options markets for the ruble.


Cigars Made the Old-Fashioned Way
LEAD: ALBERT CASTELLANO considers himself a tailor for cigar smokers. ''It's like a custom-made suit,'' said Mr.
Castellano, the manager of Tobacco Products, a 40-year-old shop on in the Chelsea section of Manhattan. ''You get individual attention.


Free Fuel for the Troops
LEAD: Saudi Arabia is diverting hundreds of thousands of barrels of jet and diesel fuel daily from exports and supplying it free to the international force on its territory.
Page A14.


3d Defendant in Bensonhurst Case Gets Maximum Sentence
LEAD: John S. Vento, the Bensonhurst defendant who first agreed to testify for the prosecution, then was charged with murder after he changed his mind, was sentenced yesterday to a maximum prison term of two years and eight months to eight years for unlawful imprisonment.


Dollar Weakens Further And Gold Prices Are Mixed
LEAD: The dollar continued to weaken yesterday as the foreign exchange markets remained nervous about events in the Persian Gulf.
Gold prices were mixed.


Steinbrenner Inactive in U.S.O.C.
LEAD: After four hours of tedious discussion and debate this afternoon, senior members of the United States Olympic Committee recessed without resolving whether George Steinbrenner would remain as one of the organization's three vice presidents.


Negotiations to Settle Liberian War End in Failure
LEAD: Negotiations for a settlement of the Liberian civil war ended in failure today after the country's main rebel group and West African leaders were unable to agree on more than postponing a discussion of their differences to the indefinite future.


Staten Island Boy, 9, Killed By Car While Chasing a Ball
LEAD: A 9-year-old boy was struck and killed by a car yesterday when he chased a ball from a school playground into a street on Staten Island, the police said.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Transcript of News Session by Bush and 2 Officials on Mideast
LEAD: Following is the transcript of the news conference by President Bush, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen.
Colin L. Powell yesterday in Kennebunkport, Me., as recorded by The New York Times:
OPENING STATEMENT


Editor Sues a Town That Had Sued Him
LEAD: A newspaper editor sued the Town of West Hartford yesterday, claiming the Hartford suburb violated his First Amendment rights when it sued him for writing an editorial critical of the town's handling of an anti-abortion protest.


Drug Given for Head Injury Is Ineffective in Long Term, Study Says
LEAD: A drug given to more than 100,000 head injury patients each year is ineffective after the first week and, as a long-term treatment, is actually worse than giving nothing at all, a study has found.


'Religious War' in Ukraine, Orthodox Assert
LEAD: Russian Orthodox leaders accused Ukrainian Catholics today of waging a ''religious war'' against them, including attacks on churches and hostage-taking.


3Com President Makes A Rapid Rise to Chief
LEAD: Just four months after being named president of the 3Com Corporation, Eric P. Benhamou has been elected chief executive.
On Sept. 20, Mr.
Benhamou will succeed L. William Krause, who will continue as chairman of the computer networking company based in Santa Clara, Calif.


Beijing Journal;   As Daily Toes the Line, Readers Turn Their Backs
LEAD: Behind the armed guards at the grand main gate of the compound, beyond the cafeteria in a pleasant park-like setting, is a building that is identified as No. 5, but which might better be labeled as a battleground for the future of China.


Streets Are Closed After Masonry Falls
LEAD: Broadway between 102d and 105th Streets was closed to traffic last night after masonry fell from the seventh floor of an 11-story building at 230 West 103d Street, the police said.
There were no injuries.
A spokesman for the Buildings Department, Vahe Tiryakian, said that problems with ornamental stonework on the building's facade had been detected on Monday and that nets were put up as a precaution.


Hilton's New Campaign Promotes Brand Image
LEAD: The Hilton Hotels Corporation has begun a series of brand-image commercials created by the Los Angeles office of McCann-Erickson Worldwide, its first of this type in six years.
The hotel chain, which has relied on promotional spots for things like special weekend rates, has turned its $7 million budget toward print and television ads that feature scenes from hotels around the world and the theme line, ''Hilton, it's all in the name.


Rose Status, Year Later
LEAD: Yesterday was Cara Chae Rose's first birthday, and while undoubtedly a joyous occasion it was not quite the harbinger her father once predicted it would be.
It was a year ago tomorrow, in fact, that her father, Pete Rose, the manager of the Cincinnati Reds, was suspended from baseball after the commissioner, A.


CBS New Division President Is to Announce His Departure
LEAD: After two tumultuous years at CBS, David W. Burke has been forced out as president of the network's news division, an executive of the network said last night.
The executive, who would speak only on the condition of anonymity, said Mr.
Burke would be replaced by Eric Ober, the president of the five television stations owned and operated by C


Welch's 21st Victory Ends Athletics' Slump
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics righted themselves after a three-game losing streak tonight and beat the Chicago White Sox, 7-1, as Bob Welch won his 21st game and Willie Randolph had three hits, including a triple.


U.S. in Plea On Textiles
LEAD: The United States has asked China to cooperate in halting purportedly illegal shipments of textiles intended to avoid quota restrictions, an American trade official said today.


Sugary Diet Link to Delinquency Discounted
LEAD: University of Wisconsin researchers have found no support for the common belief that sugary foods or the abnormal metabolism of sugar can provoke aggression or other behavior problems in juvenile delinquents or, for that matter, in nondelinquent boys.


With Steinbrenner Gone, Will Stability Arrive?
LEAD: It is too early, Gene Michael said, to know if stability, at long last, will come to the Yankees.


Who Says a Lobster Outranks Broccoli?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Viola Puts Mets Back on Track
LEAD: Things were getting so shabby, Bud Harrelson said, that he began keeping a kind of diary or log on the Mets' sins, slumps and swoons.
Too laid-back.
Too lackadaisical.
Time to get the act together before they ran out of time.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: August has been the nicest month for MAGGIE KUHN, who founded the Gray Panthers 20 years ago: she became a Giraffe, she received 1,000 pints of Ben and Jerry's light ice cream and she turned 85.


Armed Raids in Pakistan Kill 27 Mohajirs
LEAD: Masked gunmen killed 27 people and wounded 83 today in raids on members of Pakistan's powerful Mohajir national movement, hospital officials said.


A Dispute Over Radio Technology
LEAD: Setting the stage for a contentious regulatory battle over emerging radio technology, the National Association of Broadcasters has asked the Federal Communications Commission to dismiss the application of a company that wants to provide ''digital audio broadcasting,'' or D.A.B., by satellite.


Reagan Set Table for Savings and Loan Orgy;   Pay Off in Shares
LEAD: To the Editor:


High-Tech Tolls, and Less Pollution
LEAD: Can transponders unclog the traffic that backs up for miles at New York City's toll bridges and tunnels?
Authorities are about to experiment with systems already installed in places like New Orleans and Dallas.
The sooner the better.


MTV Is Sued Over Phone Contest
LEAD: A California woman has filed a lawsuit against the cable television music channel MTV, accusing it of running illegal lotteries and deceptively advertising contests that viewers can enter by calling ''900'' telephone numbers.


Vermont Journal;   New Battle Goes On As Guns Lie Quiet
LEAD: The crews have gone home, their excavation pits refilled with clay, the buttons and cow bones and glass shards they unearthed bagged and ready for analysis.
Mount Independence, the site of New England's main fortress in the early years of the American Revolution, is silent again.


Reagan Set Table for Savings and Loan Orgy;   States' Wrongs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mississippi to Pay $4.7 Million to Settle Bias Suit
LEAD: The State of Mississippi has been ordered to pay more than $4.7 million in the final ruling of a 20-year-old discrimination suit against the state's employment agency.


Trump Signs Bailout Pact
LEAD: Donald J. Trump completed the signing of all documents relating to his bailout package yesterday and received the first installment of $65 million in new loans.


California on Verge of Making Its Presidential Primary 2d in Nation
LEAD: In a move that could have a profound effect on Presidential elections, the leadership of the California Legislature agreed today to move up the state's Presidential primary to second in the nation after New Hampshire.


Patient Is Too Weak For a Transplant
LEAD: A teacher with AIDS who won a court decision to make his medical insurer pay for a lifesaving bone marrow transplant has learned he is now too weak to get the transplant.


People
LEAD: * Patricia E. Harney has been named a creative director of Leo Burnett, Chicago.


Japan Stocks Plunge; Finance Sector Ailing
LEAD: The sharp slide in the Tokyo stock market accelerated today after a heavy selloff yesterday.


Ford Introduces European Line
LEAD: Ford of Europe introduced its new Escort and Orion line of small family cars.
The line, in which the Ford Motor Company unit has invested $1.5 billion over the last five years, will go on sale around in Europe next month.
The cars are powered by 1.3- to 2-liter engines.


Doubling Up Inmates Is Upheld in Court
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday refused to halt Connecticut's preparations to greatly expand the use of housing two inmates to a cell and to add beds at the state's maximum-security prison.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: RICHARD HARRIS is at center stage in a campaign to save the Young Vic Theater in London.
Mr.
Harris, currently starring in the hit production of Pirandello's ''Henry IV'' at the Wyndams Theater in London, makes an appeal for contributions after each performance.


Plan to Reduce Haulers' Fees At Fresh Kills Is Withdrawn
LEAD: Facing likely defeat, Mayor David N. Dinkins withdrew a proposal before the Board of Estimate Tuesday night that would have lowered the fee charged private garbage haulers to dump at the Fresh Kills Landfill on Staten Island.


Books of The Times;   Daimler-Benz and Its Nazi History
LEAD:
Mercedes in Peace and War
German Automobile Workers, 1903-1945
By Bernard P. Bellon
356 pages. Illustrated. Columbia University Press. $37.50.


Justin in Merger
LEAD: Justin Industries said it had signed a definitive merger agreement with the Tony Lama Company.
A Justin subsidiary will pay $9 a share in cash for Tony Lama common stock.
The offer will start no later than Aug. 28 and will be for all of the approximately two million shares of Tony Lama's outstanding stock.


British Aerospace In $900 Million Deal
LEAD: British Aerospace P.L.C. said it had firm orders for 25 of its BAe-146 aircraft and options for eight more, in a deal worth about $900 million.
The company has sold 293 of the four-engine airliners that entered service in 1983.
The aircraft can seat between 70 and 120 passengers.


Yanks Top Blue Jays For Sixth in a Row
LEAD: The Yankees, waging a more spirited battle for sixth place than the Blue Jays are for first these days, completed a three-game sweep of the perplexing American League East contenders by defeating Toronto, 4-2, last night.


Board of Estimate, Headed for Demise, Approves Flurry of Projects
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate approved a flurry of disputed proposals early yesterday morning, including a plan by Columbia University to build a commercial biomedical laboratory at the site of the ballroom where Malcolm X was assassinated in 1965.


Robert Robinson, 76, Pioneer Spinal Surgeon
LEAD: Dr.
Robert A. Robinson, a pioneer in spinal surgery and one of the first to employ the use of an electron microscope to study bones, died Aug. 16 at a retirement community in Baltimore.
He was 76 years old.
Dr.
Robinson, who had been professor and chairman of the department of orthopedic surgery at the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, died after apparently suffering a heart attack, John Hopkins said.


In Village, The Past Is Recalled And Resold
LEAD: WITH the opening of U.S.E.D. last Sunday, it feels as if it is 1976 again in Greenwich Village.
That was the year Jerry Harmyk opened Johnny Jupiter on West 10th Street, a strange new breed of shop that seemed to combine garage sale, flea market and toy store.


Bridge
LEAD: One of the unobtrusive advantages of the Lightner double, asking for an unusual lead against a slam, is that it inhibits some bad penalty doubles at high levels.
West would have been much better off if he had remained silent throughout the auction on the diagramed deal, but he gave South some useful help by repeated doubles.


Bernard Wex, Bridge Designer, 68
LEAD: Bernard Wex, designer of the world's longest suspension bridge span, died on July 31, The Independent newspaper reported today.
He was 68 years old.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: MADDY COHEN had her two children, Matthew and Benjamin, at an age when some parents are worried about paying their children's college tuition.
She was just shy of 40 years old when Matthew was born two and a half years ago.
She had Benjamin four months ago.


Seabrook Closes Down Again
LEAD: Three days after beginning regular operation, the Seabrook nuclear reactor closed down today, its eighth unplanned shutdown since connecting to the regional power grid on May 29.
Today's shutdown occurred automatically during scheduled maintenance on a turbine control system, said a plant spokesman, Ron Sher.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CLEVELAND (AL) - Optioned Jeff Manto, infielder, and Jeff Shaw, pitcher, to Colorado of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Sergio Valdez, pitcher, from Colorado.
BASKETBALL
HOUSTON (NBA) - Signed Matt Bullard, forward, to a one-year contract.
FOOTBALL
GIANTS (NFC) - Signed Erik Howard, nose tackle, and Mark Collins, cornerback, to two-year contracts.


Parker Birthday Concert
LEAD: The 70th anniversary of the birth of the jazz saxophonist Charlie (Bird) Parker will be celebrated with a free concert on Tuesday at 7 P.M. at the Great Hill in Central Park, at West 106th Street.
The concert, sponsored by the Central Park Conservancy, will feature the Lou Donaldson Quintet.
The drummer Max Roach will be the master of ceremonies.


G.M. Cancels Plan For a Convertible
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it had canceled plans for a convertible version of the Chevrolet Beretta because of mounting costs, engineering and quality problems and delays.


A 14-Year Trail Leads From Harlem to a Murder Suspect's Arrest
LEAD: Even Harvey Rosen, a veteran homicide prosecutor who does not shock easily, remembers it as a particularly gruesome case: A woman's torso found in Mount Morris Park in Harlem, her hands found by a child playing nearby, her severed head found floating in the Hudson River.


Pac-10 Unlikely To Expand Soon
LEAD: Expansion of the Pacific-10 Conference seems to be just about a dead issue, for the time being.


59th St. Bridge Market Developers Have Duty to Clean Up Site
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shuttle Fuel Leak Is Traced to Glass Beads
LEAD: Glass beads found in hydrogen lines from the space shuttle Columbia contributed to its fuel leaks, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today.


Review/Dance;   Ideas From the Joseph Holmes Troupe
LEAD: The Joseph Holmes Dance Theater, a jazz dance company seen at the Studio/Theater of the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival on Saturday night, is an engaging troupe filled with likable dancers whose stage personalities and styles blend nicely.
Randy Duncan, the company's director and resident choreographer, obviously has lots of ideas and a sense of how he wants to express them.


Holtz Denies Condoning Steroids
LEAD: Notre Dame said today that five football players had tested positive for steroid use in the past three years, but Coach Lou Holtz denied published allegations by a former player that steroid use was widespread and that he must have known about it.


Reagan Set Table for Savings and Loan Orgy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dispute Delays St. Louis Offering
LEAD: A delay in settling the offering of a $24 million tax and revenue anticipation note by the City of St.
Louis could have negative implications on the city's general obligation bond rating if not resolved soon, Moody's Investors Service said yesterday.


In Mongolia, Taking Stock of Rare Animals
LEAD: This vast nation of steppes, rich in animal species, is beginning to count its living wealth to improve conservation.


Hospital Police Officer Is Killed
LEAD: An off-duty police officer for the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation was fatally stabbed on a subway train in Brooklyn yesterday during a fight with two youths who had robbed two transit workers moments earlier, the police said.


Shevack's Attraction to Big Clients
LEAD: PARTNERS &amp; SHEVACK, a small New York agency, recently pulled off a feat uncommon for an agency its size: It snatched an important account, Anacin, away from the giant Young &amp; Rubicam.


Washington at Work;   Religion and Politics Become Fused In Congressman's District, and Heart
LEAD: Boston is one of those places where religion and politics sometimes merge to the point of being indistinguishable.
Such was the case during one of Representative Joe Moakley's visits to the streets of the South Boston district that has been his base since he entered politics 37 years ago.


SRI LANKAN PLANES HIT TAMIL TARGETS
LEAD: The air force bombed and strafed targets on the Jaffna peninsula today in what military officials called a new offensive against the northern stronghold of the Tamil rebels.


Tokyo's Offer Welcomed
LEAD: Egyptian officials said today that President Hosni Mubarak had gained a pledge of financial assistance from Japan and that they expected the help to go ''some way'' toward meeting losses that Mr.
Mubarak said could run at a rate of $2 billion a year.


Metro Matters;   Politics, Pensions And the Shadow Of a Raider
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, the corporate raider and chairman of Trans World Airlines, has focused on a new target, New York State's $47 billion pension fund, which he thinks should be used to influence management to be more efficient and competitive in corporations in which it has holdings.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Jordan's Ruler: A Peacemaker or Just Indecisive?
LEAD: As the gulf crisis deepens, the quandary of King Hussein of Jordan is becoming more acute.


Control Data Allowed to Sell 6 Computers to Soviet Union
LEAD: In a significant policy relaxation, the United States Government is allowing the Control Data Corporation to sell six mainframe computers to the Soviet Union.
The machines, which are considered mid-size mainframes and not supercomputers, will be used for analyzing safety factors in civilian nuclear power reactors.


100 More Die as Rival South African Blacks Fight
LEAD: Factional fighting in black townships around Johannesburg raged into a 10th successive day.
The police reported 100 more deaths today and overnight, raising the tally of dead beyond 500 in the 10-day period.


Topics of The Times;   Fine-Tune the Tunes
LEAD: Why didn't somebody think of it sooner?
Owners of convenience stores in the Pacific Northwest have found a fail-safe way to curb teen-age loitering: they blare out easy-listening music outside their all-night stores, and the kids flee.
At the first swell of Mantovani's strings from Hoagy's Corner Deli in Tillicum, Wash., 14-year-old Felix Mendiola said ''I'm out of here, dude.


Samaranch On Gulf Crisis
LEAD: Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, said today that he was very worried that the crisis in the Persian Gulf could adversely affect the Asian Games, scheduled to begin next month in Beijing.


Fall Classes and Lectures on Crafts
LEAD: Here are some classes in crafts scheduled for fall.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''In 1980 people said, 'These are the numbers we are going to have to deal with.' I don't think that it's the case this time.
Now there's an acceptance that there are errors in the census.


Teen-Ager Arrested in Shooting of Girl, 3
LEAD: A teen-ager who the police say worked as a gunman for a crack-dealing ring was charged yesterday with firing a bullet that critically wounded a 3-year-old girl as she played with her shadow on a Brooklyn sidewalk Tuesday night, the police said.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Square D Co., Palatine, Ill., which manufactures electrical equipment, to Creswell, Munsell, Fultz &amp; Zirbel, Cedar Rapids, Iowa, a unit of Young &amp; Rubicam, with an estimated budget of $30 million.


Campgrounds Guide for the Fall
LEAD: As in previous years, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation will keep certain campgrounds open throughout the fall.


South African Equality Begins With Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


Close to Home
LEAD: THIS month I will have lived in my present home for 11 years.
That's the longest I have ever lived in any one place in my entire adult life.


From Tragedy to Absurdity With Finland's Prolific Upstart
Seventeen guys in dark glasses are playing electric guitars and keyboards on the stage of a small club in Finland.
All of these men are named Frank, and some of them have died earlier in the film, ''Calamari Union,'' which is not about a rock band at all, but about the Franks' meandering attempts to get to the other side of Helsinki.
Yet here they are, alive and singing what could be the director Aki Kaurismaki's anthem: ''Bad boys are coming to break all your toys.''
Mr.
Kaurismaki, who has written and directed eight mischievous, society-tweaking films in the last seven years, is the highly successful bad boy of Finnish cinema.
In fact, he and his older brother Mika almost are the Finnish cinema; each directs, and together they produce their own works and distribute foreign films.
Now Aki Kaurismaki's films are arriving in the United States in one great wave, and they demonstrate that, at the age of 33, he is more than a prolific upstart or a local curiosity; he is an original and commanding talent among international film makers.


Yields Rise In Week
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report rose for the week ended yesterday.


Credit Cards Back $215 Million Issue


Intergroup to Consider Sale of Foxmeyer Unit
LEAD: National Intergroup Inc. said today that it would ''entertain and evaluate proposals'' for the sale of its Foxmeyer Corporation drug distribution subsidiary.
National Intergroup said several potential buyers had indicated they were interested in the unit.


For Regina Resnik, Feisty Fun In City Opera's 'Little Night Music'
LEAD: Before she has uttered her first withering lines as Mme.
Armfeldt, the acerbic grandmother in the revival of ''A Little Night Music'' at the New York State Theater, the mezzo-soprano Regina Resnik is greeted with applause.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amoco Corp., Chicago, the oil company, retained Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., to assist in the sale of assets from its petroleum additives manufacturing facility based in Clayton, Mo.
The value of the assets was not disclosed.


Gulf Crisis Stirs Concern on Asian Games' Fate
LEAD: The crisis in the Persian Gulf is truly a terrible thing, a Chinese writer complained the other day.


INSIDE
LEAD:
It's Official: 2 Germanys To Become One on Oct. 3
The East German Parliament voted to formally join West Germany on Oct. 3, ending weeks of increasingly partisan haggling over the reunification date.
Page A3.
California Wants Its Say
In a move that could have a big effect on Presidential elections, California legislators agreed to move up the primary to second in the nation after New Hampshire.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE OIL JOLT
The price of oil topped $31 a barrel, the highest price since November 1985, when the oil markets were still recovering from the Iranian revolution five years earlier.
The current Middle East crisis has now raised prices higher than they were when Iran and Iraq were trying to sink each other's tankers.


Smokers' Revolt Succeeds in Moscow
LEAD: Scores of angry smokers blocked a street next to Red Square for several hours today as public outrage over a summerlong cigarette shortage boiled over.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Restoring Marble Sheen


Lawsuit Challenges Easing of Controls On Nuclear Waste
LEAD: More than two dozen groups have filed a lawsuit challenging a decision by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to ease controls on the disposal of low-level nuclear wastes.


PRICE OF OIL JUMPS BY 9% IN ONE DAY
LEAD: The price of oil topped $31 a barrel yesterday, the highest price since November 1985, when the oil markets were still recovering from the Iranian revolution of five years earlier.
The current Middle East crisis has raised prices to a level higher than they were when Iran and Iraq were trying to sink each others' tankers.


The Shaken Financial Markets
LEAD: The world's financial markets have been reeling as fears mount of war in the Middle East and oil prices soar.


You Get Eight Miles to the Gallon, and a Microwave Oven, Too
LEAD: If the Statue of Liberty had looked over her shoulder last week, she would have seen the Wally Byam people right at the water's edge here in their round-edged, riveted, shiny aluminum homes on wheels.
All 378 of them.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Kuwaitis Resist Iraqis by Work Boycott and Armed Raids, 'Eyewitness' Articles Say
LEAD: Kuwaitis remain defiant in the wake of the Iraqi occupation of their country, and an underground armed resistance has sprung up, according to an article in the Wednesday issue of The Washington Post.
The paper said that the article was ''an eyewitness account of recent events.''


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Embassy in Kuwait Keeps Up Its Aid to Stranded Americans
LEAD: The State Department said today that despite plans to cut its diplomatic presence in Kuwait sharply, the embassy will continue to protect and assist the 2,500 Americans trapped there as best as it can.


Crossland's Capital Plan Is Rejected
LEAD: Crossland Savings Bank of Brooklyn, the largest savings institution in New York, said yesterday that Federal regulators had turned down its plan for a financial revamping and had imposed limits on its lending in the future.


When Sideline Becomes Firing Line
LEAD: To Mike Kelly, the memory of Rick Carter hangs like a banner at half-staff over a profession that has become increasingly pressurized and less forgiving in recent years.


Hawaiian in Protest Drowns
LEAD: A militant environmentalist drowned in Keauhou Bay on Tuesday shortly after leading a flotilla of boats and surfboards in an anti-geothermal protest, the police said.
The man, 47-year-old Dexter Cate, failed to surface after diving from a kayak, Lieut.
Errol Ishimine said.
Mr.
Cate, a Hilo High School teacher, was protesting state-backed plans for geothermal energy plants in Wao Kele O Puna Rainforest.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. KEEPS KUWAIT MISSION OPEN, JOINING OTHERS IN DEFYING IRAQ; TOKYO FUNDS TO BACK EMBARGO
LEAD: The United States announced today that it would defy Iraqi orders to close its embassy in Kuwait by Friday, and President Bush signed an order that is expected to put 40,000 reservists on active duty by the end of the month, supplementing and replacing forces involved in the Persian Gulf crisis.


After Melee, 'Fragile' Calm At Rikers Jail
LEAD: The day after dozens of correction officers quelled another inmate outburst at Rikers Island, First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel said yesterday that the climate at the jail complex was calmer than a week before but still ''fragile and tense.''


Bank Woes Climbing in Northeast
LEAD: The storm at New England banks is growing more ominous.


Calendar: Crafts Show, Frames, Flowers, Tours
LEAD: Autumn Crafts, Lincoln Center, Fordham University Plaza, 62d Street between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues; (212) 677-4627.


Heat Gets Williams
LEAD: The Miami Heat signed the forward John (Hot Rod) Williams to an offer sheet yesterday reportedly worth an estimated $18 million over six years.


Stotler Facing Charges By 2 Regulatory Panels
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission have filed separate disciplinary charges against Stotler &amp; Company, the collapsed futures trading firm, for hiding its financial difficulties from the two regulatory agencies beginning in December 1989.


Breaking The Cycle
LEAD: About 15,000 buses, unregulated, unscheduled, following any route the owner chooses, rumble through this city, many unsafe, some half-empty, all spewing pollution - a noxious product of the deregulation that has brought Chile the most open-market economy in Latin America.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ROMAN POLANSKI, who fled the United States to avoid being sentenced for having sexual relations with a 13-year-old girl, is entitled to have a lawyer defend him against a suit filed by the victim.
A state appeals court in Los Angeles ruled on Monday that Mr.
Polanski, who fled to France in 1977, should have the chance to answer the suit, brought by the victim in 1988.


Airlines Delay Fare Increase
LEAD: Most of the big airlines said yesterday that they would delay a planned 5.3 percent fare increase until Aug. 30.


Pepsico Drink Deal
LEAD: Pepsico Inc. said it had signed an exclusive five-year contract to supply soft drinks to Ponderosa and Bonanza restaurants beginning next month.
No financial details were released.
The Metromedia Company owns the 1,200 Ponderosa and Bonanza locations.


Earliest Figures For Census Fall Below Estimate
LEAD: Preliminary 1990 census figures for half the 50 states show that the tally is running more than 2 percent below the Census Bureau's own projections.


Shaken Baby Syndrome, Deadly but Little-Known Condition
LEAD: There were no scars, no burns or cuts and only two bruises on his back to hint of trauma when 2-month-old Kwok-wei Jiang was brought, dead on arrival, to Metropolitan Hospital in Manhattan on July 6, 1988.


A Kuwaiti Newspaper Reopens in London
LEAD: In a whitewashed building in a working-class area of west London, the daily newspaper Al Qabas is waging a war of well-chosen words against the Iraqi invaders of Kuwait.


Lebanon Moves To Create Political Equality
LEAD: The Lebanese Parliament has adopted basic changes in the Constitution that Government officials said could establish political equality between Muslims and Christians for the first time since independence 47 years ago.


Latest in Breast Reconstruction: Take Wedges of the Patient's Fat
LEAD: An increasing number of women who undergo mastectomies are having breast reconstruction using wedges of fat from their abdomens, buttocks or thighs, doctors say.


Bridgeport Selects A New Police Chief
LEAD: Thomas J. Sweeney, deputy commissioner of the Westchester County Department of Public Safety, was named Bridgeport's new police chief yesterday.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Korey, Kay &amp; Partners has rushed ahead its creation of an executive board because of the death of a partner, Lois Korey.
Its members are Steven R. Fajen, executive vice president, director of media and marketing services; Milda Misevicius, executive vice president, director of business development; Neil R.


Soviets Oust Armenia Rebels in Azerbaijan
LEAD: Soviet troops expelled hundreds of Armenian guerrilla fighters today from the Kazakh border region of neighboring Azerbaijan, where they had been attacking villages and battling soldiers sent by Moscow to intervene.


Leo Dana Dies at 94; Aide at Union Carbide
LEAD: Dr.
Leo I. Dana, a former Union Carbide research executive who specialized in low-temperature physics, died last Thursday in Canton, Ohio, at the age of 94.


Currents;   For Gardeners, Pants You Can Really Kneel In
LEAD: AT last, pants for the working gardener.
The clothing designer at Smith &amp; Hawkens, Gibson Mann, has attempted to put an end to aching kneecaps and lost pruners, trowels or other totable paraphernalia.
He has designed pants with pouches for foam pads where knees meet ground, and with seven deep pockets along the legs, back and sides.


Found: A New Treasure in the Gulf
LEAD: President Bush's main goal in the Persian Gulf is to protect moderate Arab states threatened by attack or intimidation from Iraq.
His policy has already achieved a brilliant success: A broad front of Arab states are standing up to Saddam Hussein's renegade regime.


Currents;   A New Life Is Found For Dairy Byproducts
LEAD: MATHEW RUBIN, a Vermonter who is an engineer by training and an environmentalist by temperament, has found a good use for cheese products' residue.
Concerned about landfill space, he persuaded the Vermont Whey Company of Montpelier to dry the 50,000 pounds of whey byproducts left each day to be reused as garden fertilizer.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
CBS Records, New York, a subsidiary of the Sony Corporation of America, named Jon R. Peisinger president of its music video enterprises division.


A Scene of Sugar, Fit for a Table of Yore
LEAD: IN the 17th and 18th centuries, landscape design was at its height in Europe, not only in vast Baroque gardens with stone terraces and fountains, but also in miniature scenes put together by porcelain makers and pastry chefs as centerpieces for banquet tables.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Planning at the Helm For Troops in the Sand
LEAD: Operating around the clock since the invasion of Kuwait, a small staff of Pentagon officials has served as the pivot point for the United States military deployment in the Persian Gulf, coordinating a sprawling operation involving a large-scale air and sealift, the mobilization of troops and daily revisions in battle plans.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Japan Offering Billions to Arabs To Help Offset Gulf Crisis Losses
LEAD: Japan is offering what may amount to billions of dollars in financial aid as well as communications and transportation support to Middle East nations that would suffer by cutting off trade with Iraq and Kuwait, the Foreign Ministry has said.


Greek Warning On Olympic Bid
LEAD: It's 1996 or never for Athens and the Olympics, the president of Greece's Olympic bid committee said today.


Boeing, Insurers In Federal Court
LEAD: The Boeing Company has sued its insurance companies to settle an $80 million dispute over who should pay to clean up toxic wastes at two Seattle-area sites.
The insurance companies have refused to pay, contending Boeing knew it was polluting the areas.


Mireet Greenspan Weds in Brooklyn
LEAD: Mireet S. Greenspan, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Greenspan of Flushing, Queens, was married last evening in Brooklyn to Joseph E. Wolf, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Mitchel L. Wolf of University City, Mo.
Rabbi Simcha Krauss performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center.


Florio, With His Popularity Sinking, Moves a Top Aide
LEAD: Amid a growing tax revolt and criticism within his own party of his slow response in defusing it, Gov.
Jim Florio today removed his chief of staff.
Top Democrats saw the move as a shakeup among the Governor's political advisers.


A Children's Video Helps With Moving
LEAD: When Marcel and Judith Burnim moved to their new house in Brookline, Mass., a few weeks ago they found that two of their biggest problems were unpacking and acclimating their three children to their new surroundings.
They tried to prepare their younger children for the change through discussion, but they also received some help from a new children's videotape about moving.


Elderly in Apartments: Feeling Trapped
LEAD: Esther and Leonard Farb, an elderly couple in Upper Manhattan, often feel like prisoners in their own home.
Fear of crime keeps them inside at night, and they often stay inside during the day, too, because the elevators are chronically broken, they say, and they are too weak to take the stairs.


CUOMO AND DINKINS AGREE TO HOUSE 5,225 MENTALLY ILL
LEAD: In the state's most ambitious effort to date to solve the problem of New York City's homeless mentally ill, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday signed an agreement to find, refurbish or build new housing for 5,225 mentally ill people by the middle of 1992.


Mideast Fears Shake Tokyo Stock Market
LEAD: Stock prices plummeted today in unrelenting selling, sending the Japanese market to its second steepest drop ever and raising fears of a more prolonged slide.


2 Held in Extortion of Paper Delivery Service
LEAD: Two key employees of a wholesale newspaper distributor were arrested yesterday on charges that they extorted $30,000 to assure speedy shipments of The New York Times to a newspaper home and business delivery service.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-17


Joe Lombardo, Graphics Designer, 45
LEAD: Joe Lombardo, an award-winning graphics designer, died on Aug. 15 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 45 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Talks on 'Miss Saigon' Are Continuing
LEAD: Actors' Equity said yesterday that ''cordial discussions'' about ''Miss Saigon'' were held during the day between the union and the show's producer, Cameron Mackintosh.
Mr.
Mackintosh has demanded a free hand from the union in casting the show before he agrees to bring the hit London musical to Broadway.


3 INCUMBENTS WIN IN WYOMING RACES
LEAD: Former Gov.
Clifford P. Hansen's daughter won the Republican nomination for his old job in a primary on Tuesday.
In November, she will face the Democratic incumbent, Mike Sullivan, who easily defeated his opponent, a motorcycle mechanic.


Boy, 14, Critically Wounded As Relative Shows Him Gun
LEAD: A 14-year-old boy was in extremely critical condition yesterday after he was accidentally shot in the head by a relative who was showing him how to use an illegal handgun, the police said.


Pathe Makes A Payment
LEAD: The Pathe Communications Corporation has paid another $50 million toward its $1.3 billion purchase of the MGM/UA Communications Company.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
7.97
9.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.59
7.58
8.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.52
7.48
7.88
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.80
8.72
8.24
30-YR.


Stocks Fall Again as Oil Surges
LEAD: Stock prices tumbled late yesterday in the wake of a surprising $2.51-a-barrel rise in crude oil futures.


Home Improvement
LEAD: WOODEN windowsills are designed to shed moisture, but unless they are regularly painted or waterproofed, snow and rain can penetrate them during long periods of bad weather.
The resulting decay eventually destroys the sill and can damage the window and adjoining walls, causing interior paint to peel and plaster or wallboard to crumble.


Giants' Collins and Howard Sign for 2 Years
LEAD: Mark Collins and Erik Howard signed contracts and practiced today, leaving Lawrence Taylor and Leonard Marshall as the only Giants missing from camp.


Review/Theater;   Moliere's Invalid Reborn In a Brazilian Carnival
LEAD: Deep into end of ''O Doente Imaginario'' (''The Imaginary Invalid''), the Teatro do Ornitorrinco's rollicking, irreverent version of the classic 17th-century farce, Moliere's archetypal hypochondriac, Argan, has a dream about dying.


A Story Of a Pair Of Eras
LEAD: The day was gray; it was overcast, and there was a chance of squalls.
And this had nothing to do with the weather.
This was often the atmosphere in the Yankees' clubhouse.


The Panama Pretext
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Saudis Plan to Supply U.S. With Fuel for Military Use
LEAD: Saudi Arabian oil officials moved today to suspend their nation's daily export of hundreds of thousands of barrels of jet and diesel fuel, diverting much of it to the American military as a down payment on reimbursement for United States aid in the Persian Gulf crisis, Saudi officials say.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   China Gives Its View
LEAD: Prime Minister Li Peng said today that China opposed any military involvement in the Persian Gulf by ''big powers,'' but officials reportedly told a visitor that it would not oppose a United Nations resolution allowing the use of force to back up the embargo of Iraq.


Harold L. Oram, 83, A Fund-Raiser, Is Dead
LEAD: Harold L. Oram, the founder and president of the Oram Group, fund-raisers for humanitarian and environmental causes, died on Tuesday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 83 years old and lived in Yorktown Heights.


Currents;   Greenhouse Group Offers To Let the Public Look In
LEAD: THE Texas Greenhouse Company, which manufacturers window greenhouse kits, and the Turner Greenhouse Company, which sells fiberglass units for as little as $500, are two of more than three dozen suppliers described in the most recent copy of the Directory of Manufacturers of Hobby Greenhouses, Solariums, Sun Rooms and Window


Personal Health
LEAD: Check whichever statements apply. At this point in the summer, your sunglasses:


Taking Time to Consider the Lilies of the Wayside
LEAD: AUGUST brings to the garden a sense of pause.
It is a time of already over and of not yet.
The vegetative rush that began in the spring has come to a halt.
Except for crabgrass and poke, even my weeds have lowered their metabolism, moderated their ambitions to conquer the patch of earth I tend.The day lilies that came in on a tide of radiant colors in July have had their day, now showing only tired foliage and ugly brown stalks that I would remove if


The Appliance Brand-Name Game
LEAD: At Abt Television and Appliance here in this Chicago suburb, no fewer than 15 models of washers and dryers crowd the showroom.
So why is Kitchen Aid, a Whirlpool subsidiary best known for its premium dishwashers and heavy-duty mixers, muscling into the market with its own brand of laundry appliances?


Review/Jazz;   A Rousing Welcome For a Cuban Trumpeter
LEAD: A series of musical explosions punctuated Monday night's packed performance at the Village Gate.
The concert, a welcome party for the Cuban trumpeter Arturo Sandoval, featured the orchestras of Mario Bauza and Tito Puente, along with the guest singers Celia Cruz and Graciela.
Mr.
Sandoval, who arrived from Cuba in July, has recently been given political asylum in the United States; he, along with just about everybody else who walked the stage - including Bill


East Germans Agree to Unification Date
LEAD: The East German Parliament ended weeks of bitter dispute early this morning by agreeing to Oct. 3 as the date for formal unification with West Germany.


Review/Television;   Beer for Slim, Elegant Sophisticates
LEAD: Why should wine drinkers be esteemed as nobs while beer drinkers are put down as slobs?
An effort to correct this injustice and get equal treatment for those who prefer the mix of the malt to the fruit of the vine appears to be the life's mission of Michael Jackson.
No, not that Michael Jackson.
This one is an Englishman who lives up to his title, ''The Bard of Beer,'' in the six-part series, sensibly called ''Beer,'' that begins tonight at 10:30 on the Discovery Channel.


Ex-Thornburgh Aide Denies Drug Charges
LEAD: A former top aide to Attorney General Dick Thornburgh pleaded not guilty today to four drug-related charges.


Germans Free Bomb Suspect
LEAD: The police today freed a Lebanese man who was arrested a month ago as a suspect in the 1986 disco club bombing that led to United States air strikes against Libya.
The suspect, Ali Mansur, was picked up on a tip from a former member of the East German security police.
The police said the tip was unreliable.


Attempt to Set OPEC Meeting Fails
LEAD: A militant group of oil producers led by Algeria, Libya and Iran has blocked a renewed attempt by Saudi Arabia and Venezuela to convene an emergency meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to try to stablize soaring oil prices.


Long-Term Rates Climb Sharply
LEAD: Long-term interest rates rose to their highest levels in nearly four months yesterday and Treasury bond prices fell sharply, pushed by a sharp rise in oil prices and heightened fears that war may soon break out in the Persian Gulf.


Nynex to Release Document
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation said yesterday that it would release today a lengthy deposition by Guy M. Struve, a New York lawyer who led a 1988 investigation into lewd parties in Florida attended by a dozen of the company's purchasing managers and employees of some Nynex suppliers.


Colombia Reports the Arrest Of Cocaine Cartel Assassin
LEAD: The Colombian security police said today that they had arrested the chief of assassins for the Medellin cocaine cartel.


Second Time Around?
LEAD: He didn't quite make it the last time around, but Andrew Gaze, the Australian star who helped Seton Hall reach the final game of the 1989 National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, may make a new run at the National Basketball Association.


Coslet Likes the New Jets' Line Play
LEAD: The Jets' defensive line, last in the National Football League in 1989 with 28 quarterback sacks, has taken quarterbacks down nine times in the first two exhibition games.


More Pension Benefits Awarded to Old-Timers
LEAD: It cost fans and active players part of the 1990 spring training season, but the basic agreement hammered out before the regular season by representatives of the major league players and the owners has some special benefits for retired players, especially those who left the game before 1959.


In Turnabout, Rinfret Is Victim Of an Ambush
LEAD: As a vote-getting tactic, it probably has as much utility as eating goldfish.
Still, ambush, it seems, has become the strategy of choice for some of this year's gubernatorial candidates.


For the Children of the Working Poor
LEAD: Affordable day care is more than a boon to working parents.
It's also a way to help millions of poor children find their way into the American mainstream.
Congress can make that help possible soon by enacting legislation to make it easier for low-income parents to get decent child care and advance two


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Fewer Badges of Faith
LEAD: The Defense Department is allowing Jewish soldiers to have their religious affiliation deleted from dogtags before traveling to Saudi Arabia as part of the American military buildup in that Muslim country, Pentagon officials said today.


Radio Link With Venus Probe Is Still Intermittent
LEAD: For the second time in less than a week, flight controllers lost radio contact with the Magellan spacecraft orbiting Venus but after hours of unsuccessful attempts yesterday, they finally managed to restore limited communications.


Younger Consumers: More to Spend, More to Want
LEAD: AT the moment Kimberly Esteves doesn't have any money.
But if she did, the 6-year-old would head for a restaurant.


Restaurants
LEAD: An American menu that ranges from the homey to dishes for the adventuresome.


Ex-Drexel Executives Arrange Aid for Fruit of the Loom
LEAD: A group of former employees and associates of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., the defunct brokerage house, have arranged what amounts to a secured loan to William Farley, a former Drexel client who controls Fruit of the Loom Inc., filings made yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission show.


Soviet Circus Ends Bittersweet Tour
LEAD: After being stranded for three months and abandoned by its promoters, the Great Circus Bim Bom returned to the Soviet Union today with bittersweet memories of the United States but without the equipment and animals they brought here.


Neeme Jarvi to Conduct Mozart Works
LEAD: Neeme Jarvi is to conduct the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra in Johann Roman's ''Drottningholm Music,'' and Mozart's Symphony No. 41 (K. 551) at 8 tonight at Avery Fisher Hall.
The program also includes two other Mozart works, the Piano Concerto No. 13 in C (K. 415), with Louie Lortie as the soloist, and the Sinfonia Concertante in E flat (K.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums


Help the homeless Off the Street;   Making Room for the Mentally Ill
LEAD: An agreement signed this week by Mayor David Dinkins of New York and Gov.
Mario Cuomo marks a monumental advance for the unkempt mentally ill who wander the streets and parks talking to the voices in their heads.


Big Board Seat Is Sold
LEAD: The price of a seat on the New York Stock Exchange has fallen to a six-year low with the purchase yesterday of a seat for $301,000.
That price is the lowest since 1984 and a decline of $9,000 from the previous sale price of $310,000 on Monday, exchange officials said.
The record price for a seat, $1.15 million, was paid in 1987, before the stock market crashed that year.


Gorbachev Meets Afghan
LEAD: Presidents Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and Najibullah of Afghanistan met today and discussed the problems their nations face, the Soviet press agency Tass reported.
They also discussed events in Iraq, but Tass provided few details.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Oil Companies' Stocks Fall Again
LEAD: Investors continued to unload their holdings in oil companies and oilfield service companies for the third consecutive day.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 520 money market mutual funds increased $6.22 billion, to $408 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
At the 162 institutional funds, assets rose $1.15 billion, to $99.48 billion.
The assets of the 253 general-purpose funds were up $2.40 billion, to $142.45 billion.


Cancer Rates Are Rising Steeply For Those 55 or Older, Study Says
LEAD: Cancer deaths among people 55 and older are climbing steeply and steadily, according to a new study.
The increases are occurring in all six countries analyzed in the study: the United States, Japan and four European nations.


Under-3-Hour N.F.L. Game? New Rules Make It Possible
LEAD: When the Chicago Bears are hosts to the Los Angeles Raiders tonight at Soldier Field in a nationally televised preseason game, the Bears' quarterback, Jim Harbaugh, expects two patterns to continue: that the game will flow quickly and that his on-field play-calling responsibilities might increase.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Cheney Steps to Center of the Lineup
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis has brought Defense Secretary Dick Cheney into new prominence in the White House, strengthening his relationships with President Bush and with Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser.


Sale at Primerica
LEAD: The Primerica Corporation has completed the sale of its Penncorp Financial group of insurance companies to the PCF Acquisition Corporation, a holding company formed by the investment group DJS/Iverness, for $300 million.
Primerica, based in New York, said it expected no material gain or loss from the sale.


Let Postbabies Alone, You Neo-Adults
LEAD: To the Editor:


CRITIC'S CHOICE
LEAD: From noon to 9 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday at Damrosch Park in Lincoln Center, the Roots of American Music Festival is presenting an impressive array of blues and country performers, each giving a free one-hour show.


Price of Being No. 1 Is Nothing to Cheer About;   Japan Gains on Us
LEAD: To the Editor:


Adding Police Won't Hold Back New York's Crime Tidal Wave;   Don't Cut Libraries
LEAD: To the Editor:


Crude Oil Up to $31.93 A Barrel
LEAD: Crude oil prices climbed 71 cents yesterday, reaching $31.93 a barrel.
Analysts attributed the increase to momentum from Wednesday's leap of $2.51 and anxiety over today's deadline set by Iraq for closing all embassies in Kuwait.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: PRINCE CHARLES faces a second operation on his right arm, which was broken earlier this summer when he fell off his pony during a polo match.
Since undergoing surgery at Circencester Hospital, Wiltshire, after the fall, he has continued to have pain and it has led him to cancel public engagements.


Siren Call of Niagara Falls and a Tragedy
LEAD: Legend has it that the Iroquois who once populated this area believed that the Great Spirit observed the world from behind the thick curtain of Horseshoe Falls.
If so, the Spirit has been a backstage witness to a summer that might have been a script by David Lynch: an eerie season of intrigue, dark comedy and tragedy that has been unusual even by Niagara Falls standards.


At Stewart Airport, a Whiff of Success
LEAD: Amid the military cargo planes and private jets that have long rolled along the runways at Stewart International Airport is a new addition these days: Boeing 727's.


Review/Music;   Hearing and Seeing Things
LEAD: Listening to ''Angels: Visions and Apparitions'' at Damrosch Park on Wednesday night, one longed for childhood.
Give the very young a little melodrama, a spooky sound or two, even the barest of props, and innocent imaginations will have no trouble building their own private worlds of wonder.


Review/Film;   What Is Art? What Is Real? Where's the Bicycle?
LEAD: A woman in a black-and-white movie called ''The Icicle Thief'' leaps into a river and emerges from a washing machine in a full-colored television commercial for detergent.
A family half-watching this movie on television doesn't notice anything strange.
Maurizio Nichetti's ''Icicle Thief,'' the work that includes the film within a film, the commercials within a film and more, sounds too strained and clever for its own good.


TV Weekend;   Sex Talk, Jurisprudence and Big-Band Echoes
LEAD: Tonight the Lifetime cable channel offers a civics lesson in the form of a drama, and some sex talk in the form of Bill Cosby and Dr.
Ruth Westheimer.


Priva Gross, Art Professor, 79
LEAD: Priva Gross, a retired chairwoman of the art department of Queensborough Community College of the City University of New York, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.
Professor Gross, whose specialty was medieval art, taught at the college for 20 years, retiring in 1981.


Results Plus
LEAD:
CYCLING
Two Americans Sprint to Final
Connie Young and Renee Duprel won their sprint semifinals yesterday at the world championships in Maebashi, Japan, setting up an all-American final.
Young beat Felicia Ballanger of France in two straight races.
Duprel lost the first race to Rita Raznaite of the Soviet Union but rallied to win the next two.


Freer Economy Resisted in Uruguay
LEAD: The six-month-old Government of President Luis Alberto Lacalle has joined the trend in South America toward reducing the state's role in the economy, but tough labor opposition means that each step will be hard fought.


Conservative Says Sununu Assured Him on Souter
LEAD: John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, assured a conservative writer that President Bush's Supreme Court nominee, David H. Souter, would offer a strong conservative voice on the Court if confirmed, according to a memorandum made public today.


Mackintosh And Equity Plan Meeting
LEAD: Actors' Equity and Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of ''Miss Saigon,'' agreed yesterday to meet in New York City in early September ''in an effort to establish a working relationship'' that would clear the way for the hit London musical to come to Broadway.


Nippon Steel Unit
LEAD: The Nippon Steel Corporation of Japan has formed a new American subsidiary, Librex Computer Systems Inc., to manufacture and market computer products.
The unit, based in San Jose, Calif., plans to introduce its first products, notebook computers, in the fourth quarter of the year.
Many Japanese companies in basic industries like steel and chemicals have been diversifying into electronics and biotechnology.


Economic Scene;   Trade Obstacles Among Africans
LEAD: On the edge of Nairobi's industrial park sits one of the most visible manufacturing ventures in Kenya.
Founded after independence in 1963 by the Jumas, an Asian family who came to Kenya from Uganda, the company, Orbitsports, makes soccer balls, rugby balls - indeed, all kinds of balls - dart boards, boxing gloves, and a wide range of sports clothing and leisure wear.


Eastern Planning Vacation Flights
LEAD: Eastern Airlines said it would begin special vacation flights during the peak winter travel season to reward frequent business fliers.
The airline said that in December it would start special ''Business Break'' flights from Atlanta to Hawaii, Mexico and the Caribbean to serve business fliers fulfilling free travel rewards during peak travel periods.


Slavomir Stracer, Prague Minister, 55
LEAD: Slavomir Stracer, Czechoslvakia's Minister of Foreign Trade, died of a heart attack Tuesday.
He was 55 years old.


Panel Asks Test Use of Cameras For Civil Cases in Federal Courts
LEAD: Reversing a recommendation made last year, a five-judge panel appointed by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist today called for allowing television, radio and photographic coverage of civil proceedings in Federal courts in an experiment.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Quick Changes


3 Dead and 12 Hurt in Houston Plane Crash
LEAD: A private airplane crashed on takeoff and burned at Houston Intercontinental Airport today, killing three men and injuring 12 others, officials said.


DIALOGUE: Next Step in the Gulf    Should the U.S. Attack Iraq?;   Yes, Hussein Must Be Ousted
LEAD: Imagine the Middle East with Saddam Hussein in command of a multimillion-man army, equipped with chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, and intercontinental missiles to deliver them.


Guards' Chief Says Dinkins Backs Inmates
LEAD: As the third day of a water shortage on Rikers Island threatened the fragile mood there, relations between Mayor David N. Dinkins and the head of the correction officers' union turned even more bitter yesterday, with the union chief accusing the Mayor of siding with rebellious inmates because most of them are black.


Zapata Selling 90% of Fleet
LEAD: The Zapata Corporation said today that it had reached an agreement to sell 90 percent of its drilling-rig fleet to a European group for $280 million.


The Hitler Analogy
LEAD: The most excruciating choice faced by ethical people is called triage.
When a field hospital is overwhelmed with casualties, someone has to decide which of the wounded can be saved before allocating scarce medicine and treatment -denying it to those with little chance of survival.


Auctions;   Eleanor Blau
LEAD: Money, money everywhere, useless but oh, so, interesting, in red and blue instead of green, with George Washington in a toga.
A toga?
Yes, a toga.
The dollars in his wallet are boring, James Lamb was saying, though he would probably welcome a stout billfold as much as the next fellow.
He was comparing their look with the designs on antique notes to be auctioned at Christie's in


Judge Rejects Keating Suit; Sees 'Looting' of Lincoln
LEAD: In a blistering opinion, a Federal judge today dismissed the lawsuit brought by Charles H. Keating Jr. to regain control of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association.
The judge said that the Government seizure of Lincoln was ''fully justified'' and that the actions of Mr.
Keating and his associates amounted to a ''looting'' of the institution.


Joy Postponed in Mudville: Rainout for Little Leaguers
LEAD: The most active people on the baseball field during a session of the Little League World Series today were the dozen groundskeepers who battled rain and mud in a losing cause.


F.B.I. Man Tried Again on Spying Charges
LEAD: The third trial of Richard W. Miller, the only agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who has ever been charged with spying against the United States, opened here on Wednesday.


David W. Peck, 87, Former Justice And Court Reformer in New York
LEAD: David W. Peck, a retired Presiding Justice of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court who played a leading role in court reform in the late 1940's and 1950's, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.


Agent for Two Jets Doesn't See Deal Soon
LEAD: With their preseason game against the Giants coming up Saturday, the Jets still have three players out of camp.
They are the running back Blair Thomas and the wide receiver Reggie Rembert - the top two draft picks - and Jim Sweeney, the seventh-year center.


East Germany Rethinks Its Laws on Eve of Unity
LEAD: The tumultuous combination of democracy and unrest that has swept East Germany into an October reunification with West Germany reaches beyond the nation's much-publicized crumbling economy.
The toppling of Communist rule last year has also brought turmoil in the criminal justice system.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on the Media Business page on Aug. 6 about an investment by the Times Mirror Company in La Opinion, one of the United States' largest Spanish-language daily newspapers, referred to the action incorrectly in some editions.
Times Mirror is purchasing 50 percent of the newspaper; it is not buying the whole paper.


Cattle Prices Fall the Limit; Hogs and Pork Bellies Drop
LEAD: Cattle futures prices plunged the daily limit on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange yesterday, as concern grew about the implications of the Middle East crisis.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Business People column on Monday about Andre Danesh, an investor in distressed companies, referred incorrectly to one of his investments.
He invested in Revco D.S.


King Broadcasting Sale Will Aid Environment
LEAD: Priscilla Bullitt Collins, a member of the family that pioneered television in the Pacific Northwest, said this week that the Seattle-based King Broadcasting Company was up for sale and that about $100 million of the proceeds would be used to finance environmental causes.


Review/Film;   When the Ladies Take Off Their Wigs, Head for Home. Fast.
LEAD: ''The Witches'' resembles a brilliantly told bedtime story, though the teller of this children's tale may well be the slightly cracked relative who can't judge when scary stories become nightmares.
This tale about a witches' plot to turn every child in England into a mouse is based on the novel by Roald Dahl, who does not write cuddly sugarcoated books.


Tourism in New York City Is Down After 80's Boom
LEAD: After the boom years of the 1980's, New York City tourism is down slightly this summer, a dip that is being closely monitored by the local tourist industry.


20,000 Protest K.G.B. at a Lithuanian Border
LEAD: About 20,000 people rallied today near the Soviet border with Poland to protest K.G.B. control of travel to and from Lithuania.


F.D.A. Defends Milk-Producing Drug in Study
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration said in a study to be published on Friday that a genetically engineered growth hormone that increases milk production in dairy cows was harmless to human health.


Up Anchor and Cast Off! A Nautical Night on the Town
LEAD: World Yacht is a rather grandiose name for a craft that rarely ventures beyond the Statue of Liberty.
Yet for a dazzling sightseeing tour of New York Harbor combined with music, dancing and a surprisingly good meal, World Yacht can be enthusiastically recommended.


Review/Film;   Balladlike Wartime Tale Of Maturing
LEAD: Anne Wheeler's ''Bye Bye Blues'' has the tone and texture of a dreamy pop ballad from World War II spun out over nearly two hours.
Reflecting the wide-open spaces of western Canada where most of it was shot, the slow-moving, beautifully photographed film takes its time in telling the story of a young woman who finds self-sufficiency as a band singer during World War II while her husband is a prisoner of the Japanese.


A Reservist Waits
LEAD: Ed Reynolds, a linebacker for the New England Patriots who is also a captain in the United States Army Reserves, was informed Wednesday that he could be called to action after President Bush announced a call-up of 40,000 reserve units because of the crisis in the Persian Gulf.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Reservists to Learn Today if a Call-Up Changes Their Lives
LEAD: After more than a week of uncertainty, thousands of military reservists throughout the country will begin hearing today whether they are among the more than 40,000 ordered to leave their jobs and homes and report for active duty.


Carlos Kleiber to Lead 'Rosenkavalier'
LEAD: Carlos Kleiber will return to the Metropolitan Opera next month to conduct seven performances of ''Der Rosenkavalier,'' the Met announced yesterday.
The West German conductor, who led critically acclaimed performances of ''La Traviata'' and ''Otello'' in the house last season, will replace James Levine, the Met's artistic director, who was scheduled to lead all seven performances of the Richard Strauss opera in September and


Robbery Suspect Dies and a Neighborhood Is Silent
LEAD: A crowd in a crime-ridden Bronx neighborhood took justice into its own hands Wednesday night, surrounding a fleeing robbery suspect and stabbing him to death, the police said.


Insurer Clarifies Retirement Stance
LEAD: The Metropolitan Property and Casualty Insurance Company is asking workers to retire, but its general counsel says a report that the company wants 80 percent of its work force to leave was exaggerated. ''In no way would there be an 80 percent reduction in our work force,'' said, Richard W. Berstein, a vice president, in regard to an article in The Providence Journal


Persian Gulf States Use Wealth Wisely
LEAD: To the Editor:


Books of the Times;   Seeing the Landscape At Its Best and Worst
LEAD:
The Experience of Place
By Tony Hiss
233 pages. Illustrated. Alfred A. Knopf.  $19.95.


Price of Being No. 1 Is Nothing to Cheer About;   Tomorrow's Hope
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about preliminary 1990 census figures misidentified a Census Bureau official.
She is Deirdre Blackwood, a spokeswoman, not the director.


'Micromachine' Project in Japan
LEAD: Japan plans a multimillion-dollar research project into ''micromachines'' that can travel through blood vessels or look for faults in tiny crevices in jet engines and nuclear power plants, officials said today.
The Ministry of International


Luigi Cardinal Dadaglio, 75, Dies; Envoy Aided Spain in Transition
LEAD: Luigi Cardinal Dadaglio, a Vatican diplomat who played a major role in liberalizing the Roman Catholic Church in Spain in the waning years of Franco's rule, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Rome at the age of 75.
The Vatican said he died of a heart ailment.


For a Start, There's Gilbert vs. Wilander
LEAD: A year after eighth-seeded Brad Gilbert was upset by Todd Witsken in the first round of the United States Open, Gilbert, again seeded eighth, got something of a shock today when he learned that his first-round opponent for the 1990 Open next week would not be a potential giant killer but a bona fide giant of the game: the 1988 champion, Mats


Editorial Notebook;   A Very Special Graveyard
LEAD: For the last 127 years, the remains of a man named Pierre Toussaint have been lying in a cemetery in what is now New York City's Little Italy.
If the State Supreme Court agrees, they are about to be disturbed.
The Catholic Church wants to unearth the grave to make sure it does indeed embrace Mr.
Toussaint, and to find out whether he is, perhaps, in a miraculous state of preservation.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Gains Some Support at U.N. for a Resolution Endorsing Force
LEAD: American French and British representatives have agreed on the text of a Security Council resolution endorsing military action to enforce the embargo against Iraq, diplomats said today.


Farm Bank Offers $200 Million Bonds
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Bank Funding Corporation yesterday priced $200 million in 8.94 percent callable consolidated systemwide bonds due Sept. 7, 1995, at par through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Mobil's European Plan
LEAD: The Mobil Corporation said today that it would restructure operations of its 16 European marketing and refining affiliates to take advantage of the opportunities associated with a single European market in 1992.
Europe-wide responsibility for selected business operations will be centralized in the new Mobil Europe Center of Operations in London, the company said.


Sochia Suspended
LEAD: Brian Sochia, the starting nose tackle for the Miami Dolphins, was suspended for five weeks yesterday by the National Football League for violating the league's policy banning the use of steroids.


Volunteer Prosecutors End Backlog of Drug Cases
LEAD: Faced with a growing backlog of drug cases, prosecutors in Washington State have adopted a novel tactic.
They are deputizing volunteer lawyers from private firms to act as pro bono prosecutors.


Review/Music;   Second Cast For 'Lucia' At City Opera
LEAD: Whatever else might be said for or against Donizetti's ''Lucia di Lammermoor,'' the conflicting passions that drive the work are meant to kindle the operagoer's instant sympathy for Lucia and her secret lover, Edgardo, and antipathy for her desperate, scheming brother, Enrico.


Weekender Guide
LEAD:
Friday
DUTCHESS COUNTY FAIR


Editorial Post Filled by Times
LEAD: Philip M. Boffey will become the deputy editorial page editor of The New York Times on Nov. 1.
The appointment was announced yesterday by Jack Rosenthal, the editorial page editor.


FOOTBALL: The Making of a Quarterback;   U.S.C.'s Marinovich Was Raised According to a Game Plan
LEAD: The man is sitting in his office at a fitness center, looking at the figure on the television screen.
The television is on a chair, resting upon the book ''Secrets of Soviet Sports Fitness and Training.'' The figure on the screen is throwing footballs, viewed from the side and the front in normal and slow motion.


Vintners Head Said to Resign
LEAD: Officials in the wine industry said today that Paul M. Schlem had been forced out as chief executive of the Vintners International Company.


Taylor Seeks Pot of Gold At End of Contract Talks
LEAD: In recent months, Jose Canseco, perhaps the most dynamic player in baseball, signed a five-year contract for $23.5 million and Joe Montana, the best quarterback in pro football, signed a four-year contract for at least $13 million.


Suit By Apple Is Extended
LEAD: The long-running copyright infringment suit brought by Apple Computer Inc. against the Microsoft Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company will run a little longer.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 16 about Texas' use of prisoners in training dogs to track escaped inmates misstated the position taken by Ann Richards, the Democratic candidate for governor.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, Calif., named Tony R. Brown vice president and chief operating officer.


Rangers Sign Gartner To a 2-Year Contract
LEAD: The Rangers announced yesterday that they had signed Mike Gartner to a new contract.
The deal, said a source familiar with the negotiations, is for two years and is worth roughly $1.2 million.


Ambase Gets Bid For $68 Million
LEAD: The Ambase Corporation of New York said it had received an acquisition proposal from an investment group led by several former top executives of the insurance industry.
The group offered to acquire 50.1 percent of Ambase's common stock for $4 a share, or about $68 million.
Ambase's board said it would consider the offer.


Victor Siegel, 81, Dies; Ex-Bank Street Official
LEAD: Victor J. Siegel, former adminstrative vice president of the Bank Street College of Education, a private school for teachers, died on Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


92 Captive Aliens Are Rescued in a Raid
LEAD: Los Angeles County sheriff's deputies raided a house here Wednesday night and rescued 92 illegal aliens who were being held captive by nine smugglers demanding ransom from the aliens' relatives, the authorities said today.


Foe Studying Takeover Act
LEAD: The California Public Employees Retirement System, one of the nation's largest and most influential institutional investors, said today that it was considering stepping up its challenge to Pennsylvania's anti-takeover law.


Review/Film;   Kurosawa's Magical Tales of Art, Time and Death
LEAD: A solemn little boy comes out of his house one rainy morning to find the sun shining.
His mother, practical and no-nonsense, looks up at the sky and says that foxes hold their wedding processions in such weather. ''They don't like to be seen by people,'' she says, and goes about her business.


SmithKline Will Produce A Generic of Its Dyazide
LEAD: The SmithKline Beecham Company said yesterday that it would bow to the inevitable and make its own lower-priced, generic copy of Dyazide, its widely used blood-pressure drug, which lost its patent protection three years ago.
Rugby Laboratories will start selling the generic version for SmithKline in


After 6-Month Absence, Connors back Winning
LEAD: In his first match since February, Jimmy Connors once again graced the stadium court at the West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills, Queens, with his charismatic presence, defeating Robert Seguso, ranked 280th in the world, 6-2, 4-6, 6-0, yesterday in the second round of the W.C.T.
Tournament of Champions.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Israelis' Fear of a Poison Gas Attack Is Growing
LEAD: A senior civil defense official advised Israelis today to purchase a two-week stock of food for their homes, check fire extinguishers and buy masking tape so they can seal their windows against poison gas in case of attack.


No Headline
LEAD: Richard Kaufman, a managing director of the Wall Street firm of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 54 years old and lived in Stamford, Conn.


Our Towns;   For a Teacher Fighting AIDS, Love and Loss
LEAD: When Tom Bradley realized that the illness inside him was going public, he envisioned headlines: ''GAY AIDS TEACHER!
PARENTS REVOLT!
CLASSROOM MAYHEM!''


Several Top Managers Are Named by Hasbro
LEAD: Hasbro Inc., the toy company, has named George R. Ditomassi chief operating officer for the company's games and international operations, one of several key changes in senior management this week.
The company also named Alfred J. Verrecchia chief operating officer of domestic toy operations and manufacturing services.


And Now, A Show From Our Sponsor
LEAD: Bozell, the giant New York advertising agency, has created a series of commercials for Valvoline Oil, but the real news is that the campaign will be broadcast next week during a special television program the agency also created for its client.


Trump Keeps Shuttle; $10 Fare Rise Planned
LEAD: Donald J. Trump said yesterday that the Trump Shuttle was no longer for sale.
In a separate announcement, the airline said it would raise its fares by $10, effective Monday.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   BAGHDAD WARNS DIPLOMATS AGAINST 'ACT OF AGGRESSION'; HUSSEIN SHOWS OFF HOSTAGES
LEAD: Iraq warned the United States and more than two dozen other nations Thursday that if they challenged a deadline today and tried to keep their embassies in Iraq-occupied Kuwait open, as they have vowed to do, Baghdad would take it as an ''act of aggression.''


Art, Too, Finds a Summer Home Outside Manhattan
LEAD: New York may be the archetypal cosmopolitan city, but New Yorkers are notoriously provincial when it comes to acknowledging the extent of cultural life beyond the Hudson River or across the Throgs Neck Bridge.
The fact is that while much of Manhattan dozes through August, museums and galleries at nearby points north, south, east and west offer the summer's most substantive and inventive exhibitions.


Robertson Group Holds 18.2% Stake
LEAD: A group of dissident shareholders of the H. H. Robertson Company has raised its stake in the Pittsburgh-based maker of building materials to 18.2 percent from 15.9 percent.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the dissident group said it would continue to oppose Robertson's planned acquisition of Ceco Industries, despite the recent death of Anthony Pedone, a New


New Nightmare: Peril of Floods Is Fires' Legacy
LEAD: Those who were spared the fire now face the flood as the rainy season approaches, nearly three months after brush fires that devoured more than 400 homes left the hillsides above the city bare and dangerous.


Reviews/Art;   In Westchester, Fantasies of Odilon Redon
LEAD: Odilon Redon's name does not often appear near the top of lists of 19th-century artists who influenced 20th-century art, but before the Surrealists - before many of the Surrealists were born, in fact - he was exploring the dark side of the subconscious.


Yugo America Account To Buckley/DeCerchio
LEAD: Buckley/DeCerchio Advertising got a great gift to celebrate its second anniversary - the $8 million to $10 million account for Yugo America cars.


Mongol Journal;   Spared by Rebels? The Spirit Says That'll Be $2
LEAD: In this war-battered country, a traditional healer - a woman who says she is possessed by the spirit of a man - has brought peace to her village, winning the return of kidnapped families from the clasp of the notoriously brutal Renamo rebels.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Monday about the Higher Education Assistance Foundation referred incorrectly in some editions to its chairman's role in any rescue of the troubled organization.
The chairman, Richard C. Hawk, will participate in rescue negotiations.
The article also misstated the business of the organization in some editions.


Report of Move By the Raiders
LEAD: Al Davis was quoted in a published report today as having told a Raider team meeting it was ''100 percent certain'' the club would return to its old home in Oakland to play the 1990 season.
The Raiders, however, vehemently denied it. ''We fully expect to play our 1990 home games in Los Angeles,'' said Al LoCasale, the Raiders' executive assistant.


Water Under A-Plant Is Found to Be Tainted
LEAD: Workers excavating storage tanks at a plant that processes uranium found levels of radioactive uranium in underground water that were as much as 35,000 times higher than Federal safety standards allow, officials said today.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Pakistan Day Parade, Lexington Avenue will be closed on Sunday from 26th to 47th Streets from 1 P.M. to 4 P.M.
For a related street fair, Madison Avenue will be closed from 23d to 26th Streets from 3 P.M. to 8 P.M.


Cuts at Unit Of Honeywell
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. announced today that its Defense and Marine Systems unit plans to cut 120 of its 8,300 employees effective Sept. 6.
The staff cuts are in preparation for the planned spinoff of the Defense and Marine Systems unit.


Western Nations Back U.N. Gulf Resolution
LEAD: American, French and British representatives agreed on the text of a Security Council resolution endorsing military action to enforce the embargo against Iraq, diplomats said.


New York Tourism: Some Ups, Some Downs
LEAD: Traditionally, tourists coming to New York City have braved the noise , the crime and the people.
They are doing so this summer as well, but in smaller numbers than they did during the boom years of the 1980's.


Brewers Put Yanks In Proper Place
LEAD: For the Yankees, their season so full of shame and empty of success had left them with that most modest of ambitions: an escape from last place.
It was a sad sort of quest, but as a challenge it had at least one redeeming quality.
It could conceivably be met.


Cone Outhurled As Mets Fall 4 Out
LEAD: He is round and chubby, and he wears eyeglasses now, and his left arm has pitched baseballs for 2,300 innings in the last 10 years in a career that seemed finished two summers ago.


Steady Radio Contact With Venus Craft Regained
LEAD: Steady radio contact with the Magellan spacecraft orbiting Venus was re-established yesterday, but the reason for the on-again, off-again communications continued to mystify project engineers.


'Parking' Spaces for Jittery Dollars
LEAD: In the midst of the Persian Gulf oil crisis, much of the world's money is fleeing to safe harbors in Britain, Australia and Canada.


Agreement On Maalox Is Canceled
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company and Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. said yesterday that they were ending an agreement to transfer Rorer's Maalox antacid franchise in the United States to Procter &amp; Gamble.


New Office for Warner
LEAD: Warner Brothers Inc. has agreed to move its film, television, comic book and licensing divisions from 75 Rockefeller Center to 140,000 square feet of office space at 1325 Avenue of the Americas.
The new 35-story tower, which Warner will move into next spring, was developed by Edward J. Minskoff Equities Inc.


Tokyo Stocks Are Up 1.8% In a Volatile, Nervous Day
LEAD: Share prices rose in volatile trading here today, but traders said the market remained extremely nervous.


Zulus vs. Mandela's Group: Strife Sets Back Both
LEAD: In the string of black townships east and west of Johannesburg where factional fighting has spilled blood and shaken the nation's political kaleidoscope, the victories claimed by Zulu hostel dwellers seem ambiguous.


Durables Orders Up 2.9% in July
LEAD: Factory orders for durable goods rebounded 2.9 percent in July, the Government reported today.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: International
A2-11


Flora Staal Hartog, 87, Jewelry Store Founder
LEAD: Flora Staal Hartog, who founded F. Staal, the Fifth Avenue jewelry store, 50 years ago and ran it until she retired in 1983, died yesterday at her home in Forest Hills, Queens.
She was 87 years old.


Review/Art;   Parallels in American and Soviet Post-Modernism
LEAD: To American eyes, contemporary Soviet art is endlessly fascinating.
It comes from a culture that for most of this century has been closed to the West.
It dispenses with the approved style of Socialist Realism and contradicts our preconceived ideas about the creative conditions of Communist life.
Moreover, it bears a disconcerting resemblance to recent


Of all the sad words of tongue of pen, what of the clerkship that might have been?
LEAD: On the fourth Monday in July, Marcella David was supposed to start preparing for the first Monday in October.


Pearl Bailey's Love Is Remembered at Her Funeral
LEAD: Pearl Bailey was remembered at her funeral today as an extraordinary entertainer and a woman who loved life and everyone she met.


Confrontation in the Gulf: TV Critic's Notebook;   Iraq's Leader Entertains 'Guests,' Not 'Hostages'
LEAD: Suddenly, yesterday at noon, viewers of CNN's ''News Hour'' were presented with President Saddam Hussein, in civilian suit and shiny tie, sitting amid some two dozen people, most of them under 21 and dressed for kicking a ball around.


Review/Art;   New Jerseyans Examine the Road to Uniqueness
LEAD: Ordinarily showcases for artists of a particular state or region are uneven affairs, lacking a theme, stylistic consistency or both.
Such is not the case with ''A Force of Repetition,'' an exhibition at the New Jersey State Museum in Trenton that is subtitled ''Contemporary Arts: The New Jersey Context.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Refugees Flooding Into Iraq-Jordan No Man's Land
LEAD: Tens of thousands of people were caught today in a vast stretch of scorching desert no man's land between Iraq and Jordan as this country struggled to cope with a tidal wave of refugees fleeing the threat of war in Iraq and Kuwait.


New Face: Wesley Snipes;   How an Actor Turned Into a Jazzman
LEAD: When Wesley Snipes was preparing for the role of the jazz saxophonist Shadow Henderson in Spike Lee's film ''Mo' Better Blues,'' he studied the moves of some of the greatest jazz legends of all time.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Guam Abortion Law Voided
The most restrictive abortion law in the United States, permitting the procedure only to protect the life or health of a woman, was struck down by a Federal judge.
Page A12.
Volunteer Prosecutors
Faced with a growing backlog of drug-related cases, officials in Washington State have begun deputizing lawyers from private firms to act as pro bono prosecutors.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Barbara Lea Pays Tribute


Economic Pessimism
LEAD: A New York Times/CBS News Poll found that Americans had turned decidedly sour in their perceptions about the state of the economy.
Such a sentiment frequently worsens the nation's actual economic condition.


Venezuela to Increase Oil Production by 25%
LEAD: Venezuela, the largest oil producer in Latin America, has announced it will raise production by 25 percent to offset oil lost because of the embargo on Iraq and Kuwait.


Judge in North's Appeal Tainted Justice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Accounts
LEAD: *
Tasco Sales Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., a distributor of consumer optics, to W.B.
Doner and Co., Baltimore and St.
Petersburg, Fla., for a reported billing of more than $1 million.
Advertsing had previously been done in house.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Be-Bop's Lou Donaldson


News Corp.'s Profit Fell 27% in 4th Quarter
LEAD: Hit by a worldwide advertising slump and heavy losses at its British satellite-television service, the News Corporation reported yesterday that its profits had fallen 27 percent in the fourth quarter and 43 percent for the fiscal year.


Trenary Looks to '92
LEAD: Jill Trenary said yesterday that she would remain an amateur with a goal of winning a gold medal in the 1992 Winter Olympics, something she has failed to accomplish in previous Games.


Treasury Bonds Decline Further
LEAD: The selloff in the credit markets continued yesterday and interest rates rose, as dealers reacted to a further rise in oil prices by marking down the price of most Treasury securities.


Repurchase Set At Fannie Mae
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, will repurchase about $500 million in common stock warrants and common stock.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR will co-produce a television film based on the life of the Rev.
Vernon Johns, who as minister of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Ala., was an early civil rights activist.
He is regarded as a mentor of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., who succeeded Mr.
Johns at the church.


Plan to Aid Homeless Runs Into Opposition
LEAD: A state agency has asked its employees to collect unused soap bars and shampoo bottles from hotels and motels when they are on trips and save them for the state's homeless.
The proposal has drawn the anger of the state hotel industry, which said it might lead to taking more than complimentary items.


'Junk Bond' Prices Plunge In Reaction to Stocks' Fall
LEAD: Heavy selling sent prices of high-risk, high-yield ''junk bonds'' sharply lower yesterday as traders reacted to the uncertainty in the Middle East and the sharp decline in the stock market.


Pirates Remain Merciless To Reds
LEAD: Bobby Bonilla hit a grand slam to cap Pittsburgh's six-run fifth inning and Barry Bonds hit a two-run homer as the Pirates won their fifth in a row over Cincinnati, beating the Reds by 9-3 tonight in a battle of National League division leaders.


Airline Parts Investigation
LEAD: An airplane parts distributor is being investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Federal Aviation Administration for possibly misrepresenting the condition and source of the parts it sold to airlines, aircraft operators and other aviation vendors.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Waldheim to Travel to Iraq
LEAD: President Kurt Waldheim of Austria is to meet with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq on Saturday in Baghdad to discuss the release of Westerners held in Iraq and Kuwait, Mr.
Waldheim's office said today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: SEAN CONNERY, who quickened pulses in the 60's and 70's as James Bond and set a new standard as sophisticated-hero-with-humor, will be 60 years old tomorrow.
And this fall, he will receive a rare tribute from the British Academy of Film and Television.
Mr.
Connery, who played Agent 007 in seven films, is only the third recipient of the Tribute Award, given previously to DIRK BOGARDE and JULIE ANDRE


Officers Kill Robbery Suspect
LEAD: A robbery suspect was killed last night in an exchange of gunfire with two undercover police officers in a Bronx school yard, the police said.
The shootout occurred at 10:25 P.M. after the officers came upon two suspects robbing three men at gunpoint on the playground of Junior High School 145 at East 164th Street and Teller Avenue in the Morrisania section, said Sgt.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm sure that you'd prefer to be in Britain now.
Yes.
I am an Iraqi and I realize that if I were in your shoes, I'd rather be in my - in Iraq, my country.
But sometimes one is forced to face situations which are not of his own choice.''
- President Saddam Hussein, talking to British hostages in Baghdad.


DIALOGUE: Next Step in the Gulf    Should the U.S. Attack Iraq?;   No, U.N. Pressure Will Work Best
LEAD: The U.S. has accomplished its original military objective in the Middle East: We stepped in with a strong presence in Saudi Arabia and stopped Saddam Hussein's march south to control the Middle East oilfields.
That was a bold and proper action.
It was a brilliant performance.


Revco Plans to Sell Southwest Stores
LEAD: Revco D.S.
Inc. will sell 146 retail stores in the Southwest to a Maryland company in a divestiture plan announced in January.
The stores, in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona and Colorado, are being sold to the RDS Acquisition Corporation, formed by a group of longtime retail drugstore executives, Revco said.


At the Movies
LEAD:
With Big Bugs


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraqi TV Shows a Smiling Leader With Grim-Faced British Captives
LEAD: In one of his few public appearances since the invasion of Kuwait, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq held a strained meeting today with British hostages that was shown on Iraqi television and broadcast abroad.


New Endowment Panel To Watch for Obscenity
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Arts is creating a panel to investigate complaints from ''any reliable source'' that grant recipients are violating the law by using Federal money to produce obscene art.


Review/Film;   Misfits Whose Crime Does Not Pay
LEAD: James Foley's ''After Dark, My Sweet'' is a brisk, entertaining contemporary melodrama about the kind of sleazy characters who populated California crime literature 35 years ago.
That's no surprise, since the screenplay, adapted by Robert Redlin and Mr.
Foley, is based on Jim Thompson's novel, published in 1955.


Even as Profits Fall, Home Builder Plans to Gain
LEAD: The Ryland Group, the nation's second-largest home builder, took analysts by surprise earlier this summer when it said it would earn less in the second quarter than it had expected.


2 Injured in Refinery Fire in Texas


Teen-Ager Sentenced to Life
LEAD: A teen-ager was sentenced today to life in prison without hope of parole for stabbing and strangling a friend in a crime he said was influenced by repeated viewings of the movie ''A Clockwork Orange.'' On June 21, the defendant, Michale Anderson, who turned 18 years old today, was convicted of first-degree murder in the death of 17-year-old Karen Hurwitz, who died on Oct.


Quiet Shift in Trading Rules On Japan's Stock Exchange
LEAD: In an effort to bolster the battered stock market here, the Tokyo stock exchange and the Ministry of Finance have quietly stepped in and changed trading rules.


New York a Jungle? Seems So to Monkeys
LEAD: They went that-a-way.
No, that-a-way.
Well, then, maybe that-a-way.
Catching monkeys in Queens is no easy task.
Just ask the A.S.P.C.A.
Or the police officer with the peach.


Transcript of Iraqi Chief's Conversation With English-Speaking Captives
LEAD: Following is a transcript of a televised conversation between President Saddam Hussein and several English-speaking foreigners held at an undisclosed location in Iraq.
Mr.
Hussein's remarks, in Arabic, were translated by an Iraqi interpreter; some sections were inaudible.
The broadcast was recorded by The New York Times from Cable News Network.


U.S. Bank Quits Bahrain
LEAD: The Bank of America said on Wednesday that it was closing its operations in Bahrain but stressed that the Persian Gulf crisis had not been a major factor in the decision. ''We are winding down our Bahrain operations as a result of a continuing review of the bank's international strategy for business,'' said Zakir Mahmoud, a regional vice president.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, AUGUST, 24, 1990
LEAD:
Markets


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Shrinking Supplies of Food Evident in Iraq, Reports Say
LEAD: While the American-led military buildup in Saudi Arabia continues, another weapon, the withholding of food for Iraq under the United Nations trade embargo, is beginning to cause hardship, a variety of reports from officials of Western governments and food experts say.


Another Parting for Steinbrenner
LEAD: For all the elements of the agreement that removed him from the daily operations of the Yankees, George Steinbrenner was most concerned that the public understood he was neither ''banned,'' ''suspended'' nor put on any kind of probation.


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column of Business Day on Aug. 7 referred incorrectly to the origins of the Old Joe advertising campaign for Camel cigarettes.
The ''smooth character'' cartoon, the concept for the campaign, was created for the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company by Trone Advertising in Greensboro, N.C.; the campaign was later developed by McCann-Erickson Worldwide.


T. W. McMahon, 69, Former Bank Executive
LEAD: Thomas W. McMahon Jr., a former executive at the Chase Manhattan Bank, died yesterday at Union (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Union.


Vehicle Sales Drop By 4.7%
LEAD: Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks fell 4.7 percent in mid-August, a decline that analysts attributed to record high sales a year ago.


First Catch of Atlantic Salmon Documented in Alaska Water
LEAD: Biologists have documented the first catch of an Atlantic salmon in Alaska waters, raising fears that escaped fish from commercial farms will introduce diseases dangerous to the state's valuable native species.


3,000 West African Troops Leave For Liberia to Enforce Cease-Fire
LEAD: Six ships carrying 3,000 West African soldiers sailed from here today to enforce a cease-fire in Liberia, where a 10,000-man rebel army has rejected a proposed truce.


Mets Never Got Over Kid and Mex
LEAD: While the Mets sleepwalk through the West, the Kid and the Mex are looking better and better, in retrospect.


Righetti Gains Vote of Support
LEAD: Stump Merrill, the manager of the Yankees, said yesterday that he had full confidence in the ability of Dave Righetti, the left-handed closer who will become a free agent at the end of the season, and that he couldn't or wouldn't imagine a bullpen without him next season.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allied-Lyons P.L.C., London, the beverage company, said Suntory Ltd., the Japanese beverage maker, had increased its Allied stake to almost 5 percent from 2.5 percent.


Washington Talk;   How Old Votes Become New Political Liabilities
LEAD: Recorded votes in Congress have a habit of becoming campaign nightmares.
To avoid them, lawmakers often jockey for voice votes on controversial legislation, so as not to have to risk going on the record.


Nearly 2 Years Late, Air Force Receives New Presidential Jet
LEAD: Nearly two years after the originally scheduled delivery date, a brand-new jumbo jet that will serve as President Bush's airplane was handed over to the Air Force by the Boeing Company today, the President's spokesman said.


HORSE RACING: Notebook;   Best 2-Year-Olds May Bi in Hiding
LEAD: Talented 2-year-olds have been so slow to emerge this year that it seems possible the eventual champion juvenile has yet to make his debut.
It is more comforting to think that the best are yet to run than to pronounce the crop a dull one already, and there is a theory to support that notion.


Planes Ordered By AMR Eagle
LEAD: The regional airline subsidiary of the AMR Corporation will become the largest operator of ATR aircraft in the world with its order this week for $1 billion worth of aircraft.


Review/Art;   Long Island Art, a Refuge From the Whirl
LEAD: August comes but once a year to Long Island, and that may be as much as anyone can take.
The frantic whir of relaxation and hand-to-hand socializing fills the air, and the pesto intake skyrockets.
For those who need a break from the work of not working, the area's museums are one option.
They are generally cool, calm, a little underpopulated and, even better, the season's crop of summer exhibitions is unusually fine.


U.S. Already in a Recession, More Than 60 Percent Say
LEAD: Americans have turned decidedly sour about the state of the economy, with the perception that the country is in a recession now shared by 6 out of 10 of them, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


Review/Film;   With Brains and Skin, Another Cloaked Avenger Fights Evil
LEAD: Of all this summer's movies, ''Darkman'' is the one aimed most directly at the audience for ''Batman.'' From its title to the organ-swelling music by Danny Elfman (who seems to have borrowed his own score for ''Batman''), on to its dim, foggy, comic-book look, this film lives in the shadow of last year's hit.


Edward Pattison, 58, Former Congressman And Lawyer in Troy
LEAD: Edward W. Pattison, a former United States Representative from Troy, N.Y., died on Wednesday at his home in West Sand Lake, N.Y.
He was 58 years old.


Kohl Hails 'Day of Joy' for Reuniting Germans
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany, a champion of German unification, basked in his triumph today with East Germany's decision to accede to the West on Oct. 3.


Regan Used Advice of Donor On Investment That Declined
LEAD: State Comptroller Edward V. Regan, who has faced criticism over awarding lucrative state contracts to campaign contributors, relied on a New York consultant firm that contributed $10,000 to his campaign in investing state pension funds in a Boston office building.
The property's appraised value has since declined by slightly more than a third.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: In a ceremony yesterday in Canberra, SIR GEOFFREY HOWE, the Deputy Prime Minister of Britain, handed over Australia's birth certificate, Reuters reported.
The document, with its faded writing on vellum, officially ended Australia's status as a British colony in 1901 and recognized it as a nation.
The country is a member of the Commonwealth.


The Soviets: Steady, if Slow
LEAD: Differences between the Soviet Union and the United States on when to use force to uphold economic sanctions against Iraq are troublesome.
But they scarcely threaten the remarkable international consensus that increasingly isolates Saddam Hussein.


Despite All, German Literati Keep Jousting
LEAD: As the unification of the two Germanys approaches, it has become clear that one group in German society will remain bitterly divided among themselves: the writers of East Germany and West Germany.


Renault Rethinks Mack Trucks Bid
LEAD: Renault S.A., the French state-owned automobile maker, is reconsidering its $6-a-share offer for all remaining shares of Mack Trucks Inc. because of the company's revised forecast of losses for the year.
The shares of Mack Trucks fell by $1.125 each today, to $5.25, in over-the-counter trading.


DEALS
LEAD:
Baseball


In Europe, Ambiance Costs $10
LEAD: It's one thing to hand over an unfamiliar bill or a few strange coins after a pleasant hour at a Paris sidewalk cafe.
It's quite a different thing to find that you've just spent $10 for a Coke and sandwich and a touch of ambiance.


Who's to Pay?
LEAD: John (Hot Rod) Williams knows he'll receive $26.5 million over the next seven years.
What the 6-foot-11-inch power forward doesn't know is whether the money will come from the Miami Heat or the Cleveland Cavaliers.


Judge in Guam Rejects Strict Law on Abortion
LEAD: A Federal district judge on the Pacific island of Guam has struck down the nation's most restrictive abortion law, one that directly challenged the constitutional right to abortion established in the landmark Roe v.
Wade case.





President Of New York Post Resigns
LEAD: Valerie B. Salembier, president of The New York Post for nearly 17 months, announced yesterday that she was resigning as of today.


Adding Police Won't Hold Back New York's Crime Tidal Wave
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.00
9.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.53
7.59
7.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.51
7.52
7.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.85
8.80
8.21
30-YR.


THE MUSEUMS
LEAD: Here are the addresses and hours for the exhibitions listed.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Long Island ''TWO DECADES OF AMERICAN ART: THE 60's AND 70's'' (through Sept. 3), Nassau County Museum of Fine Art, Northern Boulevard and Museum Drive, Roslyn Harbor. (516) 484-9337.
Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 A.M.


Price of Being No. 1 Is Nothing to Cheer About
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place;   Why the Broad Selloff in Oil Stocks?
LEAD: Even as commodity traders extended the upward march of oil prices in the futures market, investors continued to unload their holdings in oil companies and oilfield service companies, for the third consecutive day.


Review/Film;   A Quirky Return to Hong Kong, the Last Frontier
LEAD: In ''Life Is Cheap . . . but Toilet Paper Is Expensive,'' Wayne Wang, the Chinese-American film maker (''Chan Is Missing''), returns to Hong Kong, where he was born and where, it's said more than once in the film, ''Life is cheap, but toilet paper is expensive.''


A Light Rain and Heavy Trucks Entangle New York City Traffic
LEAD: The fates, mainly in the form of a light rain and tractor-trailers, conspired against drivers in New York City yesterday.


On Stage
LEAD:
Born of Faith


An Iraqi Visitor
LEAD: My Iraqi visitor turned up again.
Six years ago he came by, out of the blue, to ask why the Western press failed to tell about the horrors and brutalities of Saddam Hussein's regime, why America only paid attention to oil and strategy in the Persian Gulf and ignored the human dimension.


Oil? Nation's Utilities Are Not So Worried
LEAD: Whatever damage the run-up in oil prices inflicts on the economy as a whole, the effect on electricity bills is likely to be relatively modest.
Of the fuel-consuming industries, the electric utilities have been the most successful in learning the lessons of the first two oil shocks, in the 1970's, and finding other sources.


College Football;   How the Other Half Lives
LEAD: There are no white lines to define the shaggy practice field at Miles College.
As his players scrimmaged recently in the draining Alabama heat, the Golden Bears' new coach, Jerome Barkum, determined what was out of bounds and how far to go for a first down.


Bond Yields Rise in Volatile Trading
LEAD: Long-term Treasury bond yields continued to edge higher yesterday in a trading session marked by volatile price swings.
The Treasury debt market was buoyed after the opening by weakness in oil prices and the absence of any signifcant worsening of the situation in the Middle East, as well as by the expected slowing in the growth rate of the second-quarter gross national product.


Jordan Keeps Border Open; Thousands of Refugees Near
LEAD: Facing a relentless wave of refugees from Kuwait and Iraq, Jordan today gave up the idea of closing the desert border crossing that has become the main escape route in the gulf crisis.


Saratoga's Backyard Success
LEAD: Business at Saratoga this month should have been rotten.
The economy is receding.
Tourism in the area is down.
The racing is indifferent and the weather is as unpredictable as the steeplechasers.


U.S. Contends Nassau Broke Pact on Sludge
LEAD: Saying that Nassau County had broken an agreement that would have enabled it to meet a deadline to stop dumping sewage sludge in the ocean by the end of 1991, Federal prosecutors today asked a Federal judge to declare the county in contempt of court.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: WILLIAM PENTLAND, the former husband of ROSEANNE BARR, has filed a lawsuit seeking at least $15 million from her and $3 million from her husband, TOM ARNOLD.
Mr.
Pentland, whose 16-year marriage to Ms.
Barr ended in divorce in January, is represented by MARVIN MITCHELSON.
Ms.
Barr's lawyer is ARLENE COLMAN-SCHWIMM


Challenging Nike, Rights Group Takes a Risky Stand
LEAD: For days now, the image of Jesse Jackson has hovered over the Rev.
Tyrone Crider as he sits in the Chicago offices of Operation PUSH, devising a boycott of Nike Inc., the athletic shoe giant.
For Mr.
Crider and the civil rights organization he heads, it is their biggest test since Mr.
Jackson, the group's founder and soul, left for


Estonians Mark 51st Anniversary of Soviet Annexation of Baltic States


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CURTIS MAYFIELD, paralyzed by an accident at a concert in Brooklyn on Aug. 13, left Kings County Hospital yesterday for the Shepherd Spinal Center in Atlanta, near his home, according to a spokesman for Kings County Hospital.
The 48-year-old singer-songwriter was accompanied by his wife and son.


Letter: On Energy;   A Tax Would Make Oil Shock Worse
LEAD: To the Editor:


S.I. Port's Fate Is Muddled by the Mideast Crisis
LEAD: Before the Persian Gulf crisis began, the Staten Island home port was almost ready to open, or almost ready to close, depending on who was asked.
Now, the prospects for the port are even more confused.


I.B.M. to Offer New Computers
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation is expected to announce on Sept. 5 its plans for introducing mainframe computers twice as powerful as the current systems, a market research group said.


Mexican Democracy Means Brokered Elections
LEAD: To the Editor:


Apple Listing in Tokyo
LEAD: The Tokyo stock exchange plans to list shares of Apple Computer Inc. on its foreign section in mid-September, the exchange said.
Apple, a United States personal computer and software maker listed on the over-the-counter market, will not issue new shares after it is listed in Tokyo, the exchange said.


5 Found Dead in Burning Queens House in Apparent Murder-Suicide
LEAD: A Queens man, enraged that his wife was about to take their children and leave him, shot the woman and two of the youngsters to death with a hunting rifle, set their house on fire and then killed himself, the police said.


Christian Science Case Tests Medical Belief
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gorbachev Sends a Signal Ending Hesitation at U.N.
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev warned President Saddam Hussein of Iraq today that the Iraqi leader will face additional international sanctions if he does not withdraw his troops from Kuwait and release foreign nationals under his control.


Review/Film;   2 Garbage Men and 1 Corpse
LEAD: ''Men at Work,'' which opened here yesterday, is a good-natured lowbrow farce about two southern California garbage men who dream of opening their own surf shop.
It's also about toxic waste, political corruption, a dead body with its face hidden behind a Nixon mask and two dumb cops.


Dow Gains On Peace Sentiment
LEAD: Stock prices advanced briskly yesterday, posting their first gain after three days of heavy losses.


Let's Not Count on Electricity to Reduce the Greenhouse Effect
LEAD: To the Editor:


Adviser Loses $100 Million
LEAD: A financial adviser afraid to face his clients admitted in a videotape message that he lost about $100 million of investors' money by making risky trades in stock options.


Cattle Prices Are Declining Amid Fears of a Recession
LEAD: Cattle futures prices slipped yesterday at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange amid continuing fears of a recession.


Texas and Texas A&amp;M Are Staying in S.W.C.
LEAD: Texas and Texas A&amp;M announced today that they would stay in the Southwest Conference, the league the two schools helped form 76 years ago.


Forces Committed to Saudi Arabia and Nearby Waters
LEAD:
FROM THE UNITED STATES


Quiet Race Worries Connecticut Democrats
LEAD: In two weeks Democrats will choose in a primary for governor between a challenger whose strategy for victory counts on as few voters as possible going to the polls and a convention-endorsed candidate who rarely acknowledges there is a race at all.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You ask contractors to open jobs to women, and they say they'd love to but that the unions don't have any women.


Pact for Chargers' Seau
LEAD: Junior Seau, the linebacker from Southern Cal who was the San Diego Chargers' first-round draft pick, has agreed to the club's final offer of a five-year contract worth a reported $4.525 million.


James Wine, 71, Church Leader Active in '60 Kennedy Campaign
LEAD: James W. Wine, a Protestant layman who played a major role in defusing anti-Catholic sentiment in the Presidential campaign of John F. Kennedy, died Thursday at his home in Linden, Va.
He was 71 years old.


Oil vs. Gas: A Question of Cost Again
LEAD: The contest between oil and natural gas for supremacy in the home heating market has been long and bitter.
Now the confrontation between the United States and Iraq has made it more intense.


Golden Nugget
LEAD: Stephen A. Wynn, the chairman of Golden Nugget Inc., has lowered his stake in the Las Vegas, Nev., casino concern to 31.1 percent from 32 percent.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Mr.
Wynn gave no reason for the sale of the shares.
Golden Nugget has 16.5 million shares outstanding.
Between July 3 and July 11, Mr.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Abortion Law Struck Down


Activated Reservists Report for Gulf Duty
LEAD: As the call-up of reservists began, the Pentagon yesterday discarded a policy that had prohibited journalists from publishing or broadcasting the names and hometowns of enlisted men and women stationed in the Persian Gulf region.


Gooden Pitches Strongly As Mets Defeat the Dodgers
LEAD: The Mets finally found their sense of timing tonight when they edged the Los Angeles Dodgers, 3-2, on the powerful pitching by Dwight Gooden and two home runs by Kevin McReynolds, and moved to within three games of the first-place Pittsburgh Pirates in the National League East.


Mortgage Rates Rise
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.29 percent this week, up from 10.05 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
It was the highest level since a similar 10.29 percent rate was posted last June 1.
On one-year adjustable rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.36 percent, up from 8.31 percent last week.


AN IRISH HOSTAGE FREED IN LEBANON
LEAD: An Irish hostage held for more than four years in Lebanon was released Friday night, in what could be a step by Iran's Islamic Government toward warmer relations with the West.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline 0.5% on Nasdaq
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered - or ''short interest'' - fell one-half of 1 percent for actively traded over-the-counter securities in its national market system for the four weeks that ended in mid-August.
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the number of shares sold short and not yet covered - or ''short interest'' - fell one-half of 1 percent for actively traded over-the-counter securities in its national market system for the four weeks that ended in mid-August.
A total of 255.5 million shares were held short and not yet covered in mid-August, the association said, compared with a revised total of 256.9 million in the period that ended in mid-July.
The August activity represents short selling in 2,335 stocks; in July the short selling was spread among 2,299 issues.
Short-sellers expect a stock's price to decline, so they sell borrowed stock in anticipation of buying back an equal number of shares later at a lower price, thereby making a profit.
Views of Analysts Differ
Some traders and analysts consider a large short position to be bearish, because it presumably represents a strong cumulative belief that the market will turn down.
Under this reasoning, a large jump in the position would also be bearish.


Air Force Calls Up Reserves in 6 States
LEAD: In the first round of reserve call-ups, the Air Force activated units today in six states to augment flight crews shuttling cargo and equipment to the Persian Gulf region.


Jewish Prisoners Lose Appeal Over Beards
LEAD: Arizona's ban on prisoners' wearing beards has been upheld by a Federal appeals court over the objection of two Orthodox Jewish prisoners who contended that the policy discriminated against them.


Five Found Dead, Four Shot, in Burning Queens Home


Bridge
LEAD: A basic principle of bidding that is learned by beginners and observed quite strictly by experts is this: If your partner shows a five-card major suit and you have three-card support, you must show it, either immediately or on the next round, unless perhaps you uncover a good fit elsewhere.


5 South Carolina Lawmakers Indicted in Corruption Inquiry
LEAD: A Federal grand jury here indicted five state legislators today on charges of selling their votes to undercover Government operatives who were seeking their support for a bill authorizing parimutuel horse and dog racing in South Carolina.


Patents;   Protecting Child From Electric Plug
LEAD: An inventor in Des Moines, Mark Menninga, obtained a patent this week on a magnetically controlled device to help parents ''baby proof'' their homes by blocking a child's access to electrical plugs.


Turmoil Takes Its Toll on Military Families


Fed Panel Kept Steady Course in July
LEAD: Federal Reserve policy makers concluded in July that inflation remained high enough to require that current interest rates be maintained despite a ''relatively slow'' economy, records released today show.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: LIV ULLMANN and JEREMY IRONS won the Francois Truffaut Award at the Giffoni Film Festival recently.
The jury was made up of 120 children.
The festival, near Salerno, Italy, is devoted to films for children 10 14 years old.
Ms.
Ullmann won for her 10 years of work with children as good-will ambassador for Unicef and as vice president of the International Rescue Committee.


Toeing Party Line, Chinese Films Falter
LEAD: Ideological purity in the arts always exacts a price, but in China's film industry, which was blossoming before political hard-liners took control of the Government, it is proving ruinous.


U.S. Bank Regulators Challenged By the Co-op Market in New York
LEAD: Federal regulators, fresh from their experience taking over distressed property elsewhere in the nation, are facing new legal challenges and deep resentment as they move into the troubled market for New York area cooperative apartments.


GORBACHEV WARNS BAGHDAD TO BACK OFF OR U.N. WILL ACT; IRAQIS RING KUWAIT MISSIONS
LEAD: President Bush made a big gain today in his effort to isolate President Saddam Hussein of Iraq when President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union warned Baghdad that he was ready to back additional measures to toughen the United Nations embargo against Iraqi commerce.


Kuwaitis Recount Gunfire and Terror
LEAD: Iraqi soldiers are shooting at carloads of people trying to drive overland out of Kuwait, while occasional attacks on the occupied forces continue in urban areas, according to two Kuwaitis who fled to Saudi Arabia.


Griffey, Put on Waivers, Could Join Mariners
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds agreed yesterday to put Ken Griffey Sr. on waivers, clearing the way for him to team with his son, Ken Jr., on the Seattle Mariners.


Upper Caste Hindus Protest Indian Plan to Set Aside Jobs for Lower Castes


Mapping of Venus Is Delayed For Study of Radio Problems
LEAD: The start of the Magellan spacecraft's mapping survey of Venus will be delayed two or three weeks as engineers struggle to figure out how to prevent further communications losses and, in the event of recurrences, how to protect the craft from catastrophic damage.


FEDERAL RESERVE SAID TO RULE OUT A RATE SHIFT NOW
LEAD: The Federal Reserve apparently decided at a policy meeting this week to make no changes in interest rates until the Middle East crisis quieted down and a clearer picture emerged of its effect on the economy.


Judge Antoinette L. Dupont Marries Judge A. W. Cretella Jr. in New London
LEAD: Chief Judge Antoinette Loiacono Dupont and Judge Albert W. Cretella Jr. of the Connecticut State Appellate Court were married yesterday in New London.
The Rev.
Joseph Castaldi officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church, assisted by the Rev.
Felix H. McGuire and the Rev.
Vincent E. Lyddy.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Watching Interest Rates
LEAD:
International events are now influencing the interest rates that banks pay more than the economy is influencing them.
Yields on certificates of deposit have been falling for more than three months, but the Middle East situation could mean higher yields in the near future.
Bank rate analysts suggest watching rates on certificates of deposit closely for the next three weeks and holding some money in a federally insured bank money market account to be ready to shift to C.D.


Your Money;   Aiding Charities And One's Family
LEAD: An elderly widow who recently came to see Ilene T. Nadel, president of Creative Philantrophic Resources in New York, had needs similar to those of many of her generation: She wanted to be sure her grandchild got a good education; she wanted to provide a nice memorial for her husband, a Holocaust victim, and she wanted as little of her money as possible to go to taxes.


Disadvantage for U.S. in the Desert: Fewer Tanks
LEAD: If the crisis in the Persian Gulf should lead to full-scale war, United States and Iraqi forces would square off in a desert four times the size of France in a battle unlike any other in American history.
While most American, British and Israeli military experts say United States aircraft in the region could quickly smash an Iraqi invasion of Saudi Arabia,


Tamzin Anderson Is a Bride
LEAD: Tamzin Ellen Anderson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael W. Anderson of Bozeman, Mont., was married there yesterday to Nicholas Andrew White, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Willard D. White Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Charles Willming performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
White, 23 years old, expects to graduate from Montana State University in June.


Guilty in Money Laundering
LEAD: A Colombian reputed to be the financial wizard for the Medellin drug ring pleaded guilty on Thursday to charges that he helped launder more than $1.2 billion in illegal drug profits.
The plea was entered by Eduardo Martinez-Romero before Federal District Judge William C. O'Kelley.
Mr.
Martinez could be sentenced to up to 30 years in prison without parole and fined up to $4 million.


Oil Prices Fall Back $1 a Barrel
LEAD: Prices of crude oil fell $1.02 a barrel in the futures market yesterday, and prices for gasoline and home heating oil eased slightly.
Analysts and brokers said jittery commodity traders cashed in some profits before the close of a landmark week in the oil markets.


Chief of Correction Faults Rikers's Way Of Hiring Officers
LEAD: New York City Correction Commissioner Allyn R. Sielaff yesterday painted a bleak portrait of Rikers Island as a violent institution protected by correction officers who slipped through lax hiring standards and where prisoners are rarely punished for assaulting officers and one another.


Redskin Enters Plea
LEAD: In Houston yesterday, the Washington Redskins receiver Ricky Sanders pleaded not guilty to charges stemming from a May 1 fight with a parking-lot attendant outside a nightclub.
The attendant said Sanders drove a Cadillac into him after the two argued about Sanders's hubcaps.


Pennsylvania's Abortion Restrictions Are Struck Down by a Federal Judge
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Reading, Pa., today struck down several provisions of a restrictive abortion law that was enacted in Pennsylvania last year with the intention that it become a vehicle for the Supreme Court to reconsider the issue of abortion.


About New York; It's Not Exactly Dial-a-Quote, But It's Close
LEAD: This is about people who take down everything that Phil and Oprah and Geraldo say.
And Sam and Diane (the Sam and Diane on ''PrimeTime Live,'' not the Sam and Diane on ''Cheers'').
Every ''uh-huh,'' every ''well, now.'' So we will take extra-careful notes here.
Wouldn't want to misquote the quoters.


Nets Sign Rookie Guard
LEAD: The Nets have signed a rookie free-agent guard, Doug Lee, who averaged 27 points a game at Purdue in the 1986-87 season.


Religion Notes
LEAD: Woman to Head Alliance An American Presbyterian scholar has become the first woman to head a worldwide communion of churches.
Dr.
Jane Dempsey Douglass was elected president of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, an association of churches rooted in the 16th-century Reformation theology of John


Review/Music;   Mozart and Beethoven, Together but Far Apart
LEAD: Some 40 years of history separated the two halves of Thursday's Mostly Mozart concert by the Takacs String Quartet.
Yet the musical space between the two introductory Mozart pieces and Beethoven's A minor Quartet at the end seemed far wider.


Books of the Times;   How the U.S. Decides It's Times to Go to War
LEAD:
Constitutional Diplomacy
By Michael J. Glennon
353 pages. Princeton University Press. $35.


Phantom Panther in Vermont Evergreens
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Is Up From Lows; Gold Higher in New York
LEAD: In what is becoming a usual Friday performance, the dollar rose yesterday ahead of an uncertain weekend in the tense Persian Gulf.


Reserves' Quick Shift: Civvies to Olive Drab
LEAD: He spent Thursday night in Greenwich Village, shopping for clothes - just another 19-year-old.
He got the call at 11:30 P.M.
By this afternoon he was in an olive drab flight suit with an American flag insignia on one arm, checking in at the Air National Guard base here, 60 miles north of New York City.


Review/Theater;   Poetry and Surreal Imagery In Praise of the Mambo Beat
LEAD: In a poem by Pedro Pietri that runs like a hallucinatory thread through the first half of the revue ''Mondo Mambo,'' the Puerto Rican-born writer compiles a series of surreal images to evoke the transcendental mysteries of mambo music.
The train of associations, recited by Edwin de Asis, begins with images of an ''absent-minded alarm clock,'' rain that falls upward and ''colors that no one can name.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Winter, in Advance
LEAD: The warm, dry weather that usually arrives in the Northeast around Labor Day, ending summer's fiercest heat and humidity, offers ideal conditions for sealing and preparing outdoor surfaces for fall and winter.


Sign Vandal Case Dismissed
LEAD: A judge today dismissed charges against a Greenwich millionaire arrested in July in the spray painting of a real-estate sign that he contended was offensive and illegal.
The 64-year-old man, Rene Anselmo, who was charged with third-degree criminal mischief, said that he thought he had made his point.


Ambase Accepts A Takeover Bid
LEAD: The Ambase Corporation said it had signed a letter of intent accepting an investor group's offer to acquire 50.1 percent of the company for $4 a share, or about $68 million.
The group, led by Sequoia Associates and including several former top executives of the insurance industry, said that if the deal was consummated, Ambase's chairman, president and chief executive, George T.


Jets-Giants Rivalry a Subject for the Scrapbooks
LEAD: Has the Jets-Giants rivalry, which began at the Yale Bowl in August 1969, the weekend of Woodstock, finally gone the way of bell-bottom jeans?


Amid Crisis, West Meets Mideast in Saudi Arabia
LEAD: The arrival of American and foreign troops in Saudi Arabia and the flood of Kuwaiti refugees here are helping to pry open Saudi society, which has been hermetically sealed.


Moscow Journal;   To Leninists, It Smells Like a Purge
LEAD: These are not easy times for the people charged with looking after Lenin's good name.
His theories are falling into disrepute, his historic role is being re-examined and now, in a half dozen cities around the Soviet Union, his statues are being dismantled, not by bands of hooligans but by local city councils.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary of Pearl Bailey in some editions last Saturday and some on Sunday referred incompletely to her co-stars in the Broadway musical ''Hello, Dolly!,'' and a correction in this space on Tuesday misidentified the actor with whom she first performed the role.
Cab Calloway starred with Miss Bailey in a 1967 staging of the musical, and Billy Daniels appeared with her in a 1975 revival.


Syrian Gains Are Seen In the Shift Toward U.S.
LEAD: What has led President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, long viewed in the West as an intractable adversary, to align his nation with the United States in the Persian Gulf crisis?


The Oasis Crowd
LEAD: He had been the first to get into Baghdad.
That's why they called him Koppel of Arabia.
The name had weight.
Before he was Koppel of Arabia he had been just another Ted.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Pop Life column on Wednesday about the Neville Brothers misinterpreted a reference to Angola in ''Sons and Daughters,'' a poem by Art Neville that is on the group's new album, ''Brother's Keeper.'' The reference is to the Louisiana State Penitentiary at Angola, La., not to the African country.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
LITTLE LEAGUE
Shippensburg Reaches Semifinals
Bob Shannon struck out 14 batters and Shippensburg, Pa., clung to the lead it took two days earlier to advance to the semifinals of the rain-interrupted Little League World Series yesterday with a 3-1 victory over Mobile, Ala., at Williamsport, Pa.


Offering by Sun May Be Halted
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. said today that it might not proceed with previously announced plans for a stock offering because the price of its stock had declined as a result of the selloff on the stock market amid the Persian Gulf crisis.


U.N. Reviews Proposal
LEAD: The 15 members of the Security Council opened formal consultations today on a proposed resolution that would allow countries to halt ships suspected of violating the trade embargo against Iraq.


Gift to Regan Revives Debate on Business Donations
LEAD: Reports this week that the State Comptroller had invested state money on the advice of consultants who had given money to his campaign have raised questions again about the influence of campaign contributions in government decisions.


Data General To Cut 2,000
LEAD: The Data General Corporation said it would lay off more than 2,000 workers, or 4.9 percent of its work force, in the next several weeks.


Sematech Gains In Chip-Making
LEAD: Officials at Sematech, the private industry and Federal Government chip-making consortium, said yesterday that they were now making semiconductor chips with half-micron-wide circuit lines on American-made equipment.


Christian Science Case Tests Medical Belief;   State Intervention
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.E. Announces Plans To Cut More Jobs
LEAD: The General Electric Company said today that it would cut more jobs because of a shrinking military budget.


Review/Films;   The Invincible Hero Who Hardly Growls
LEAD: Early in Chuck Norris's new film, ''Delta Force 2,'' the star, who portrays an Army colonel named Scott McCoy, casually beats up some skinhead bullies who have been menacing the owner of a Chinese restaurant.
When congratulated on winning the fight, he remarks: ''I didn't fight.
I gave a motivational seminar.


Band Is Held Not Liable In Suicides of Two Fans
LEAD: A judge ruled today that the British heavy-metal band Judas Priest was not responsible for the deaths of two youths who committed suicide after listening to the group's album ''Stained Class.''


World Talks on Air Fares
LEAD: Major airlines will meet next week to discuss international fare increases in response to soaring fuel prices caused by the Persian Gulf crisis, an industry association said today.


Officer Is Cut in Face by Disturbed Woman
LEAD: An emotionally disturbed woman jabbed a broken bottle into the face of a police officer in Harlem yesterday, slashing his cheek, the police said.


Harold Masursky, 66, a Leader In Mapping of Moon and Planets
LEAD: Harold Masursky, the former chief scientist of the United States Geological Survey's Center of Astrogeology and a leader in lunar and planetary exploration, died yesterday at his home in Flagstaff, Ariz.
He was 66 years old.


Did I Say Average? I Meant Superior
LEAD: My brother Ted and his wife Lynn waited, eagerly checking the mail, for the results of their 3-year-old's first I.Q. test.
They had paid the requisite $90 for a ''next-day'' mailing.
But after 10 days, 2 phone calls and promises that it ''went out days ago,'' Ted sent a messenger to the Resource Center for Gifted


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-7
The American effort to isolate Iraq advanced when President Gorbachev suggested he would support measures to toughen the U.N. embargo.
In Kuwait, Iraqi troops surrounded several embassies.
Page 1
Gorbachev warns Iraq to withdraw and to free hostages


Police Officers to Get to Know Their Neighborhoods


Postal Service Unions Open Contract Talks
LEAD: The Postal Service and unions representing its workers opened contract negotiations here today against a backdrop of the service's financial distress and labor's charges of mismanagement.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.12
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.46
7.53
7.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.48
7.51
7.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.90
8.85
8.25
30-YR.


Telescope Construction Cleared Over Objections
LEAD: The United States Forest Service has authorized the University of Arizona to build three telescopes on Mount Graham after determining that the project's possible harm to an endangered subspecies of squirrel had been studied sufficiently.


Red Sox Edge Blue Jays in Ninth
LEAD: Mike Marshall's run-scoring single in the ninth inning broke a scoreless tie and the Boston Red Sox beat Toronto, 2-0, tonight to take a two-game lead over the Blue Jays in the American League East.


Going Private Is a Public Affair
LEAD: Under the plan of the Mexican Government to privatize its huge national telephone company, the winning bidder will have to agree to increase the number of household phone lines from 5 million to 10 million over the next four years; reduce installation time from 18 months to 6, and shrink the wait for a dial tone from 30 seconds to under 10.


Leading Executive and 2 in Family Are Killed in Boston Plane Crash
LEAD: A development company executive and his wife who were flying their daughter to meet a commercial flight at Logan International Airport crashed their twin-engine private airplane into a crowded residential neighborhood here today, setting two houses on fire.
The three people on the plane all died in the crash.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Prime Minister MICHAEL MANLEY of Jamaica was released from a Manhattan hospital yesterday, nine days after doctors removed a benign growth from his prostate.


Putting Up Office Tower, Women Break Sex Barrier
LEAD: Vickie Barnes is putting up a 27-story glass and granite office building here with 43 other women and about 600 men.
An apprentice carpenter, she earns $13.62 an hour, enough to support herself and her 12-year-old daughter.


Wrong Fix for Public Schools
LEAD: Oregon's citizens are now considering a state constitutional amendment that would give parents more flexibility to choose schools.
While choice is to be encouraged, the Oregon plan would create a kind of free market among public, private and religious schools.
That's dubious public policy.


Guilty Plea in '88 Rampage
LEAD: A Bronx teen-ager pleaded guilty yesterday in State Supreme Court in the Bronx to eight robbery and burglary charges stemming from his part in murder, rape and robbery by five young men two years ago.
The teen-ager, Brandon Campos, who was 15 at the time, admitted helping to loot an apartment in Brooklyn after a group of companions strangled a construction foreman in the Bronx.


CHEMICAL ACCIDENT IN URALS HURTS 110
LEAD: An explosion at a chemical factory injured more than 100 people and polluted the drinking water of the city of Ufa in the Ural mountains, the Soviet press agency Tass said today.


To Insure Toy Safety, U.S. Shifts Its Attack
LEAD: The Federal Government shifted its strategy on toy safety this week, filing lawsuits against seven major companies in the United States that distribute or sell imported toys.


Man Suffocates As Intruders Hold a Party
LEAD: Four people, three of them teen-agers, were charged yesterday with murdering a mentally retarded man who suffocated inside a closet while they caroused in his Bronx apartment for nearly six days and sold his belongings, the police said.


500 Are Detained in Burmese Capital
LEAD: About 500 people have been detained for questioning by the military authorities in the last two weeks in the capital of Myanmar, formerly Burma, diplomats said today.


Patents;   Cork Has 2 Chambers To Purify Champagne
LEAD: Ernest Gladstone, a retired teacher in Brooklyn, has patented a two-chambered cork that he says makes it possible to purify champagne without exposing it to the air.


Arts Appeal Is Rejected
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Arts has rejected a request for an administrative appeal of the agency's decision last June to deny grants to four performance artists whose work has strong sexual content.


2 Court Rulings Prevent Release Of Mexican Doctor Held by U.S.
LEAD: A pair of court rulings in the last two days seem to assure that a Mexican doctor charged in the slaying of an American drug agent will remain in Federal custody while the Government pursues its appeal of a judge's order that he be returned to Mexico.


At Payola Trial, Primer on Forms and Mechanics
LEAD: Packets of cocaine hidden in audiocassette cases.
Thousands of dollars handed over furtively in the men's room of Hollywood restaurants.
Record album jackets stuffed with cash and shipped by Federal Express to radio station executives.


USAir Plans More Layoffs
LEAD: USAir Group Inc., which had already announced layoffs of more than 1,500 workers this month, said yesterday that it planned to cut another 2,100 jobs by the end of the year.
The latest reduction amounts to about 4 percent of the work force of the airline company, which is based in Arlington, Va.


Phantom Panther in Vermont Evergreens;   Hunted in the West
LEAD: To the Editor:


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amerifirst Bank, Miami, said it would eliminate 50 staff and management positions and would decrease its asset size.


Yankees Start Looking to Future
LEAD: In the final weeks of their dry season, the Yankees seem ready to begin laying more groundwork for the future.
They are talking with other clubs about trades, pondering the possibility of moving veterans and looking closely at prospects who might offer help as early as next summer.
They are also still losing.


Soviets Verify Big Oil Find
LEAD: The Soviet Union confirmed today that it had found two oilfields and the world's biggest offshore gas field in the Barents Sea, the scene of costly but until now fruitless exploration efforts in recent years.


2 Soviet Athletes Out
LEAD: Two female Soviet athletes - the former world high-jump champion Tamara Bykova and the heptathlete Larisa Nikitina - have been suspended for using banned drugs at the Goodwill Games last month in Seattle and will miss next week's European championships, the Soviet Athletics Federation said in Moscow yesterday.


Poles Tell of Americans Held at Iraq Chemical Plant
LEAD: Some Americans in Iraq are being held at a chemical factory near the Syrian border that also produces enriched uranium, according to Polish workers who witnessed the arrival of the hostages.


G.M. Sets Incentive Offer On Many of Its 1991 Models
LEAD: In a move that analysts said amounted to a concession that its new cars and trucks may be priced too high in a soft market, the General Motors Corporation said today that it was offering incentives on many of its 1991 models, including several that go on sale this month for the first time.


Convicted Northwest Pilots Plead Guilty to a 2d Charge
LEAD: Two of the three members of a Northwest Airlines crew who were convicted in a Federal court this week of flying their plane and its 73 passengers while drunk have pleaded guilty to a second charge growing out of the incident.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture on the Law page yesterday with an article about volunteer prosecutors was published in error.


Football;   After Jets Tonight, Will There Be a Tomorrow?
LEAD: When the Giants play the Jets on Saturday night in the teams' annual preseason game at Giants Stadium, it may be the last or almost the last hurrah for one or both of the Giants' recent running-back heroes.


Generals Favor 'No Holds Barred' By U.S. if Iraq Attacks the Saudis
LEAD: Top American military commanders here are recommending that Washington respond to any Iraqi invasion of Saudi Arabia with a punishing, all-out attack against Iraqi military forces and installations.


Baxter Is Selling Stake in Genetics
LEAD: Baxter International Inc., the Deerfield, Ill., hospital supply concern, said it intends to sell its 7.3 percent stake in Genetics Institute Inc., a biotechnology concern in Cambridge, Mass.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of museum hours in Weekend yesterday with articles about museums near Manhattan misstated the visiting days and the admission policy for the Newark Museum.
It is open from noon to 5 P.M.
Wednesday to Sunday, not on Tuesdays.
Admission is free, not $1.


Bucket Danger Warning
LEAD: Warning that household buckets pose a serious drowning threat to small children, Government and industry are making available labels alerting the public to the hazard.


G.N.P. Rate For 2d Period A Weak 1.2%
LEAD: In what many analysts see as a further sign of a weakened economy, the Government confirmed today that growth was listless even before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait jolted oil prices.


John M. Karns Jr., 62, Illinois Appeals Judge
LEAD: John Marshall Karns Jr., a retired Justice of the Illinois Appellate Court, died Wednesday at Memorial Hospital in Belleville, Ill.
He was 62 years old and lived in Belleville.
His wife, Joan, said he died of lung cancer.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, AUGUST, 25, 1990
LEAD: The Economy


Tadzhikstan Declares Sovereignty
LEAD: The Soviet Central Asian republic of Tadzhikistan declared sovereignty today, becoming the 13th of the 15 Soviet republics to make some move toward greater autonomy, a news service reported.


Patents;   Simplifying the Output Of a Class of Compounds
LEAD: Researchers at the Celgene Corporation in Warren, N.J., obtained patent approval this week for a method of determining whether molecules are, in effect, left-handed or right-handed.


Dirty Minds, or Little Minds?
LEAD: There is a scene in Shakespeare's ''Henry the Fifth'' in which Katharine, the French princess, asks someone described as ''an old Gentlewoman'' for an English lesson.
The ensuing instructions, in schoolgirl French, are funny - and as anyone knows who has seen them performed with vivid gestures in Kenneth Branagh's movie version of the play, even ribald - a dazzling exercise in double entendre, even to one who doesn't grasp all the dialogue.


Hong Kong Outlook
LEAD: The Government of Hong Kong today cut its estimate of economic growth for the year and said conditions could deteriorate further, adding that a slowdown seemed likely even before the Persian Gulf crisis.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline yesterday about a New York Times/CBS News Poll on Americans' view of the economy referred incorrectly in some copies to the segment who believe the nation is now in a recession.
It was slightly more than 6 in 10, not ''nearly.''


Showing His Old Form, McEnroe Beats Gilbert
LEAD: For at least one satisfying match, on center court here in the quarterfinals of the Norstar Bank Hamlet Challenge Cup today, the 31-year-old John McEnroe looked like the McEnroe of old, serving convincingly, returning the ball effectively and volleying with authority.


Jefferey Bucholtz, Designer of Homes And Apartments, 33
LEAD: Jefferey D. Bucholtz, an architectural designer, died Thursday at the Davies Medical Center in San Francisco.
He was 33 years old.
Michael Goldblum, a colleague of his, said he had died of AIDS.


The World v. Saddam Hussein
LEAD: Cornered and desperate, Saddam Hussein now lashes out against diplomacy itself.
His troops lawlessly threaten foreign embassies in Kuwait while his regime detains U.S. diplomats and dependents who were promised a safe exit from Baghdad.
The most telling condemnation comes from Moscow, Iraq's longtime ally.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Pakistan Day Parade, Lexington Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 26th to 47th Streets from 1 P.M. to 4 P.M.
For a related street fair, Madison Avenue will be closed from 23d to 26th Streets from 3 P.M. to 8 P.M.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: B. DON MAGNESS, chairman of the Miss Texas Scholarship Pageant for 20 years, resigned Thursday night after reports of impropriety.
He told the pageant's board of directors that he was unfairly depicted in a Life magazine article as a dirty old man who made lewd comments to pageant contestants.


3,000 West African Troops Anchor Off Liberian Capital
LEAD: Six ships carrying 3,000 West African soldiers arrived off Monrovia today, but did not attempt to dock as gunfire erupted in the port of the Liberian capital.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Southwest Boomed in 80's, Census Finds
LEAD: The five states whose deserts and canyons form the vast expanse of the American Southwest have seen some of the nation's sharpest increases in population in the last decade, preliminary 1990 census figures show.
A boom in the Las Vegas area raised Nevada's population by nearly 50 percent.


Pretoria Takes Broad Steps To End Factional Fighting
LEAD: In a crackdown on factional bloodletting that has claimed more than 500 lives in 11 days, South African authorities today designated 27 black townships ''unrest areas'' and gave the police wide powers to arrest and search people without warrant and to seize weapons.


Sergei Dovlatov, 48, Soviet Emigre Who Wrote About His Homeland
LEAD: Sergei Dovlatov, a leading Soviet emigre writer noted for the laconic irony and graceful irreverence of his stories about his homeland, died of heart failure yesterday at Coney Island Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 48 years old.


Roosevelt Watson, A Freed Defendant In 70's Slaying Case
LEAD: Roosevelt Watson, one of five black youths who won dismissal of murder charges in a widely publicized case in rural Dawson, Ga., in the mid-1970's, died Tuesday at his home in Albany, Ga.
He was 34 years old.


Oil May Affect Price of Tires
LEAD: Further jumps in crude oil prices could push up retail prices of American-made tires in coming months, a trade official of a rubber trade group said today.


Congress Gets Bush Pay Plan
LEAD: President Bush today sent Congress his recommendation that Federal employees receive a 3.5 percent pay rise on Jan. 1.
Congress has until the end of September to approve the plan or substitute its own.
The House has approved a 4.1 percent raise.
The President's advisers had recommended raises of 22 percent to 40 percent to keep Civil Service pay abreast of salaries in the private sector.


Develop a Seaplane To Deploy Our Troops
LEAD: To the Editor:


For The Iraqi Ruler, Variations on a Name
LEAD: In reports on the crisis in the Persian Gulf, many Western news organizations and many officials have referred to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq as Saddam, or President Saddam.
Other organizations, including The New York Times, call him President Hussein.
The inconsistency derives from the Iraqi


Lisa Marie Knoechel Wed
LEAD: Lisa Marie Knoechel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Knoechel of Lake Carmel, N.Y., was married yesterday to Antony Leo Kerz, a son of Louise Kerz of Los Angeles and the late Leo Kerz.
The Rev.
Brian McWeeney officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
James the Apostle in Carmel, N.Y.
Mrs.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Pakistan Day Parade, Lexington Avenue will be closed today from 26th to 47th Streets from 1 P.M. to 4 P.M.
For a related street fair, Madison Avenue will be closed from 23d to 26th Streets from 3 P.M. to 8 P.M.
In Brooklyn, Brighton Beach


Campus Life: U.C., Irvine;   Reaching Out To Young Indians Unsure of College
LEAD: A new program to prepare American Indians for college careers has drawn 50 prospective students to the University of California at Irvine.


Baseball;   Brock's Homer in 9th Beats Yanks
LEAD: It was not a good week for Dave Righetti.


Commercial Property: Vacancy Rates;   Black Monday's Fallout: An Emptiness Downtown
LEAD: The shadow cast by Black Monday is growing longer and longer through the canyons of lower Manhattan, where commercial vacancy rates continue to climb higher than they have in years.


Tourism At Shore: Changing Patterns
LEAD: ALTHOUGH state and local tourism officials say that the crowds have begun returning to the Jersey Shore after three years of being repelled by reports of coastal pollution, business somehow is just not the same, they say.
The officials add that Shore tourism may never be what it once was.


Mama, Papa and Baby Tiger
LEAD:
TIGERS
The Secret Life.
By Valmik Thapar.
Photographs by Fateh Singh Rathore.
160 pp. Emmaus, Pa:
Rodale Press. $35.


Baptist Group Challenges Conservative Leadership
LEAD: The steps taken at a Southern Baptist meeting here this week were still a long way from breaking America's largest Protestant denomination in two, but many here said that this outcome might be unavoidable.


When a Dance Delves Into Literature
LEAD: ''Why should we do Shakespeare?
Shakespeare's already done Shakespeare.'' George Balanchine once made that scornful declaration about the way some choreographers base works on literary classics, including the plays of Shakespeare.
However, by choreographing his own ''Midsummer Night's Dream,'' Balanchine himself ''did Shakespeare.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday about George Balanchine's troupe Les Ballets 1933 characterized the company incorrectly.
It was the choreographyer's first company in the West, not his first American one.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
JUMP CHAMPS


Ani Stern Weds Askold W. Buk
LEAD: Ani Stern and Askold W. Buk were married yesterday at the New York Academy of Art in New York.
M.
Michael Grupp, a leader of the American Ethical Union, officiated.


Text of Resolution by U.N. Security Council
LEAD: Following is the text of the Security Council resolution authorizing military action to halt all maritime trade with Iraq:


Review/Theater;   First-Person Lampoon Of a Former First Lady
LEAD: Nancy Reagan may be out of the public eye, but one person who hasn't forgotten her is Terry Sweeney.


Freed Hostage Reports Seeing 3 Others in Lebanon
LEAD: A hostage freed overnight from Lebanon said today he had recently seen three other Western hostages, including the American journalist, Terry A. Anderson, held for more than five years, and that all were well.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
COWBOY DREAMS
Written and illustrated by Dayal Kaur Khalsa.
Unpaged. New York:
Clarkson N. Potter. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Baseball;   Clemens Fires Shutout For Three-Game Lead
LEAD: Roger Clemens pitched a five-hitter and escaped a bases-loaded jam in the ninth inning today, and Dwight Evans hit a home run as the Boston Red Sox beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 1-0.
Boston increased its lead in the American League East to three games over Toronto.


Ellen Morris Marries Peter McCann
LEAD: Ellen Hallowell Morris, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
John B. Morris of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Peter Michael McCann, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. McCann of Boston.
The bride's father, a retired Episcopal priest, assisted by the Rev.
Halsey DeWolfe Howe, also an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Village Church in North Haven,


Currency;   Pressure on the Dollar
LEAD: Another week and another milestone for the dollar.
First, the dollar set a new low against the German mark on Aug. 14.
Then, last Thursday, it fell to a low against the Swiss franc, 1.2560, and set another low aganst the mark, 1.5444.
At the same time, the weary dollar fell further against the three popular high-yield currencies that are backed by high interest rates and are also net energy exporters, making them less vulnerable to the Persian Gulf crisis.


Special Today;   Fashions Of The Times/Magazine Part 2


Jennifer M. Brown Wed in Michigan
LEAD: Jennifer Mills Brown, the educational marketing manager in the children's book department at HarperCollins Publishers in New York, and John Philip Irwin 3d, who will become an associate at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton next month, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Muskegon, Mich.


The Man Behind Iraq's Supergun
LEAD: On a quiet evening this March, in the leafy Brussels suburb of Uccle, Gerald Bull walked down the hallway leading to his apartment and pulled out the key to his door.
It was the last thing he ever did.


Tech Notes;   Getting Photographs From Medical Imaging
LEAD: First there was medical imaging - electronic devices that produce video pictures of structures deep within the body using X-rays, sound waves or magnetic resonance techniques.
Now there is a way to directly convert these electronic images into high-quality, instant, black and white photographs printed on film.


Campus Life: S.M.U.;   At Boot Camps for Freshmen, Lessons in Tradition and Tolerance
LEAD: Last week, college students began converging on America's campuses for the start of the fall semester.
Among them were some four million freshmen.
Nowadays, more and more colleges try to make the transition from high school easier with orientation programs.
Here are reports from Southern Methodist University and Case Western Reserve University on their programs.


Comments of Writer From Japan Disrupt Reunion of Veterans
LEAD: Veterans from the unit that dropped the atomic bombs on two cities in Japan in World War II today dedicated a peace memorial, but they caused a furor when they scratched a Japanese writer off the speaker list for saying the bombings were not necessary.


Tennis;   U.S. Open Shows No Favorite
LEAD: This year the United States Open promises to be a quieter tournament than usual: along with the temporary banishment of La Guardia Airport's jet stream from the sultry skies above Flushing Meadows, there is the absence of a contender for a 1990 Grand Slam on both sides of the draw.


Talking: Oil Tanks;   New York's New Rules On Storage
LEAD: Until recently, people with free-standing fuel-oil storage tanks in their basements or beside their houses did not have to worry about rules designed to avoid environmental contamination.
Spills from these above-ground tanks are not likely to seep into ground water or waterways because even a small leak is immediately visible and can be cleaned up before becoming an environmental hazard.


Summer Theater as an Endurance Test
LEAD: FORSAKING friends, family and familiar surroundings, four New Jersey residents packed their bags and headed north to the White Mountains of New Hampshire to take part in the actor's annual rite of passage known as summer theater.


One Hat Too Many
LEAD: Elected officials are supposed to put the public good ahead of narrow partisan interests.
That is the common-sense reasoning behind a provision in New York City's new Charter that bars key officeholders from holding party jobs.
But a disappointing court decision now casts doubt on whether that ban against political moonlighting can be enforced.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   A Lot of World to See With a Ranger as a Guide
LEAD: ''We appreciate the little things,'' said Rich DeSimone, an Urban Park Ranger at Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx. ''And we encourage people to come back to the parks.''


Chased Out?
LEAD: The slings and arrows of the Dartmouth Review have apparently taken their toll on William S. Cole.
For several years, Dr.
Cole, a tenured music professor at Dartmouth College, faced a stream of criticism from the conservative, off-campus Review, which commented caustically on his teaching style.
The Review also criticized others, but its attacks on Dr.


ABORTION SHIFTING GERMAN ALLIANCES
LEAD: With German unity finally set for Oct. 3, West German Government officials are moving quickly to insure that resolution of the remaining internal aspects of unification does not turn into a political free-for-all like the dispute over the unification date.
But another partisan battle is already brewing, this time over


She's Tired Of McEnroe
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Caution: Tomato Season Nearing End
LEAD: WITH only a few more weeks of summer on the calendar, tomatoes top the shopping list.
Is it possible to indulge in enough of them, to become sated now so they will not be missed as sorely after the season?


Thrown Out
LEAD: The lawsuit brought by Charles H. Keating Jr. to regain control of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Associaton bounced like a bad check last week.
In what Federal officials called ''an extremely important victory,'' a Federal judge dismissed Mr.
Keating's suit, accused him and other Lincoln executives of pillaging the Arizona institution and said the Government was ''fully justified'' in taking over Lincoln last year.


33 Are Hurt at a Rap Concert
LEAD: About 40 youths scaled gates at an amphitheater during a concert by the rap group Public Enemy on Friday night and randomly assaulted concert-goers and security guards, the police said.
Thirty people were treated for minor injuries at first aid stations and three others were treated at a hospital, the police said.


Ready to Deal After Shuffle
LEAD: FOR the Yankees' reshuffled front-office personnel, it is still just the beginning of the post-George Steinbrenner era.
But so far, things seem to be progressing well.


Ground Covers Go Beyond Pachysandra
LEAD: SOMETIMES ground covers other than grass are the best solution to protect bare earth.
If soil is not covered with something, weeds move in rapidly.
The goal is to plant cover that will establish itself quickly.
This is especially true for areas like slopes or heavily shaded patches under mature trees.


What's Star Style?
LEAD: The season's brightest looks, plus a few that are fading fast.
What's Flashing


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Soothing Soups, Glorious Noodles and Bargains
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
La Bonne Soupe


Demons in Cuba
LEAD:
THE MAGIC DOG
And Other Stories.
By Antonio Benitez Rojo.
Edited by Frank Janney.
261 pp. Hanover, N.H.:
Ediciones del Norte.
Cloth, $26. Paper, $14.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Aug. 11
MANHATTAN
Greenwich Village
$710,000
44 Carmine Street
3-family, 4-story brownstone with a 2 bedroom duplex, a 1 bedroom unit and a 450-sq.-ft. studio; 1 bath in each; 750 sq. ft. of commercial space on the first floor; 18- by 80-ft.


Riddoch Stays Put
LEAD: HE took over the hot seat when Jack McKeon opted for his old office chair, and on Friday, Greg Riddoch found out that he could now sit back and relax a bit.
The Padres announced that Riddoch, the coach who replaced McKeon as manager July 11 after McKeon left the dugout to concentrate full time on his job as vice president of baseball operations, would remain as the team's manager through next season.


Seven-Alarm Fire Destroys New Orleans Wharf


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Fresh Tuna Grilled On Stove
LEAD: If you are fortunate enough to be able to grill a piece of tuna over charcoal, you know that it requires no seasonings at all for spectacular flavor.


State Stewards Guard Adirondacks' Alpine Flora
LEAD: Alix Cleveland did not think that climbing to the top could become so routine.
But this summer, as one of New York State's first ''summit stewards,'' she climbs 5,344-foot Mount Marcy five days a week.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Plan for next spring's flower garden; mail orders for hardy bulbs.
Feed 'mums to support oncoming bloom.
Last call to dig and divide bearded iris.
Keep after weeds.
Repair weak, established lawns and seed or sod new ones.
Spray rosebushes with a fungicide to protect them from black spot.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Visualize a room with plenty of capacious, comfortable, welcoming sofas and chairs, not all of them occupied.
In this room there are, too, a few straight-back chairs and someone is sitting in one of them.
Someone with a bad back?
Wrong guess.
This person has a wonderful, healthy, much-to-be envied back.


A Travel Nut's Library
LEAD: Old travel books occupy so many shelves in my apartment that a visitor might take me to be some kind of antiquarian nut.
I am merely a travel nut, and the books are artifacts of that hobby.
Just looking at their sonorous titles (''Forbidden Sands,'' ''Monsoon Seas,'' ''Dead Cities and Forgotten Tribes,'' ''They Reigned in Mandalay''), I am taken back to places in many parts of the world that I traveled far to see.


Streetscapes: 316 East 59th Street;   New Role for 'Gnomes' Home'
LEAD: Storefront design bubbled with vitality in the 1920's and early 30's as small shops sought an identity amid a rising group of chain operations and department stores.


DEALS
LEAD:
Baseball


Nancy Seligson Marries
LEAD: Nancy Seligson and Peter R. Green were married yesterday at the Locust Valley, L.I., home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Seligson.
Rabbi Nancy Weiner officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from Northwestern University.
She is an independent television associate producer.
The bridegroom, 30, is a son of Mrs.


Cindy Kanter, Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Cynthia Dana Kanter, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip D. Kanter of Great Neck, L.I., was married there yesterday to Michael Harris Sonnabend, a son of Katherine H. Sonnabend of Livingston, N.J., and Henry Sonnabend of Dallas.
Rabbi Morris Barzilai, assisted by Cantor Norman Summers, officiated at at Temple Beth


Afghan President Returns; Kabul Attacked With Rockets
LEAD: President Najibullah of Afghanistan returned to Kabul today, hours after rockets slammed into the capital, killing 9 people and wounding 15.


Coming To America...And Staying
LEAD: I ARRIVED in the United States on Sept. 5, 1965.
I had come as a foreign student in a Ph.D. program at a major American university and intended to return to India, my native land, after obtaining a doctorate.
I stayed on to enjoy the freedom, an organized way of life and the creature comforts that were not available to me in my old country.


Discovered Along the Flowered-Silk Route
LEAD: When it comes to antiques, whether they be furniture or textiles, their history bespeaks a world of fashion and a way of life that affected the owners as well as the makers.
But rare is the exhibition of antiques that takes this factor into account; if an exhibition does, objects appreciated for their beauty alone can also tell a story of commerce.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 5 about Pullman, Ill., rendered the name of the writer incorrectly and misstated his hometown.
It was written by Karl Zimmermann, who now lives in Norwood, N.J.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Gaetano Ferro;   Contemplating Divorce? 'Be Reasonable.'
LEAD: CHANGES in society and in the law have brought changes in divorce, says Gaetano Ferro, a lawyer in Westport.
Reasons for divorce as well as settlements and child-custody arrangements are changing, he said, yet many people are still dissatisfied with the process of of dissolving a marriage.


Pro Football;   Simms Paces Giants
LEAD: The magic was back for the Giants tonight, at least for one period.
Phil Simms's 11-for-11 passing in the second quarter provided two touchdowns and a 17-7 preseason victory over the Jets.


In The Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Farmingville
$126,000
1131 Waverly Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, attached 1-car garage; taxes $2,600.
Holbrook
$167,500
179 Nimbus Road
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $3,600.


Anne Dresselhuys Weds
LEAD: At the Fox Point (Wis.) Lutheran Church, Anne Catherine Dresselhuys, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donn R. Dresselhuys of Milwaukee, was married yesterday to Michael John Alix, a son of John A. Alix of Frederick, Md., and Tincy Crouse of Lexington, Ky.
The Rev.
David Schoob officiated.
Mrs.
Alix, 27 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.


Squeeze - and Contain - Iraq
LEAD: The United States has forged two potent weapons against Iraq, a worldwide diplomatic alliance and a swelling army in the Saudi sands.
Some analysts fear the alliance cannot long hold, however, and impatiently urge that force be used immediately to quell Iraq's grandiose ambitions once and for all.


Going Back to School
LEAD: IN perhaps his most remarkable reversal of field, Emmitt Smith, the most prolific running back in University of Florida history, has said he is going to spend this fall seeking enlightenment instead of running for daylight.


Those Who Left Wall Street Are Not Suffering
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cuomo's Green Period
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has been campaigning vigorously across the state.
He has political advertisements on the radio.
He has spent $300,000 on television commercials, just in August. ''The choice is very clear,'' he says solemnly, staring into the lens.


Another Jogger Trial, but One With Less Outcry
LEAD: As jurors in New York City weighed the fate of three teen-agers charged with the rape and beating of a Central Park jogger, a jury 300 miles to the northwest heard the gruesome details of an attack on another jogger raped and left to die.


Renting A Cotswolds Cottage
LEAD: For years I had wanted to rent a cottage in the English countryside.
I had a clear, if idealized, notion of my requirements: a thatched-roof cottage in a sleepy English village; a rustic stone fence bordering pastures and meadows; honeysuckle and roses by the front door; a pub just a short walk down the lane, and easy access to London should all the above ever become boring.


Alicia Drummey Weds John Doner
LEAD: Alicia Louise Drummey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Drummey of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
John William Doner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Royal DeVere Doner of Chalfont, Pa.
The Rev.
Canon Robert Broesler performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden


Adeline Horner Married on L.I.
LEAD: Adeline Sue Horner, a daughter of Mrs.
Albert H. J. Mueller of Tucson, Ariz., and Larry D. Horner of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Olaf Neubert, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Werner J. Neubert of Hamburg, West Germany.
The Rev.
Charles Newberry performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown in Locust Valley, L.I.


An Irish 'Toy House' For Two (or More)
LEAD: For a simple, undemanding and not-too-foreign week removed from the ruts of home and disciplines of office, renting a cottage in Ireland seemed ideal.
After all, Ireland is about as close as Europe gets to America, the people speak our language, and my wife and I personally share, across uncertain generations, elements of the culture.


Dennis Shields Weds Jill Schwartzberg
LEAD: Jill Barrie Schwartzberg was married last evening at the Plaza in New York to Dennis Alexander Shields.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman officiated.


For an Egyptian Father, The Joy of Sons' Escape
LEAD: Outside the Mourci cafe on a dusty Cairo back street on Friday, Mohammed Gamal was all smiles.
In a telephone call from Nuweiba, a port on the Sinai peninsula, he had learned that his five sons had returned safely to Egypt on a ferry from Jordan, after a grueling 1,200-mile bus journey from Kuwait.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Why Are Baseball Brawls So Common?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Humor Succeeds Simply Because People Like to Laugh
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Arizona State;   Debating Drinking On a Campus That Restricts It
LEAD: Arizona State University, where alcohol consumption is restricted, has been having quite a few debates about drinking lately.


St. Luke's Status as a Trauma Center Is Dropped
LEAD: The Emergency Medical Service notified St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center on Friday that it would no longer bring trauma patients to St.
Luke's because the hospital's trauma center does not meet the service's standards.


Data Bank/August 26, 1990
LEAD:
$
New Orders for Durable Goods
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
2.9
-3.2
4.1
Gross National Product
II Q'90
I Q'90
IV Q'89
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,162.8
$4,150.6
$4,133.2
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
1.2
1.7
0.3
Corporate After-tax Profits
Percent change
-0.2
0.5
1.7
Auto Production
Aug.


Pitfalls for the Obliging Gofer
LEAD: I'm in London standing in Harrods lower-level market - not the fabled Food Halls that take up maybe a quarter of the ground floor, but the much less touristy lower-level market.
I'm staring in dismay at the tea display, which, to my eye, can be no less than 20 feet wide and 6 feet high.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a review on Aug. 5 of A. N. Wilson's ''Eminent Victorians'' misidentified one of the subjects of Lytton Strachey's 1918 book of the same title.
He was Thomas Arnold, the educator, not his son Matthew Arnold, the poet and critic.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: It used to be that no one would submit a game for the brilliancy prize if he knew that his opponent had a drawing line.
The ideal was for the attack to feature a string of inescapable combinations leading to victory. ''But you cannot restrict yourself that way anymore,'' said the Oakland grandmaster Nick De Firmian.


Food;   THE CAPER CHASE
LEAD: Traveling to Aguilas in the Southeastern corner of Spain to learn how the caper finds its way from plant to table, I came away knowing how, but wondering why.
Even as a lifelong fan who values the caper's sharp salinity in dishes of all sorts, I marveled, once again, at the trouble people go to for this tiny culinary adornment.


Rediscovering The Pioneers Of the Blues
LEAD: To get a sketchy idea of what musical, and therefore cultural, life was like in the first half of the 20th century, a collector has had to become single-minded, slogging through used-record bins or buying expensive imported albums and CD's from specialty stores.
It is impossible, using albums released by domestic record companies, to construct a decent chronology of


A Taste For Tchaikovsky
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pretoria's Forces Impose Tense Peace in Towns
LEAD: The battles have ebbed today in these bleak townships on South Africa's gold-mining reef, where more than 500 people have died.
And the lines of competing black factions have been frozen in place by a deployment of the police and soldiers in trucks intended for bush warfare and now imposing a kind of civilian peace.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption in The Times Magazine on July 29 with an article about Detroit misidentified a downtown street that appeared deserted in the early evening.
It is John R Street, not Brush Street.


Japan Has Its Own Set of Rules
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''History will judge us by our resolve in the face of Iraq's threats to international peace and security.''
- Thomas R. Pickering,
the United States'
permanent representative
to the United Nation.
[15:6.]


Eleanor B. FitzSimons, Public Relations Executive
LEAD: Eleanor B. FitzSimons, a trustee of the Citizens Budget Commission and a public relations executive, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 65 years old.
Her longtime associate, Louis Weintraub, said she died of cancer.


BUSINESS DIARY/August 19-24
LEAD:
COMPANIES
More on the Trump Saga
For savings and loan bailouts, the Resolution Trust Corporation must approve.
For Trump bailouts, it takes the New Jersey Casino Control Commission.
On Tuesday, the commission approved Donald J. Trump's package of $65 million in new bank loans, with casinos as collateral.


French Villas Fit for a Family Reunion
LEAD: It's 11 A.M in the South of France and the sun is climbing high and hot in a blue sky.
The pool's turquoise water sparkles in a corner of a vast garden.
Sitting under the shade of a huge tree by a wooden picnic table at my rented villa, I sip my coffee, munch on a fresh croissant, and wade through the third chapter of another book


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Like most other aspects of life in the Soviet Union, bridge has been affected by perestroika.
The number of tournament players in Moscow has more than doubled in the past year from 400 to 1,000.
The progression is expected to continue.


The Bard and the Multitude
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oops! There Goes The Wine
LEAD: In Anne Semmes's restaurant review of Beaugard's on July 29, she cites an incident of a busboy's knocking over a half bottle of wine as evidence of tentative and inexperienced service.
Has she never knocked over something?
I have, and so have busboys in the finest restaurants that we've frequented here and in


Women's Shelter Wants Women Only on Its Board
LEAD: Every day more than 100 women drop in at Rosie's Place because they are homeless and hungry, and in most cases because they have been abused at the hands of men.
At Rosie's, the first homeless shelter in the country for females only, women are always welcome.


On Condemnation And the Jay Property
LEAD: Your July 29 article on rival plans for the Jay property [''Rival Proposals for Purchase of Jay Land'']  contains a subhead, ''Condemnation Could Triple Price,'' which, presented as fact, is incorrect and misleading.


THE LANGUAGE THING
LEAD: President Bush's choppy locutions may remind some readers of the similar speech patterns of Alfred Jingle, a memorable if minor character found in Charles Dickens's ''Pickwick Papers.''


In the Salt Marshes, Beware
LEAD: Re: ''In the Natural State,'' July 15, about the salt marshes of South Jersey:


Path Opens to Wide-Ranging New Antidotes
LEAD: Scientists who successfully bonded metal ions to an antibody say the procedure could be the first step toward one day creating antidotes that could neutralize chemical weapons, drug overdoses and most poisons.


Stephanie Kelly Is Married
LEAD: Stephanie Danielle Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clyde P. Kelly of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Lucien Newhouse, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Newhouse of Scarsdale.
Donald Sullivan, a retired justice of State Supreme Court, officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Know Your Allies
LEAD: Americans have a pretty clear idea why the United States is fighting in the Arab Middle East, what rings true and what clunks like a counterfeit coin.


Hope M. Houston Marries in Dallas
LEAD: Hope Marie Houston, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Houston of Carrollton, Tex., was married last evening to William David Hirshorn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald P. Hirshorn of Schenectady, N.Y.
The Rev.
Patrick H. Koch and Rabbi Ben J. Leinow officiated at St.
Rita's Roman Catholic Church in


The All-Purpose Bad Guy
LEAD:
BENEDICT ARNOLD
Patriot and Traitor.
By Willard Sterne Randall.
Illustrated. 667 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $27.95.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Because our driveway slopes toward the garage and the drain is small, water collects during heavy rains.
Also, since the garage floor is uneven, the rubber door bottom does not seal properly and water flows underneath.


Singing the Cancellation Blues, Again
LEAD: Seekers after mystic signs had to be nonplused the other day when Joseph Volpe, the newly appointed general director of the Metropolitan Opera, made it his first public act to confirm the company's abandonment of a planned Werner Herzog staging of Mozart's ''Zauberflote'' next season. (It will be replaced by a David Hockney production borrowed from the San Francisco Opera.) This might be seen as an evil omen for Mr.


Righteous Rock: Issues You Can Dance To
LEAD: It used to be easy to spot the rockers with good intentions.
They had earnest expressions and dull wardrobes, and they put across their messages with an almost puritanical disdain for embellishment, clutching acoustic guitars as talismans of sincerity.
A serious song might allow itself a singalong chorus, but it couldn't be seductive or sensual - that might seem too frivolous for important subjects.


French and U.S. Works At the Historical Society
LEAD: An exhibition of approximately 60 paintings by American and French artists whose works were displayed in the 1889 World's Fair in Paris is to go on display Sept. 5 at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street.


OPEC LEADER URGES HIGHER OIL OUTPUT
LEAD: The president of OPEC said today that the organization should help alleviate any oil shortages caused by the Persian Gulf crisis.


Rebecca Clement Marries in Akron
LEAD: Rebecca Diane Clement, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Clement of Akron, Ohio, was married there yesterday to Patrick Joseph Corless 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
P.
Joseph Corless Jr. of Pomona, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Pumphrey officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
The bride, who will keep her name, and Mr.


Miss Greene Wed To L. R. Jones Jr.
LEAD: Marsha Adell Greene, a daughter of Mrs.
Flint A. Greene Jr. of Akron, Ohio, and the late Mr.
Greene, was married there yesterday to Leonard Rayfield Jones Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jones of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
John E. Garnett performed the cermony at St.
Phillips Episcopal Church.


Give Law a Chance
LEAD:
ON THE LAW OF NATIONS
By Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
211 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
$22.50.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Shops and Housing May Soon Join Yachts
LEAD: Since the early 1900's a 14-acre peninsula in the west branch of Stamford Harbor has been a boat yard, a boat-building site and a marina, where forests of sailboat masts tower over yachts, speed boats and catamarans.


Outdoors;   Prices Ebb at Tackle Auction
LEAD: ANTIQUE fishing tackle and related paraphernalia, including fish decoys, continue to capture the fancy of collectors, but record-breaking prices are apparently a thing of the past, at least for the time being.


The Stars of Autumn
LEAD: Legs have it.
The short skirts, leggings, jodhpurs and snug boots that are everywhere prove it.
So do the taut bodysuits, dark or dazzling with patterns.
Fabrics laced with stretch certainly have it, as do those that smolder to the touch - velvet, cashmere, spongy tweeds, mohairs and meltons.
And sequins, paillettes and false gem stones never lost it.


Q and A
LEAD:
Right to Co-op Documents
Question: I am a real estate broker specializing in residential loft sales.
The lawyer of a client who is interested in a co-op requested access to the financial records but the board refused to comply.
Doesn't Section 624 of the New York Business Corporation Law gives prospective buyers the right to see these documents?


Eligibility Suit
LEAD: THE school has said no.
The family has cried foul.
The doctors -well, they have said different things.
And so it appears that for Stephen Larkin, the courts will have the final say.


Francis J. Sugrue, Journalist, 72
LEAD: Francis J. Sugrue, a writer for The New York Herald-Tribune for a quarter-century before the newspaper closed in 1966, died on Friday at the Ozanam Hall of Queens Nursing Home in Bayside.
He was 72 years old and had lived in Flushing, Queens.


Sarah Humphreys Is Wed
LEAD: Sarah Jane Humphreys, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Humphreys of Joplin, Mo., was married yesterday to Paul Stewart Atkins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neill S. Atkins Jr., of Anna Maria, Fla.
The Rev.
Keith B. Whitmore officiated at St.
Philip's Episcopal Church in Joplin.


In the Trail of the Nuclear Arms Industry
LEAD: At the University of California at Davis, the carcasses of 1,000 slightly radioactive beagles are frozen solid, ready to be buried by the Department of Energy in a project to decommission a nuclear research laboratory that could cost as much as $22 million.


In Saddam Hussein's Iraq, All Real Power Settles at the Top
LEAD: In the 11 years of Saddam Hussein's presidency, Iraq has produced no heir apparent, no viable domestic opposition, no democratic tradition and no popular leader in exile waiting to return in triumph.


A Fond Look at 'a Sport for Everyone'
LEAD: MOST people who know me are aware of my fondness for the sport of tennis.
I was first introduced to the game more than 40 years ago in Trenton by my good friend Dr.
Bill Hayling.


Ground Covers Go Beyond Pachysandra
LEAD: SOMETIMES ground covers other than grass are the best solution to protect bare earth.
If soil is not covered with something, weeds move in rapidly.
The goal is to plant cover that will establish itself quickly.
This is especially true for areas like slopes or heavily shaded patches under mature trees.


Lifestyle;   Football Hasn't Started for Real Yet, But Real Fans Show They're Ready
LEAD: Under an overcast sky on a recent afternoon, Jay Silver, a 24-year-old commercial real-estate broker, demonstrated his unconditional adoration for the New York Jets, whose 4-12 record last year was hardly easy to love.


Fashion;   Broomstick Skirts Bring Navaho Grace Anywhere
LEAD: Broomstick skirts, the gathered three-tiered skirts worn by Navaho women, look as graceful in Columbus Avenue cafes as they do in the Southwest, where they are enthusiastically worn as a local uniform.


When Children Shoot Children
LEAD: The kids don't have .38's anymore.
They have Uzis. - Jose Resto, resident of a crime-plagued Bronx community after neighbors stabbed a robbery suspect to death.


Fashion: On the Street;   Cool, and as Colorful as You Like
LEAD: The oversized shirt, loose and easy, seems perfect for the winding-down days of summer.
It is cool and airy on hot and humid days, and can work up a good billow on windier ones.


Truth Outs
LEAD: Uncle Miltie is also a father, and not just to the children mentioned in his ''Who's Who'' biography.
In an interview with the National Enquirer last week, Milton Berle said he has an illegitimate son, now 51 years old, whom he sometimes sees at social gatherings but who is unaware of their connection.


Judge Bars Evidence Seized by Agents in 'Gas Leak Inspector' Trick
LEAD: A Federal judge has ruled that cocaine and cash seized in the apartment of a Brooklyn man cannot be used as evidence against him because the ploy used by the authorities to enter the home - posing as gas company workers and falsely warning of an imminent gas explosion - could not be condoned.


Builders Facing Rough Seas
LEAD: The annual round of fall boat shows, which begins with a major trade exhibit in Boston this weekend, brings with it grim forecasts for the marine industry.
But in the midst of the manufacturers' quagmire exists an area where optimism rules the waves: in the marine export business.


Ground Covers Go Beyond Pachysandra
LEAD: SOMETIMES ground covers other than grass are the best solution to protect bare earth.
If soil is not covered with something, weeds move in rapidly.
The goal is to plant cover that will establish itself quickly.
This is especially true for areas like slopes or heavily shaded patches under mature trees.


Equipment That Plays in the Key of Flexibility
LEAD: If Beethoven could hear a CD recording of his music (assuming he returned to this world with his hearing intact) he would probably throw one of his famous fits.
The performance would seem to him consistently off key.


Works in Progress;   Softening of the Arteries
LEAD: Traffic in Los Angeles has by now reached legendary dimensions, spawning potential remedies left and right.
One of them is an experimental project called Pathfinder, a joint effort by the United States Department of Transportation's Federal Highway Administration, the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) and the General Motors


Karla Buchinskas Married
LEAD: Karla Mary Buchinskas, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edmund Buchinskas of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married yesterday to Kenneth Kinam Coe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yun Myung Coe of Seoul, South Korea.
The Rev.
Carmel F. Miotke, a Roman Catholic priest, officated at St.
Thomas Chapel in Falmouth, Mass.


Protecting Creativity in a Global Market
LEAD: As this nation ponders its place in world markets, it is increasingly clear that the protection of intellectual property and the upholding of American patent laws are inexorably intertwined with competitiveness.


Campus Life: Texas;   Parents Sue A Fraternity Over a Fatal Fall
LEAD: The mother and stepfather of a University of Texas fraternity member who died here in September 1988 after falling 150 feet from a cliff have filed a $30 million negligence suit against the fraternity.


West Africa Force Repels Attack by Liberia Rebels
LEAD: West African troops sent to Monrovia to end Liberia's eight-month-old civil war repulsed an attack today by rebels loyal to Charles Taylor, the Ghana news agency reported.


Pro Football;   Falcons Defeat Packers
LEAD: Chris Miller passed 54 yards to George Thomas for a touchdown and Steve Broussard ran 71 yards for another tonight as the Atlanta Falcons beat the Green Bay Packers, 17-14, for their best-ever preseason start.


Postings: 91st St. Town House;   Dalton Expansion
LEAD: The Dalton School has added another town house to its diverse holdings on the Upper East Side, expanding by one the 91st Street row in which its lower school is conducted.
Its newest building, 63 East 91st Street, was bought for $2 million from Martha Rusk Sutphen, through the Leslie J. Garfield brokerage.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
LEAD: VACANT city lots are powerful symbols.
Betrayal, despair, mistrust - name it, and for someone the weedy blocks that dot every city represent a modern age that has all but said cities are worthless.


Review/Dance;   Paula Hunter's Dark World Of Family and Other Rituals
LEAD: The Merce Cunningham Studio is spacious and looks out on an extraordinary New York skyscape.
But it seemed impenetrably dark and cramped on Thursday night when Paula Hunter unfolded the strange, obsessive world of her dances.


For Now, It's Just First Aid for U.S. Field Hospital
LEAD: At the field hospital here the nurses are engaged in a nervous waiting game.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
MEXICAN BOLERO.
By Angeles Mastretta.
Translated by Ann Wright. (Viking, $19.95.) The Mexican journalist Angeles Mastretta's debut novel is part of Latin America's literature of political repression: in ''Mexican Bolero,'' a young girl loses her innocence while corrupt politicians, generals, labor leaders and peasant bosses jockey for power in the years after the Mexican Revolution of 1911.


Lots of Volunteers for the No. 1 Spot
LEAD: The New York Times Top 20 as compiled by Michael Sisak.
Coaches' records are for their careers, not just for their present teams.
1. TENNESSEE
Coach: Johnny Majors (150-97-8, 22 years).
1989 record: 11-1.
Strengths: Chuck Webb (RB) returns to an explosive attack led by Andy Kelly (QB), 6-0 as a starter.


Miss Murray Wed To G. M. Creamer
LEAD: Mary Jane Murray, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald E. Murray of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Glenn Michael Creamer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Creamer of Pawtucket, R.I.
The Rev.
Gerald E. Murray, the bride's brother, performed the ceremony at the Holy Family Roman Catholic Church.


Wall Street;   Shareholders Get a Say on Salary
LEAD: How much is good corporate management worth?
A great deal, no doubt, when markets are in upheaval and economic prospects grow cloudier every day; even in sunny times, nobody expects corporate executives to toil for free.


Drug Suspects Arrested Holding Bag, Literally
LEAD: Two patrol officers responding to a routine complaint surprised three suspected drug dealers in upper Manhattan early yesterday morning as they walked out of an apartment carrying shopping bags full of cocaine and cash, the police said.


At Jacob's Pillow, Endless Summer
LEAD: The gardens at Jacob's Pillow are slug-eaten, and the mosquitoes have grown sharks' jaws.
Samba drumbeats are heard from studio windows as classes in Afro-Brazilian dance finish out the summer school calendar.
And the final entry of the 1990 concert schedule is performances by the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane &amp; Company in the barnlike Ted Shawn Theater through this


Handel's Countertenors
LEAD: To the Editor:


National Awards For County Programs
LEAD: IN high schools countywide, a traveling theater group of teen-agers from Yonkers performs its original play, ''Risky Business,'' teaching young audiences how to reduce the risks of AIDS.


Living Ruins
LEAD: In VISIONS OF ANCIENT AMERICA (Rizzoli, $50), the photographer Roberto Schezen turns his lens on archeological sites in Mexico and Central America.
The cities he records were built by Aztecs, Toltecs, Olmecs and Mayans, but it is nearly impossible to imagine human creatures living amid these desolate twilight landscapes.


Jacqueline Kristan Married
LEAD: Jacqueline A. Kristan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin S. Kristan of Austintown, Ohio, was married yesterday to Stephen J. LoPresti, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. LoPresti of Belmont, Mass., by the Rev.
Fred Lukehart at the St.
Joseph Roman Catholic Church in Austintown.
Mrs.
LoPresti, 28 years old and a graduate of Bowling Green State University in Ohio, worked until recently as an assistant treasurer at J.


Against Their Will: 12 Families' Stories of American Hostages
LEAD: Some are oil workers; some are corporate managers; some are diplomats.
Some were in Iraq or Kuwait to visit relatives.
Some are tourists who had the wretched luck to make a fueling stop in Kuwait City only to find themselves squarely in the path of an international crisis.


Ms. Stringer Wed To David Usdan
LEAD: Elizabeth Doble Stringer, a daughter of Mrs.
Arthur C. Stringer of Brewster, Mass., was married there yesterday to David Edward Usdan, the son of Betsy See Dean of New York and Myron S. Usdan of Ardmore, Pa.
The Rev.
James A. Robinson, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the First Parish


Students Find Ancient Indian Site in Colorado
LEAD: Two University of Colorado students who were tracking bighorn sheep in southwest Colorado have stumbled upon the virtually untouched ruins of a lost Indian village more than 1,100 years old.


Campus Life: Case Western;   At Boot Camps for Freshmen, Lessons in Tradition and Tolerance
LEAD: Last week, college students began converging on America's campuses for the start of the fall semester.
Among them were some four million freshmen.
Nowadays, more and more colleges try to make the transition from high school easier with orientation programs.
Here are reports from Southern Methodist University and Case Western Reserve University on their programs.


Tennis;   Briskly, Edberg Defeats McEnroe
LEAD: John McEnroe is showing signs of improvement in his attempt to regain his old form, but he's not ready for the Stefan Edbergs of the world.


Postings: Italian-Designed, Korean-Made;   Furniture Showrooms for 5th Avenue
LEAD: At a time when entrepreneurs from Korea have become New York City's leading food retailers and moved aggressively into other businesses, that country's largest furniture exporter is about to make a foray into the city from an 11-story building it has bought at 315 Fifth Avenue.


'Sexual Personae'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Diversity in a Trenton Group Show
LEAD: NABISCO BRANDS owns four manufacturing companies, of which the one at East Hanover produces eight of the country's ''top 10'' cookies and crackers.
It also maintains an art gallery - the better to warm up the atmosphere of its main building, a ''layer cake'' of concrete and glass that dominates the hill bounded by River Road and DeForest Avenue.


At This Rate, We'll Never Get Off the Planet
LEAD: NASA, the proud agency that once bore the nation's hopes in space, has outlived its usefulness.
It is an aged and faltering institution whose shortcomings have become embarrassingly evident to all but the most self-interested.


D.L. McCullough Weds Miss Mead
LEAD: Kristen Key Mead, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Key Mead of Barrington, R.I., was married yesterday to Darrin Lee McCullough, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Lee McCullough of Athens, Ga.
The Rev.
Daryl Wayne Stahl performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Barrington.


Nassau Museum Defended and Praised
LEAD: The Rip Van Winkle Award for 1990 surely must go to Harold Jaffe (''Fine Art Museum Is Not Needed in Roslyn,'' Aug. 5) for his notion that Nassau County's Museum of Fine Art should be abandoned because ''we simply do not need another fine-art museum located at its present location.''


BEST SELLERS: August 26, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
11
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.
2
3
3
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford.


Ethyl Eichelberger and His Interior Spotlight
LEAD: With equal zest, Ethyl Eichelberger played men and women.
Sometimes portraying a dozen characters in a single show, he leaped from fright-wigged mad doctors to pompadourable courtesans.
In ''The Tempest of Chim-Lee,'' he represented an entire gallery of Oriental characters (with no protest from Actors' Equity).


Berlin Seeks Its Cultural Soul
LEAD: ''And what will Berlin be like when it's truly one city?'' someone said to me the other day. ''Will it be the new Paris?
Will people flock there from all over?
Will they discover their true selves in Berlin and be forever at home there, just as they used to be in Paris?''


A Place for Hearing and Reading Poetry
LEAD: The third Geraldine R. Dodge Poetry Festival is to be held Sept. 13 to 15 at Waterloo Village, Stanhope, N.J.
Joyce Carol Oates and several Pulitzer Prize-winning poets are to participate in the festival's series of readings, panel discussions and workshops.


Unhappy Landing
LEAD:
GROUNDED
Frank Lorenzo and the Destruction of Eastern Airlines.
By Aaron Bernstein.
256 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


When a Talent Remains Hidden
LEAD: EVERY family has its share of characters ranging from the stoics to the Pollyannas, the troubled to the troublesome, the heroes to the villains.
In my family, I was cast in the role of comedienne.


Baseball;   Steinbrenner Had Ex-I.R.S. Man Check Winfield
LEAD: The chief criminal investigator for the Internal Revenue Service in New Jersey retired and went to work the same week for George Steinbrenner, who hired him to look for evidence that a charitable foundation set up by Dave Winfield was involved in fraud and misappropriation of funds.


THE LANGUAGE THING
LEAD: Recovering from recent ''abominable'' surgery, I nearly split the sides of my stitches with the laughter thing when I read Maureen Dowd's article about President Bush's unique rendition of what I'm sure he thinks of as his mother's tongue (''The Language Thing,'' July 29).


Toyota Minivan Is at Head of the Class
LEAD: CHRYSLER'S minivan was an original that gonged out a knell for suburbia's well-entrenched station wagon, and I have long thought it was the only way to go.
I raced a Plymouth Voyager around the perimeter of the country in the nutty race called One Lap of America and I fell in love.
I liked the feel of it.


Common Market Prepares for German Unity
LEAD: With German unification now only weeks away, the 12-nation European Community has hurriedly drafted a set of provisional measures aimed at smoothing the integration of East Germany's backward economy into this prosperous region.


A Fall Wedding For Barbara Burg
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Burg of Woodstock, N.Y., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Barbara Burg and Steven Schieffelin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Schieffelin of Albany.


Boon to Paper in El Salvador: Free Speech
LEAD: In an act of journalistic courage here, the small afternoon newspaper Diario Latino, in May published a scathing report by investigators for the United States Congress asserting that 14 of El Salvador's 15 highest-ranking officers had commanded troops responsible for killing and torturing hundreds of civilians.


Raccoon With Rabies Found in New York
LEAD: Raccoon rabies has crossed the border into New York, where its spread is being hastened by this year's record numbers of the masked marauder.


Marc Neuhof, Photographer, 75
LEAD: Marc Neuhof, an architectural photographer whose work appeared in publications in the United States and abroad, died on Thursday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
His family said his death followed a stroke.


A Drugstore Industry Leader Raises the Level of Its Game
LEAD: Sometimes a cigar is just a cigar.
But during a recent crowded lunch hour in downtown Chicago, Jim McCallister's cigar became proof of just how quickly a customer can get in and out of one of Walgreen's drugstores.


Security, Passenger Delays and the Gulf Crisis
LEAD: The homebound crush through European airports in late August and early September will be made more difficult this year by security measures augmented because of the Persian Gulf crisis.
In mid-August, cities that were checked - Athens, Frankfurt, London, Madrid, Paris and Rome - reported that security requirements so far had delayed no departures, but spokesmen for United


Men's Style;   A STORE IS BORN
LEAD: You don't have to be a romantic to sell men's clothing in Manhattan.
But it helps.
Consider Alan Flusser, whose recently opened Wall Street-area tailor shop is a florid evocation of old England.
There are trellis-patterned carpets, chintz-covered chairs and an old-fashioned sofa in which customers can wallow as they ponder the distinction between a chalk and a pin stripe.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: More and more manufacturers are producing cameras with red-eye reduction systems these days, and the question inevitably arises: Do they work, and is it worth trading up to a new model just to get this feature?


World Markets;   Even Norway Takes a Nose Dive
LEAD: With its North Sea oil production, Norway's stock market should have been reasonably immune to the swirling downdraft from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait that has dragged most of the world's stock markets to new lows for the year.


From Hall to Mall In Yorkshire
LEAD: At the southern entrance of the Piece Hall in Halifax, a town in the Pennine hills of Yorkshire, hangs a richly wrought pair of cast-iron gates painted blue, white and gold and adorned with the Halifax coat of arms, which has at its center the sundered head of St.
John the Baptist, patron saint of the wool weavers' guilds of the Middle


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Deltiologists, collectors of postcards, the cliche goes, should look for postcards at stamp shows.
Philatelists often fail to recognize the special value a postcard might have because of its picture rather than its stamp.


Men, Women and Understanding
LEAD: To the Editor:


How to Install a Dimmer Switch
LEAD: DIMMER switches allow adjusting lighting levels; they also save energy and extend the lives of light bulbs.
Most often, dimmer switches are used for controlling incandescent ceiling lights.
Installing one is easy.
The job involves simply replacing the conventional wall switch with the dimmer.


The Word Spread Anew About Video
LEAD: The beef and dairy businesses did it, and now video might try the same thing.
This summer the industry is contemplating a generic advertising campaign to promote all of video as a medium of home entertainment.
Recent studies indicate that people are less enthusiatic about renting videos than they once were.


Keep Bathos Out of Bach
LEAD: To the Editor:


INTERNATIONAL/3-24


Hostage Families Tell Their Stories
LEAD: A decade ago, Arleen Uerling was working in a restaurant in Yakima, Wash., when Mohammed Tayeh walked in, ''and it was love at first sight,'' her mother said.
Two years later they were married and headed for Kuwait, where, until the Iraqi invasion Aug. 2, Mr.
Tayeh had a catering service and Arleen


England
LEAD: To the Editor: The article ''Memorable Gardens in England's Oxbridge'' by A. L. Rowse (Travel, May 29) described the very attractive botanic garden in Oxford, which goes back to about 1630.
The garden was built over what had been a Jewish cemetery, a fact that is commemorated on a plaque at the stone entryway.


Paul Moore Weds Elizabeth Brooks
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Brooks and Paul Philip Moore were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J., by the Rev.
Paul Daleo.


The Stuff Wars Are Made Of
LEAD: In the last week the United States crossed a threshold in confronting Iraq over its Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait.
It became more than a nation responding firmly to an international crisis; in its collective consciousness and in cold fact, it began preparing for war.


Buildup of U.S. Troops Alarms the Arab World;   Invasion of Lebanon
LEAD: To the Editor:


All Transportation Is Subsidized
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: An article on Aug. 5 about magazines aimed at black audiences misstated the combined circulation for three of them.


Spotlight on a Commissioner
LEAD: Allyn Sielaff had a progressive reputation when he took over New York City's jails.
Now critics are asking whether isolation made him blind to tension at Rikers Island.
Page 40.


Decision Is Praised
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a chart last Sunday with an article on the petroleum industry's outlook given the Middle East crisis omitted the names of several major oil producers.
The complete chart appears today on page 19.


Public Works, Private Cash
LEAD: A few months after a major new building opens in New York City, the subway stations and buses serving it often overflow with additional passengers, causing congestion and delays.


In The Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Cheshire, Conn.
$155,000
55 Broadview Road
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; expansion area upstairs, 1-car attached garage, private lot, .50 acre; taxes $1,911.
Litchfield, Conn.
$214,000
26 North Shore Road
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old lakefront raised ranch; dock, new kitchen and bath, sunken living room, .50 acre; taxes $1,954.


In Nice, a Sumptuous New See-Through Museum
LEAD: Nice, the largest city on the Cote d'Azur, has long had a double personality.
It attracts tourists because of its beaches, but it also functions as a cultural center: the Chagall Museum, the Matisse Museum, the Museum of Fine Arts are all proof of this.
These institutions, however, are not involved with living art.


Laurie Sappern Is a Bride
LEAD: Laurie A. Sappern, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Sappern of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Dean H. Gaugler, a son of Chester F. Gaugler of Bloomsburg, Pa., and Mrs.
Arnold Kohl of Newville, Pa.
Rabbi Jacob Lantz officiated at the Rolling Hills Country Club in Wilton, Conn.
Mrs.
Gaugler is a marketing representative for I.B.M.


The Big Dirty Apple
LEAD:
THE NEW YORK ENVIRONMENT BOOK
By Eric A. Goldstein and Mark A. Izeman.
Illustrated. 267 pp. Washington:
Island Press.
Cloth, $24.95. Paper, $14.95.


Voltaire vs. Religion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Ward, Research Aide, Weds J. P. Russell, Sculptor
LEAD: The North Parish Unitarian Church in North Andover, Mass., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Cordelia Anne Ward, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Graham Ward of North Andover, to James P. Russell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew Russell of Ashbourne, County Meath, Ireland.
The Rev.
David Blanchard performed the ceremony.


For Vietnamese in U.S., Uneasy Ties to Home
LEAD: The young man in the toque and clipped mustache, chatting with customers at what has become one of Vietnam's best restaurants, is a symbol of the economic strength and potential of the Vietnamese exiles in the United States, as well as of their ambivalence about closer ties between the two countries.


Judith A. Zunino Wed To Gerald Nielsen Jr.
LEAD: St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford Village, N.Y., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Judith Ann Zunino and Gerald Anton Nielsen Jr.
The Rev.
Pierre Botton performed the ceremony.


In a Dusty Texas Town, a Bizarre Tale Takes Shape
LEAD: Only on second glance does one realize that it's actually Vanessa Redgrave on the set and not a crew member or a male extra biding his time between camera setups.
Her blond hair is short-cropped, unkempt and brushed straight back from her face, emphasizing her square jaw and her sharp, oddly masculine features.


'As You Like It;' Another View
LEAD: A few days after seeing the Phoenix Theater's production of ''As You Like It'' in Dobbs Ferry, which the audience , including a large group of day campers, found thoroughly delightful and comprehensible, I read Alvin Klein's bilious review (''A Romantic Staging for 'As You Like It,''' July 29).


Tracy Campbell Weds M. H. Smith
LEAD: Tracy Ann Campbell, a daughter of Frank J. Campbell 3d and a stepdaughter of Judith W. Campbell of Gladwyne, Pa., was married there yesterday to Michael Hodgsdon Smith, a son of Peter B. Smith of New York and the late Kathleen M. Hodgsdon.
The Rev.
Martin O'Halloran performed the ceremony at St.
John Vianney Baptist Roman Catholic


Caution: Tomato Season Nearing End
LEAD: WITH only a few more weeks of summer on the calendar, tomatoes top the shopping list.
Is it possible to indulge in enough of them, to become sated now so they will not be missed as sorely after the season?


How to Install a Dimmer Switch
LEAD: DIMMER switches allow adjusting lighting levels; they also save energy and extend the lives of light bulbs.
Most often, dimmer switches are used for controlling incandescent ceiling lights.
Installing one is easy.
The job involves simply replacing the conventional wall switch with the dimmer.


Mutual Funds;   Hunting the Closed-End Conversion
LEAD: Many closed-end funds are selling at steep discounts these days, offering investors the tantalizing possibility of handsome profits.
After all, a discount is a bargain, whether you buy a cartful of groceries or a basket of stocks.
But in the arcane world of closed-end funds, some investors are finding that bargains can prove illusory and discounts don't necessarily turn into dollars.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


George Vecsey;   Stump Merrill: Yanks' Maine Man
LEAD: THERE were times, Carl Harrison Merrill said, when he slept right over there.


Ground Covers Go Beyond Pachysandra
LEAD: SOMETIMES ground covers other than grass are the best solution to protect bare earth.
If soil is not covered with something, weeds move in rapidly.
The goal is to plant cover that will establish itself quickly.
This is especially true for areas like slopes or heavily shaded patches under mature trees.


Sentence in Plot to Kill Priest
LEAD: A man convicted of plotting to kill a Roman Catholic priest who had sexually abused him when he was a teen-age altar boy, was placed on probation for three years on Friday.
The defendant, Gregory J. Riedle, 26 years old, of St.
Paul, was arrested in May, and the police found a butcher knife and a 4-foot-long wooden club in his car.


In China, Too, Centrifugal Forces Are Growing Stronger
LEAD: One of the Chinese Communist Party's proudest accomplishments is that it reunited a nation torn apart by warlords and recreated a central government that could lead the country.
That achievement stands, but in these days of economic slowdown, it is somewhat undermined by provinces that are quietly carving up the vast national market into protectionist fiefs.


At a Rustic Resort, Style Doesn't Change
LEAD: THE main office at the Solair Recreation League is the place to check on upcoming activities at the lakeside resort.
Fliers announce a Saturday-night buffet and a children's sleep-out; the Labor Day craft sale will be followed by a wine-and-cheese party.
Standing behind the counter, ready to offer more information on any of these events, is Marlene


Volcanoes
LEAD: To the Editor: In Q &amp; A (Travel, June 17) a reader asked about the danger of visiting Kilauea volcano on the island of Hawaii during an eruption.
The geologist Christina Heliko of the Hawaiian volcano observatory stated that ''there is nothing to be worried about.''


Buildup of U.S. Troops Alarms the Arab World;   Not Parallel With Israel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: SUNY, New Paltz;   Canvas Bags Replace Plastic At a Bookstore
LEAD: ''You're always looking for ways to make a difference, and when they stick it right in your face, how can you say no?'' said Elisa Quinzi, a junior photography major at the State University of New York at New Paltz.


Leslie Kahn Is Married
LEAD: Leslie Gayle Kahn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold H. Kahn of Manhasset Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Mitchell Craig Tolep, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin B. Tolep of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Jacobs performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck, L.I.
The bride graduated from the University of Maryland and is an international account associate in the Latin American division of the Bank of Boston in New York.


Merrilec Forgy Is Married
LEAD: Merrilec Forgy, a daughter of Molly M. Forgy of Santa Ana, Calif., and Fred W. Forgy Jr. of Tustin, Calif., was married yesterday to William H. Harris Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harris of Boston.
The Rev.
Ian Douglas, the bridegroom's brother-in-law, officiated at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Laguna Beach, Calif.


Move Over, Tex-Mex, It's Tex-Czech
LEAD: With no McDonald's, no movie theaters and only one exit off the Interstate, West could be any one of the dusty rural towns that dot central Texas.
But as the Czech Point of Texas, as the town sometimes calls itself, West is the unofficial capital of a thriving Czechoslovak culture that came to Texas more than 150 years ago.


For South African Businessmen, Mozambique Is a Place for Profit
LEAD: As Michael Furze sat in the bar of the elegant Polana Hotel overlooking the Indian Ocean, he could have been forgiven for thinking he was back home in South Africa.
His can of beer came from Johannesburg, he was expected to pay in South African rands and the voices of Afrikaans speakers could be heard in the room.


Ms. Cary Is Wed To R.C. Whitlock
LEAD: Catharine Anne Cary, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Whittier Cary of Saco, Me., was married yesterday to Robert Carlisle Whitlock, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Whitlock of Trenton.
The Revs.
David Prince and Fredrick Schulz performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church of East Hampton, L


Former British Hostage Returns to London


India
LEAD: To the Editor: ''The Vegetarian Snacks of South India'' by Sharon Voros (Travel, July 15) should be welcomed by all admirers of Madrasi cooking.
But the assertion that dosas and idlis ''are widely available throughout South India - and difficult to find anywhere else'' is thankfully inaccurate.
Even on my first trip to India over 25 years ago, the pleasures of dosa, idli, uppama, coffee and South India sweets like badam halwa and Mysore pak were a traveler's mainstay in any large


Surge of Addicts Strains Criminal Justice System
LEAD: THE number of people addicted to drugs or alcohol entering the criminal-justice system on Long Island has increased so rapidly that the agencies treating them are overwhelmed.


The Battle Of the Sexes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Board Sends a Message For the Budget Season
LEAD: AMID growing evidence that the county will have to lean more heavily on its property tax in difficult economic times, the Board of Legislators last week approved its first departmental budget of the new fiscal season and considered some unusual new sources of revenue.


Irene Mahoney Married on L.I.
LEAD: The Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Roman Catholic Church in Southampton, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Irene Marie Mahoney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Mahoney of Southampton, to Carl Eric Trautmann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolph Trautmann of Westport, Conn.
Msgr.
Edmond J.


Some Questions About Demolition
LEAD: While driving through the Roosevelt Square section of Ossining the other day, I was shocked and dismayed to see yet another house being demolished.
And I'm not referring to some dilapidated shack in need of expensive repairs.
This was a large house in good to excellent condition, with room for two or more families.


Amy Fukae Wed To Bryan Massey
LEAD: Amy Christine Fukae, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kensuke Fukae of Monsey, N.Y., and Tokyo, was married yesterday to Bryan P. R. Massey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick Massey of Orpington, Kent, England.
The Rev.
Roslyn V. Parrett performed the ceremony at St.
James Roman Catholic Church in Sheldwich,


Minh-Chau Luong, Translator, Wed
LEAD: Minh-Chau Luong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Luong-Si Chuong of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married yesterday to William Maxwell Crouch Jr., a son of Mrs.
William M. Crouch of Bridgeport, Conn., and the late Mr.
Crouch.
The Rev.
Jacques Bossiere, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church Center in New


DEEP BUDGET CUTS AT SUNY AND CUNY
LEAD: Faced with cuts in their budgets for the third consecutive year, the State University of New York and the City University of New York will continue to lose teaching positions, put off repairs and reduce purchases of everything from computers to paper clips, officials of both institutions say.


50 Reported Dead in a Week Of Monsoon Floods in India
LEAD: Flooding has killed at least 50 people this week, Indian officials and news reports said today.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Aug. 5 with an article about Vermont villages misidentified a building and its location.
The building was the Peacham Store in Peacham, not a bed and breakfast in Wells River.


Rent Control
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alison Boardman Is Wed in Jersey
LEAD: Alison Boardman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Boardman of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew James Goessling, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis W. Goessling of Evanston, Ill.
Royce R. Anderson, a recent graduate of the Drew University divinity school, performed the ceremony at the Morristown (N.J.) Unitarian Fellowship, with the sanction of Mayor William Layton of Far Hills, N


In One City, Support for Gulf Action, but No Fervent Patriotism
LEAD: With lots of American flags and a homemade sign that read ''Send a message to our troops in the Persian Gulf,'' Lydia Munger and her friends set out on a mission this week, a campaign to flood soldiers and sailors in the Middle East with cheerful postcards from back home.


Buildup of U.S. Troops Alarms the Arab World;   Of Might and Right
LEAD: To the Editor:


Players to Watch
LEAD:
Eric Bieniemy, TB, Colorado, Sr., 5-7, 195


In September, Warm Up For the New Season
LEAD: ALTHOUGH October is the starting month for most orchestras and concert series as well, several organizations will be performing by the middle of September.


CRIME
LEAD: You hang around Shifty Lou Anderson long enough, you pick up all sorts of useful race track tips.
Can't hurt to know a new name for The Daily Racing Form (''the horseplayers' Koran'') or what a ''hospital handicap'' is (a race with most of the horses ''bandaged to their eyeballs like Egyptian mummies'' because of ''various crippling infirmities'').


Alice Packard Blum Plans to Be Wed To John Garland Pollard 4th in October
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John Robert Halsey Blum of Lakeville, Conn., have announced the engagement of his daughter Alice Packard Blum to John Garland Pollard 4th, the son of Mr.
Pollard 3d of Urbana, Va., and Mrs.
George R. Griggs of Virginia Beach, Va.
An October wedding is planned.


Lives on Hold: Call-Up Sends Harlem Guard Unit Scrambling and Packing
LEAD: Her first week of law school behind her, Hillaire Wheatley walked into her apartment Friday afternoon, threw down her books and noticed her answering machine blinking.


INSIDE
LEAD:
S.&amp; L.'s: Placing the Blame
Americans blame owners and managers of savings and loans more than the politicians or regulators for the industry's crisis, a poll finds.
Page 30.
Uneasy Calm in South Africa Security forces suppressed fighting in South African townships, but factional conflict is unhealed.


A Week of Tension in the Gulf
LEAD: Sunday, Aug. 19 - President Saddam Hussein of Iraq says foreigners in Iraq and Kuwait must remain until the United States withdraws from the gulf.
Many are transferred to potential targets.
American warships decline to use force to stop Iraqi tankers pending United Nations approval of such action.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
SUNDAY: Some members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries plan to meet in Vienna.
MONDAY: Personal income and expenditures for July.
The Treasury auctions three- and six-month bills.
TUESDAY: The Treasury auctions two-year notes.
WEDNESDAY: Index of leading indicators for July.


Ballet, Boogie, Rap, Tap and Roll
LEAD: A wedge of hard-driving bodies moves like a robot battalion in precision drill through ''Rhythm Nation,'' the title song of Janet Jackson's current national tour.
Legs chop wide open, then close again.
They shoot out abruptly to the sides, then kick into jazz spins and bouncing splits to the floor.


All About/Coal;   Will Coal, the Plentiful Old Standby, Pick Up Speed?
LEAD: All it takes to give coal more luster is a crisis in the Middle East.
With the embargo against Iraq and Kuwait cutting off about a fifth of the world's oil supplies, coal demand can only increase.
But even before the recent jump in oil prices, the United States coal industry was growing enough in both size and efficiency to make healthy profits.


Number of Cows Drops to Lowest Since 1930
LEAD: The number of cows on New York State farms dropped last year to 776,000, the lowest level since the state began to record dairy statistics in 1930, the state Agricultural Statistics Service reported this week.


THE TRAGEDY OF DETROIT
LEAD: I was grateful for Ze'ev Chafets's article ''The Tragedy of Detroit'' (July 29).
For years I've been mystified by the fact that no one really talks about what's happened there - that this national shame is treated as if it didn't exist.


Critic's Notebook;   Junk Holds Its Own As Vacation Reading
LEAD: Vacation time is when even serious readers ask, Is there something good and junky I can read?
Good and junky are not necessarily opposites, and it is possible to guess what such readers are looking for, or at least what they are not looking for, always bearing in mind Andre Maurois's observation that ''in literature, as in love, we are astonished by what is chosen by others.


One Killed, 4 Wounded on Brooklyn Street
LEAD: A bystander was slain and four men wounded when a robbery attempt erupted into a gunfight on a Brooklyn street early yesterday morning, the police said.


Diplomats' Position in Kuwait: Gray Area in International Law
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis poses questions of international law that appear clear cut in the case of United Nations actions, but murky when it comes to the protection of foreign diplomats in Kuwait.


What to Call the Poorest Poor?
LEAD: Two weeks ago, Prof.
William Julius Wilson stood up before 1,500 colleagues and called into question the usefulness of a term that has become a fixture of the American political vocabulary and one that he, more than anyone, helped legitimize: ''the underclass.''


Foreign Cassettes Aren't So Friendly On Home Turf
LEAD: Travelers returning home with videocassettes bought abroad often discover with dismay that those tapes won't play on their VCR's.
The reason is that tapes bought in Europe and many other parts of the world are recorded using different technical standards than those used in this country.


Style Makers;   Janet Hasper, Spats Designer
LEAD: They're cheaper than a pair of fancy boots, but Janet Hasper's spats and gaiters are just as sexy.


The City's Rough Past: Frighteningly Familar
LEAD: Crimes of violence up 30 percent in six years.
Arrests up 20 percent.
Five police officers killed in a year.
Court calendars clogged.
Citizens arming themselves.
Racial tensions at a boil.
Critics bewailing a ''carnival of murder.'' So it went in the New York City of the 1860's.
Today's alarming crime rate and fearful populace have clear parallels in earlier eras of city history, although historians say they have to go back to the 19th century and earlier to find them.


Everybody Loves Somebody Sometime
LEAD:
A PLACE I'VE NEVER BEEN
By David Leavitt.
194 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


The Golf Cart Crisis
LEAD: Even on a day when he savored a hard-won diplomatic triumph at the United Nations, President Bush and his handling of the Persian Gulf crisis encountered irritating criticisms from unexpected quarters.
At the same time that


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page caption on Aug. 5 about Guadeloupe misidentified the lead singer of the Caribbean group Kassav'.
He is Jacob Desvarieux, not Pascal Vallot.


Margaret Stone Wed to Ted Cox
LEAD: Margaret Lucile Stone, a faculty administrative officer at the South Bank Polytechnic college in London, and Edwin Hindle Cox, the international officer at Goldsmiths' College of the University of London, were married yesterday at the Union Presbyterian Church in Union, Pa.
The bride's father, the Rev.


Q and A
LEAD: Hiking the Appalachian Trail


THE GUIDE
LEAD:
SINATRA PAYING A VISIT


Maria-Flora Miller, College Student, Weds Anthony Smoller, Film Producer
LEAD: Maria-Flora Miller, the daughter of Ava Mohas of Mill Neck, L.I., and Leverett Saltonstall Miller of Fairfield, Fla., was married yesterday to Anthony Michael Smoller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Smoller of Larchmont, N.Y.
James H. McIntyre, the town justice of Long Lake, N.Y., performed the ceremony at Camp Togus, the summer home of the bride's family in Whitney Park in the


Iraqi Diplomat Vows to Release Kin of Envoys
LEAD: Iraq promised today to release dependents of American diplomats from Kuwait who are being held in Baghdad, but not the diplomats themselves.


Stalking a Summer Favorite: 'We're Addicted to This Crab'
LEAD: ''WHEN the crabs are running, everyone goes a little crazy around here,'' said Tucker Crawford, a commercial fisherman fishing out of Verplanck, a close-knit village on the Hudson River.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Golf
Olazabal Surges On: Jose-Maria Olazabal continued his record-breaking assault on the Firestone Country Club yesterday, shooting a three-under-par 67 for an eight-stroke lead after three rounds of the NEC World Series of Golf in Akron, Ohio.
Olazabal's bogey-free round gave him a 54-hole total of 195 and a commanding advantage over Hale Irwin going into the final round today.


Change in Identity Is Coming to the East
LEAD: The settling of new conference affiliations, ones to resolve the makeup of major-college football in the East for a long time to come, is an important adjunct of the impending season.


Long Career With a Camera Features Changes of Perspective
LEAD: IN a 1982 monograph on Aaron Siskind, ''Pleasures and Terrors,'' Carl Chiarenza said his subject ''resembles nothing so much as a fruit peddler from turn-of-the-century Lower East Side Manhattan,'' but a ''well-tuned, well-rehearsed'' peddler.
Refining the point, Mr.
Chiarenza added that the photographer's schtick is the result of ''a lifetime of cultivation.


There May Be Some Accounting For Taste After All
LEAD: In his syndicated comic strip ''Farley,'' the cartoonist Phil Frank recently conjured a vision of the National Endowment for the Arts telling a grant applicant that his work is derivative, trite, pedantic, artless, spineless and the winner of a $2,500 grant.


Mary O'Connor and C. S. Morgan Wed
LEAD: Mary Gallagher O'Connor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas David O'Connor of Loudonville, N.Y., and Watch Hill, R.I., was married yesterday to Christopher Smith Morgan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Phillip Morgan of Stonington, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert McNulty performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Watch Hill Chapel.


Conlan Ends Holdout
LEAD: THE contract was extended, and so Shane Conlan's season no longer stands to be shortened.


Middle-Class Radical
LEAD:
BLACK IN SELMA
The Uncommon Life of J. L. Chestnut Jr.
By J. L. Chestnut Jr. and Julia Cass.
Illustrated. 432 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


LeeAnn Agnelli Wed
LEAD: LeeAnn Agnelli, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Agnelli of Naples, Fla., was married yesterday to Kenneth Lee Horton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Virgil K. Horton Jr. of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
George C. Bland Jr. officiated at the Greenfield Hill Congregational Church in Fairfield.
Mrs.
Horton, 25 years old, received a law degree from Boston College in May.


Caution: Tomato Season Nearing End
LEAD: WITH only a few more weeks of summer on the calendar, tomatoes top the shopping list.
Is it possible to indulge in enough of them, to become sated now so they will not be missed as sorely after the season?


Marcia L. Worth Marries
LEAD: Marcia Lynn Worth, the daughter of Catherine T. Worth of Paterson, N.J., and Larry D. Worth of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to David Weil Baker, the son of Mrs.
Leonard F. Baker of Washington and the late Mr.
Baker.
Judge Joseph J. Riva of the New Jersey Supreme Court officiated at the Hermitage in Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J.


Pesticide Makers Fight Export Curb
LEAD: A battle over proposed legislation to bar the export of pesticides banned in the United States has escalated, with top chemical industry executives warning that it could cause job losses in plants around the country and impede scientific research.


College '90;   Headed in New Directions
LEAD: Back in those carefree days when we could count on the college football season starting some time after the beginning of the fall semester, when we could make our tailgating plans based on 1:30 kickoffs that had been chiseled in stone months before, and when we didn't need an announcement to know who would be in the Southwest


Ms. Lippe to Wed Russell Davis
LEAD: Barbara C. Lippe of Bronxville, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter Patricia Stuyvesant Lippe to Russell Davis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse A. Davis of Birmingham, Ala.
Ms.
Lippe is also the daughter of the late Vincent S. Lippe.
An October wedding is planned.


When Raccoons Drop In
LEAD: Ros Zelman's piece about the raccoon in her attic (Westchester Opinion, July 29) prompts me to stir up one more trouble for the creatures invading not only suburban houses like hers ''with a roaring brook for a backyard'' but also restored town houses like mine in the Bronx.


Mont-St.-Michel
LEAD: To the Editor: R. S., from New Hyde Park, asked about the tides at Mont-St.-Michel (Q &amp; A, April 8).


On Language;   War Words
LEAD: Naked Aggression,'' President Bush called the blitzkrieg seizure of Kuwait by Iraq; the United States, he said, had to ''draw a line in the sand'' to defend Saudi Arabia.
News analysts called the presence of American troops in the path of Saddam Hussein's ''megalomaniacal and hegemonic'' ambitions a tripwire.


Latino Literature
LEAD: To the Editor:


Constance Gelb, Photojournalist, Weds Scott A. Otteman, Editor, in Stamford
LEAD: Constance Gelb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce S. Gelb of New York and Washington, was married yesterday at her parents' summer home in Stamford, Conn., to Scott Alan Otteman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Merlin Otteman of Fort Collins, Colo.
The Rev.
Clarke K. Oler, an Episcopal minister, officiated.


A Correction: Oil Earnings
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a chart last Sunday about the effect of crude oil prices on company earnings omitted the names of several oil producers.
Here is the complete list of estimated additional earnings per share for each $1 increase in the price of a barrel of oil.
Atlantic Richfield
$0.83
British Petroleum
0.54
Texaco
0.52
Amerada Hess
0.45
Chevron
0.40
Royal Dutch/Shell
0.39
Mobil
0.27
Exxon
0.22
Uniocal
0.22
Amoco
0.21
Phillips Petroleum
0.20
Kerr McGee
0.18
Penzoil
0.18


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 26, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Ficiton
1
39
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
6
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights Colombian drug lords.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
HARD CITY.
By Clark Howard. (Dutton, $21.95.) Clark Howard's autobiographical novel is set in the slums of Chicago's West Side in the 1950's.
Its hero, Richie, is a 12-year-old who escapes from a succession of malignant foster homes, as well as his heroin-ridden mother, to strike out on his own.


Baseball;   Stunner in the 14th Defeats the Mets


Minds and Ears Can't Go Back
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baseball Notebook;   When the Performance of a Pitcher Outshines His Team's
LEAD: Any pitcher who has 21 victories and 4 defeats is obviously having an outstanding season, but Bob Welch's performance grows even more impressive when it is placed in the context of his team's outstanding season.


One War That Passed Its Screen Test
LEAD: Few wars have attracted film makers more than the sprawling epic of World War II.
The movie industry enlisted massively and for the first time used war as an instrument of propaganda for a national cause.
Years later, feature films about World War II might show the downside, but many of those made during the war and thereafter celebrate the crusade of good against evil.


A California Pension Fund Cuts the New York Umbilical Cord
LEAD: How many people does it take to invest $17 billion?
Just one manager and two part-time traders if you are the California Public Employees' Retirement System.


Miss Miller Wed To B. C. Barstow
LEAD: Cynthia Ellen Miller and Beverly Chew Barstow were married yesterday at St.
Martin's in the Field Episcopal Church in Biddeford Pool, Me.
The Rev.
Mark S. Delcuze performed the ceremony.


Pro Football;   Thomas and Jets Agree on a Deal
LEAD: The Jets reached agreement today with Blair Thomas, their No. 1 draft choice, and the running back from Penn State held a brief news conference, then suited up for did not play in the exhibition game against the Giants at Giants Stadium.


U.S. Takes Back Seat in Third World
LEAD: The United States and Japan have already traded places in the global financial hierarchy.
Long the world's greatest exporter of capital, the United States over the past decade has become a capital importer on a gigantic scale to finance its chronic deficits.
Japan's economic surge has made it the world's pre-eminent international creditor.


Evening Hours;   In a Cityful of Music, Wall Street to the Park
LEAD: Neither rain nor wind nor an abbreviated program kept thousands of picnickers from the giant, informal party on the Great Lawn of Central Park for a free outdoor concert.


Public Dismay on Savings Disaster Grows, Poll Finds
LEAD: The public has grown increasingly disenchanted with President Bush's handling of the savings and loan crisis, but most Americans still place ultimate blame on the managers and owners in the industry, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


Caution: Tomato Season Nearing End
LEAD: WITH only a few more weeks of summer on the calendar, tomatoes top the shopping list.
Is it possible to indulge in enough of them, to become sated now so they will not be missed as sorely after the season?


How to Install a Dimmer Switch
LEAD: DIMMER switches allow adjusting lighting levels; they also save energy and extend the lives of light bulbs.
Most often, dimmer switches are used for controlling incandescent ceiling lights.
Installing one is easy.
The job involves simply replacing the conventional wall switch with the dimmer.


Data Update
LEAD:
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
July 90
July 89
Change
New York
367.4
480.0
-23%
New Jersey
125.6
215.9
-42%
Connecticut
73.8
113.2
-35%
*4*(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Anne Buckman Has Wedding
LEAD: Anne Christina Buckman, a daughter of Gunhild Malmkjell Buckman of Huntington, L.I., and Thomas R. Buckman of New York, was married yesterday to Johan Franck, a son of Dr.
Bengt Ivar Franck and Ulla Franck, both of Stockholm.
Bishop Robert Sherwood of the Church of St.
Joseph of Arimathea performed the ceremony at that church in Berkeley,


Hong Kong Dishes With Parisian Flair
LEAD: HONG KONG TASTE, a new Chinese restaurant in Westport (formerly the Beansprout), is a benchmark of sorts: it does not bear the word Sichuan or Hunan in its title, and it presents the dishes of Hong Kong with Parisian flair, in a stylish setting as sophisticated as the presentations.
With service as polished as the decor, each platter is set before you as a work of art, before being removed to a side table and dished up in individual servings.


At the Center of Spiritual Japan
LEAD: Kyoto is rightly considered an essential stop for visitors eager to take in tranquil temples and some of Japan's religious history.
But for those familiar with the tales of pious ascetics and misty mountain redoubts, where many of Japan's religious sects originated, the nearby Kii Peninsula can bring one closer to the country's religious roots, not to mention its striking natural landscape.


Sarah Gant Weds Michael Mandanis
LEAD: Sarah Ross Gant, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Gant of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Anthony Mandanis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George P. Mandanis of San Rafael, Calif.
The Rev.
J.
Calvin K. Jackson performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church in Basking Ridge, N.J.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
Tree Keeper


Managing;   Teamwork or Tug of War?
LEAD: Add team dynamics to the lengthening list of strains to come out of the tumultuous 1980's.


Judith Allen and Paul Mulkerrin Marry
LEAD: Judith Gibson Allen and Paul Francis Mulkerrin were married yesterday at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Osterville, Mass.
The Rev.
Raymond Webster performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
John Perry, a Roman Catholic priest.


China Finds a Han Tomb and 'Men of Mud'
LEAD: Workers building a road in central China appear to have stumbled on an archeological treasure: a 2,100-year-old network of underground vaults said to contain tens of thousands of terra-cotta sculptures buried with a Han Dynasty emperor, during one of the greatest civilizations of ancient times.


2 Men Slain by Man Posing as Park Ranger
LEAD: A man impersonating a park ranger approached five men who were target shooting in the mountains northwest of here on Friday and, after ordering them to march down a hill, started shooting them.


Liberia Will Topple, But Which Way?
LEAD: The question being asked in the eight-month-old Liberian civil war is no longer whether President Samuel K. Doe will be removed from office, but when and by whom.


Just in Time
LEAD: William Neal Moore was not the first murderer to find God on death row, but the sincerity of his conversion was particularly impressive.
After appeals on his behalf by Mother Teresa, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and relatives of the man he admitted killing in 1974, Mr.
Moore was granted clemency last week by the Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles.


Paint Chips Bring Family Pain and Lower Potential
LEAD: When Virginia Mitchell's children were growing up in an apartment in a New Orleans public housing project, they were always getting at the paint, their fingers pulling at the peeling walls and woodwork and then pushing it into their mouths.


Michigan Charging Murder After a 2d Assisted Suicide
LEAD: Saying he is determined to keep Michigan from becoming a haven for assisted suicides, the county prosecutor here has brought murder charges against a California man who the prosecutor says helped his wife take her own life at a suburban motel last Sunday.


Wine;   OPEN COUNTRY
LEAD: Country wine. what a beautiful concept.
Like a Norman Rockwell painting.
Innocence, naivete, freshness; what old-time virtues does it not evoke?


In The Region:;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Basking Ridge
$335,000
39 Linden Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old split level; fireplace, new kitchen; taxes $4,579.
Freehold
$189,900
2 Meadowbrook Lane
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; c/a, 1-car garage, den; taxes $2,986.


MILITARY ROOTS
LEAD: A FADED FAMILY photograph from 1944 shows my 6-foot-5 cousin Mel, on Army leave, stooping to hold me, a shy little girl, in my backyard.
We are both in uniform: his a handsome olive drab with brass buttons; mine a spiffy ''junior'' WAC uniform in khaki twill with gold bars and braid.
The skirt had already been lengthened twice.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Because our driveway slopes toward the garage and the drain is small, water collects during heavy rains.
Also, since the garage floor is uneven, the rubber door bottom does not seal properly and water flows underneath.


Tasty Thai Cuisine for the Uninitiated
LEAD: THAI food has become commonplace on Long Island, but when the Bangkok Palace opened in Woodmere over five years ago, the restaurant was an exotic trailblazer.
This Five Towns pioneer has recently changed ownership and renamed itself New Bangkok Palace.


THE NATION: In the Trail of the Nuclear Arms Industry;   What's Left Behind
LEAD: Contaminated processing plants, laboratories, nuclear reactors and testing ground that were part of the nuclear weapons industry.
Site; Description
Location
1.
Amchitka Island;
Amchitka Island,
nuclear test site
Alaska
2.
Monument Valley;
Monument Valley,
uranium mill tailings
Ariz.


Farm Stand, Not Farming, Opposed
LEAD: Eliot Weinberger's letter (''Farm Stand Story Is About One Person,''Aug. 19), about a retail farm stand in the residential zone of East Hampton, requires correcting.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Sea Theme In Disney Plan For Long Beach


Buildup of U.S. Troops Alarms the Arab World
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sri Lankan Army Is Closing In on a Citadel of Resistance by Tamil Rebels
LEAD: The Sri Lankan Army is closing in on Jaffna, the citadel and city that have symbolized Tamil resistance in an ethnic conflict that has torn apart South Asia's most developed nation.


Little League;   Shippensburg in Final
LEAD: Bobby Shannon's two-run homer in the fifth inning lifted Shippensburg to a 5-4 victory today over Cypress, Calif., sending the Pennsylvania team into the championship game of the Little League World Series against powerful Taiwan.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Swirls of Is-ness


Career Skills For Campers Via Fresh Air
LEAD: On the first day of the Fresh Air Fund's Career Camp Program, Kyshia Gillespie, a 12-year-old from Far Rockaway, Queens, fired off a barrage of questions to a visiting reporter.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article on April 29 in The Good Health Magazine, part 2 of The Times Magazine, about sexuality problems among women, cited an anecdote in which a naive husband punched a doctor who tried to enlighten him.


Mark Mandrakos Wed to Ms. Gray
LEAD: Dorothy Edna Gray, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Gray of Amityville, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark Christopher Mandrakos, the son of Leo Mandrakos of Laurel Hollow, L.I., and Joy Eipel of Roslyn, L.I.
The Rev.
Emmanuel J. Gratsias performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Greek Orthodox Church in Hempstead, L


Deposit Ticket Cashes In Big
LEAD: Deposit Ticket assumed the leadership of the nation's 2-year-olds by scoring a front-running 4 1/2-length victory over Hansel today in the $232,800 Hopeful Stakes at Saratoga Race Track.


State Offers Amnesty to Tax Cheaters
LEAD: TRYING to wring residents for every dollar they owe, the state is offering delinquent taxpayers a chance to pay up without penalty.
State officials, trying to cope with a budget deficit of at least $200 million, are starting their tax-amnesty program this week, with a warning: ''If you don't pay now, we'll make you pay later.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
PUTTING OUT.
By Neil Ferguson. (Penguin, Paper, $8.95.) New York - arguably the style capital of the world - is the setting for the English writer Neil Ferguson's ambitious first novel, which turns out to be sometimes promising and brilliant yet often exasperating.
In ''Putting Out,'' Mr.
Ferguson has taken on a formidable and intriguing topic, the rough and tumble of a New York mayoral campaign complicated by terrorism and murder in the garment district.


Today's Romance Novels
LEAD: To the Editor:


Taiwan Accused in Deaths of 25 Refugees at Sea
LEAD: Late last month, Chinese fishermen spotted a small oceangoing fishing boat that was stranded and seemed to be in trouble.
Upon boarding they discovered the problem: the boat contained 25 corpses and a few more gasping passengers locked in several cabins below deck.


Japan's Imperial Present
LEAD: In the 22d day of November this year, if all goes according to plan, an enigmatic and lonely 56-year-old man who has lived almost all his life in the shadow of his father will leave his modest home for the grounds of the Imperial Palace in downtown Tokyo.
At 6:30 P.M., Akihito will bathe, put on white ceremonial robes and enter a shrine in a wooded glade.


Visual Era or No, Voices Are Back In the Picture
LEAD: Kathleen Turner in the movies - a vocal oasis in a desert of sound.
The Voice may be making a comeback.
There is some evidence in movies and on television that we are headed toward an aural reawakening.
Until Ms.
Turner, there had been no distinctive voices in film for decades.
In the old days, Katharine Hepburn and Bette Davis and Jimmy Stewart and Cary Grant pleased the ear as well as the eye.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a listing on Aug. 12 misstated telephone numbers for eating places and hotels in San Sebastian, Spain, and the immediate area.
The correct numbers follow: Arzak, 27-8465; Akelarre, 21-2052; Nicolasa, 42-1762; Panier Fleuri, 42-4205; Chomin, 21-0705; Bodegon Alejandro, 42-7158; Kako, 55-1741; the Maria Cristina, 42-4900; the Hotel de Londres y de Inglaterra, 42-6989; Niza, 42-6663; Hostal Bahia, 46-1083, and Pension Lorea, 42-7258.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Collector's Auctions, Ltd. will hold a two-day sale on Sept. 6 and 7.
It is one of the largest collections of medals ever offered.


Lead Paint Poisons Children Despite 1971 Law on Removal
LEAD: Nearly 20 years after Congress declared lead-based paint a health hazard and ordered it stripped from the nation's stock of federally subsidized housing, it remains on the walls and woodwork of dwellings across the nation, posing a lasting toxic threat that medical experts say afflicts as many as one in every six children.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Because our driveway slopes toward the garage and the drain is small, water collects during heavy rains.
Also, since the garage floor is uneven, the rubber door bottom does not seal properly and water flows underneath.


Tom Jones Looks Forward and Back
LEAD: TOM JONES was sitting at his desk in his West Cornwallhome ''trying to remember.'' That's the apt title of a 27-page ''selective personal reminiscence'' he came up with last February.
Subtitled ''One Man's Recollections of the Origins of 'The Fantasticks,' '' it appears as the forward for the newly published (Applause Books) 30th-anniversary edition of the evergreen musical whose best-known song is ''Try to Remember.


Drawing Developers Into Day Care
LEAD: On weekday mornings, 3-year-old Carolyn Keen, sometimes with a cherished toy in tow, heads with her father, Robert, for the Heller Industrial Park in Edison, N.J., where he is a forklift operator at Linden Motor Freight Company.


Fifth Arrest in Bronx by Suffocation
LEAD: The police arrested yesterday the last member of a five-person gang accused of tying up a mentally disabled Bronx couple and taking over their apartment for six days, leaving the man to suffocate.


Are College Athletes' Rights Ignored?
LEAD: Braxston Banks went for a job interview with the National Football League and was not hired.
He was ''overqualified,'' or the N.F.L. ''just isn't hiring now,'' or the employer was simply not impressed.


David Rose, Composer, Dies at 80; Wrote for Television and Movies
LEAD: David Rose, a composer and conductor whose work in television, films and recordings won four Emmy awards, 22 Grammys and an Oscar nomination, died Thursday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Burbank, Calif.
He was 80 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


Style Makers;   Elaine Hart, Quilt Dealer
LEAD: Two and a half years ago, Elaine Hart turned a 20-year hobby into a business.
She opened a quilt shop in Manhattan.
But she still marvels at the serendipitous way she got involved with quilts.


Ann Harrington Wed in Vermont
LEAD: Ann Marie Harrington, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray D. Harrington of Hancock, N.H., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Blandford Shilling, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
A.
Gary Shilling of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles Fox performed the ceremony at the Old First Congregational Church in Old Bennington,


Horse Racing;   'Jake' Winner In Cane Pace
LEAD: After barely qualifying for the final, Jake and Elwood took an easy victory in the Cane Pace at Yonkers Raceway tonight.


Karen Page Wed in Boston
LEAD: Karen Ann Page, a daughter of Joan A. Page of St.
Charles, Ill., and George L. Page of Mount Prospect, Ill., was married yesterday to Andrew Noel Dornenburg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Dornenburg of Concord, Calif.
The Rev.
Judith Bowman Howie, an African Methodist Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Biba Restaurant in Boston.


Technology;   As Oil Prices Rise, the Hydrogen Car Is Looking Better
LEAD: On the surface, the hydrogen-powered car looks as if it were made by a malevolent Rube Goldberg.


In Poland, Reveries of 1980 Give Way to Reality
LEAD: Poland is awash in nostalgia this month as the nation revisits those simpler times of a decade ago, when an August strike at the Gdansk shipyard gave birth to the Solidarity union.
To Solidarity's leaders, this anniversary has been an occasion for pleasant reminiscenses about the years when their lives were a straightforward morality play: dissidence against


Janacek's 'House' Is Not a Home
LEAD: The novels of Fyodor Dostoyevsky pack enough violence, sex and intrigue to make even Tosca blush, but they have inspired surprisingly few operas.
Perhaps composers balk at their sheer mass.
Or perhaps it's at all those feverish philosophical dialogues on the Essence of Being.


Postings: Going Up in Hartford;   Sweat-Equity Affordables
LEAD: For $2,500 in sweat equity, $1 for a vacant lot and a $1,500 cash contribution, nine families with two or more children and household incomes of at least $22,000 may be able to own their own homes in Hartford by next year.
Eighteen other families, including smaller ones, will be considered for 18 two-bedroom condominiums with no sweat equity, but requiring down payments of $3,088 and $120 monthly association fees.


In Big Factory, Small Businesses Prosper
LEAD: It is now 36 years since the mills of the Alexander Smith &amp; Sons Carpet Company in Yonkers shut down.
The factory, founded in 1845, was at its zenith during World War II, when with a work force of 7,000 people, it operated around the clock producing blankets and tents for the United States armed services.


The Executive Computer;   Being Ready for the Day When the Lights Go Out
LEAD: Wall Street learned its lesson at 1:13 P.M. on Aug. 13 when traders' computer screens went dead.
A fire in a Consolidated Edison substation in lower Manhattan knocked out power to much of the financial district.
The blackout served to demonstrate how important it is for companies to have a reliable backup power supply for their computers.


Lisa Radley Weds Roger Mullarkey
LEAD: Lisa Louise Radley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Radley of Pueblo, Colo., was married yesterday to Roger Tighe Mullarkey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. X. Mullarkey of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard Hendry, a Methodist minister, was assisted by the Rev.
Eugene O'Brien, the executive vice president of Fordham University and a Roman Catholic priest, in performing the ceremony at the First United Methodist Church in Pueblo.


Are College Athletes' Rights Ignored?
LEAD: As long as college athletic programs embrace commercialism and are little more than proving grounds for the pros, student athletes will suffer.


Orchestras Outline Coming Season
LEAD: AS summer progresses toward the Labor Day sunset, it is not too early to look ahead to the concerts that await in the fall - remembering that season subscribers not only get tickets at a discount but also assure themselves of better seats.


VIEWS OF SPORT: An Inside View of the Game;   Wearing the Scars of Football


Twin Spotlights on Parsons of the Dime
LEAD: The directors of the Dime Savings Bank of New York had one final misgiving about naming Richard D. Parsons as its president two years ago: whether, as a former aide to Nelson A. Rockefeller and Gerald R. Ford, he could resist returning to politics. ''You know, we're not going to keep that guy,'' one board member told the chairman.


Look, Ma, No Hands, or Tim Burton's Latest Feat
LEAD: ''This is the most uncomfortable I've ever been in a movie,'' said the actor Johnny Depp between puffs on a cigarette proferred by an assistant on a makeshift roach clip.
Mr.
Depp was clad in skintight black leather from Adam's apple to toes.
His hair was a mass of black tangles, and his face was made up like a mime's, except that it was covered with prosthetic scars.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: TORNADO ALLEY, by Craig Nova. (Delta, $10.95.) Carrying a gun and a cylinder of her father's ashes, Marie Boule escapes from her dreary Pennsylvania hometown and heads for a complicated existence in San Francisco. '' 'Tornado Alley' is the kind of book one takes to the beach or to the mountains for the purpose of total immersion,'' Andrei Codrescu said here last year.


Carol Ann Baxter a Bride
LEAD: Carol Ann Baxter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert E. Baxter of North Syracuse, N.Y., was married yesterday to Loren H. Plotkin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur E. Plotkin of Miami Beach, Fla.
Judge Edward Sharretts Jr. performed the ceremony at Mr.
Plotkin's home in Water Mill, L.I.
The bride, who is 36 years old and graduated from the State University of New York at Brockport, is an actress and dancer who has performed on Broadway and in the national touring company of ''La Cage aux Folles.


Christina Weaver Weds Don Fixler
LEAD: Christina Weaver, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Weaver of Setauket, L.I., was married last evening at Temple Beth Sholom in Smithtown, L.I., to Dr.
Don Sheldon Fixler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Z.
Charles Fixler of Cincinnati.
Rabbi Elliot Spar officiated.


Iraq Yearns for Greatness - and an Identity
LEAD: Behind a pale brick fence on the outskirts of the Iraqi village of Qurna sits a small, gnarled apple tree with a double trunk.
A bronze plaque tells visitors they have reached the Garden of Eden.
But this unassuming shrine is little more than a tourist trap for weekend picnickers.
There is, after all, another Garden of Eden in Syria, and nobody can be sure where the real site is.


His Life as a Drone
LEAD:
NATURAL ORDER
By Jonathan Penner.
170 pp. New York:
Poseidon Press. $16.95.


Meg Smith Wed To G. J. Kimball
LEAD: Marilyn Ann Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
William Smith of Lexington, Mass., was married yesterday to George Jones Kimball, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Kimball Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Richard T. Cleary performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius of Loyola in Chestnut Hill, Mass.


Hers;   Fraud by Friendship
LEAD: You're involved too many ways - better not go,'' warned my husband.
His forebodings have a way of coming true, but I was determined to attend the hearing downtown at the criminal court at Foley Square.


Jewels for a Worthless Lover
LEAD:
DESIRE
By Amy Wallace.
223 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company.
$19.95.


The Nature of Art
LEAD: To the Editor:


HORSY HERITAGE
LEAD: Designers are catching on to what the horsy set has long known: that riding clothes are comfortable, stylish and flattering.
And they are adapting the look for women's everyday fashions.
Epitomizing the equestrian style is one of the pillars of America's horsy society, C.Z.
Guest.
Known for her skill as an accomplished horsewoman (she rises most mornings at 7:30 for a one-and-a-half-hour ride), Guest has always had an eye for clothing that suits her passion.


Job for Bob Wade
LEAD: HE resigned under extreme pressure as Maryland's basketball coach last year during an investigation by the National Collegiate Athletic Association that uncovered recruiting and other violations by members of his staff.
Now Bob Wade is going to work for the Baltimore parks department.
Next week, Wade will begin a job created for him by Mayor Kurt L.


After a Stray Shot: A Girl's Family Seeks Meaning in a Random Loss
LEAD: Daisy L. Rasberry lives as if suspended in time.
She has not been to work for two months.
Nor has she slept a full night since the evening of June 23, when a Saturday shopping trip with two of her daughters ended with her 10-year-old ''baby,'' Shaniqua, bleeding in her arms from a fatal gunshot wound to the chest.


Dr. Innes Wed to Dr. James Zonghetti
LEAD: Dr.
Cynthia Howe Innes and Dr.
James Robert Zonghetti, 1989 graduates of the Tufts University School of Dental Medicine, were married yesterday at the Union Church in Enfield Center, N.H.
The Rev.
Thomas Warner performed the Congregational ceremony.
The bride, 28 years old, will keep her name.
A graduate of Wheaton College, she is a daughter of Mr.


Mr. Dinkins Clears the Air
LEAD: Tennis fans and players alike will notice some changes at the United States Open, which begins tomorrow at the National Tennis Center in Queens.
Chris Evert, now retired, won't be there.
And for the first time in over a decade, neither Jimmy Connors nor John McEnroe are among the seeded players.
But the biggest and most welcome change will be the absence of the incessant roar of planes.


Guard Leader May Be Asked To Step Down
LEAD: New York City's black correction officers association yesterday scheduled a meeting for Wednesday, at which it is expected to ask Phil Seelig, president of the Correction Officers Benevolent Association, to resign.


Sorry, the President's English Won't Do
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Essential Chatham
LEAD: Like other towns much visited by tourists, Chatham, Mass., reveals its many faces only to those who take time to look below the surface.
To casual travelers who leave their cars in the public parking lot after surviving the summer traffic jam, a stroll along its gently curving Main Street with elegant low-key shops, restaurants and inns unobtrusively tucked into sea captains' houses, conjures up the picture of Olde New England charm, even when T-shirts are being sold.


Bush's Trade Offer Gets a Warm Latin Reception
LEAD: When President Bush made his offer to open a free-trade partnership with all of Latin America, President Luis Alberto Lacalle of Uruguay jumped to the telephone and said he would accept.


Sharon Bowden Wed to Sean Abbott
LEAD: Sharon Scott Bowden, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Bowden of San Antonio was married yesterday to Sean Lawrence Abbott, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
John L. Abbott of Mansfield Center, Conn., and New York.
The Rev.
Vester Vanstrom, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Southwest Craft Center Chapel in San


Cool Eating During Kyoto's Dog Days
LEAD: In the deep green pockets of Kyoto, in temple gardens and the groves surrounding Shinto shrines and the lush park enclosing the Imperial Palace, short-lived cicadas raise their shrill, mournful voices.
The overcast and intermittently cool rainy season ends (almost always) by the middle of July, and from then well into August are the dog days of Japan's summer.


COURT BACKS F.C.C. IN LICENSING RULES
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has upheld rules requiring applicants for radio or television licenses to make only the briefest assertions that their programming will serve the public interest.


Programmed for Life and Death
LEAD: This spring a California man symbolically took his life by using a computer program to seek out and destroy the contributions he had made over the years to a continuing electronic conversation run by a computer group called the Well.
Several weeks later, he followed this ''virtual'' suicide by killing himself in the real world.


Pamela Rago and Brian Hughes Marry
LEAD: Pamela Lorraine Rago, a daughter of Sharon Lord Naeole of Princeton, N.J., and Albert J. Rago of Lambertville, N.J., was married yesterday to Brian Murphy Hughes, a son of Richard J. Hughes of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late Betty Hughes.
The ceremony was held in Chatham, N.J., at the home of the bridegroom's brother, W.


Cuba
LEAD: To the Editor: Cuba's achievements - the eradication of illiteracy, the low rate of infant mortality, increased longevity and free education through the university level - are rarely the focus for reports in the U.S. press.
Space is allotted to Cuba, however, when problems occur in Havana or when Cuban expatriates in the United States make outrageous statements of their plans to overthrow the Government of


TURNING HEADS
LEAD: AT MANHATTAN's Patricia Field, a quirky Greenwich Village emporium known for its radical street-chic fashions, a small, furry revolution is under way.
All manner of wigs - the neo, the retro, the bizarre, even the downright pretty - are displayed like some rogue's gallery of pop-culture idols.
Want to pass for Bart Simpson, America's reigning cartoon brat?


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Because our driveway slopes toward the garage and the drain is small, water collects during heavy rains.
Also, since the garage floor is uneven, the rubber door bottom does not seal properly and water flows underneath.


Campus Life: Catholic University;   Angry Questions Over Cancellation Of Abortion Talk
LEAD: Amid charges and denials of interference by leaders of the Roman Catholic Church, the student-run Program Board at the Catholic University of America - a committee of one student at the time - has canceled a debate on abortion rights that would have involved Bill Baird, one of the most outspoken proponents of women's access to abortion.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
CASTLES IN THE SAND


Tasty Thai Cuisine for the Uninitiated
LEAD: THAI food has become commonplace on Long Island, but when the Bangkok Palace opened in Woodmere over five years ago, the restaurant was an exotic trailblazer.
This Five Towns pioneer has recently changed ownership and renamed itself New Bangkok Palace.


Kuwaiti Exiles Talk of Iraqi Search for Westerners
LEAD: Some Iraqi soldiers in Kuwait are searching for Westerners, Kuwaiti exiles in Saudi Arabia said yesterday in telephone interviews.


Campus Life: Maryland;   Seeking Clout, Students Work To Register Voters
LEAD: To combat what they consider anti-student legislation passed by city and county officials, the Student Government Association at the University of Maryland has registered more than 800 students this year to vote in the fall county and state elections.
And the president of the association, Daniel Cones, vows that it will continue its efforts.


Of Nazism And Nonsense
LEAD: To the Editor:


Not Co-Creators, Not Even Curators
LEAD: To the Editor:


Black Producers Add a Fresh Nuance
LEAD: Benny Medina, a 31-year-old record industry executive, had an idea for a sitcom about a teenager from the streets who goes to live with a family in Beverly Hills.
He also had a promising star to play the role, a young rap singer named Will Smith, who is known professionally as the Fresh Prince.
What Mr.


Leah V. Rush Weds Ross Cann
LEAD: Grace Episcopal Church in New York was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Leah Vivian Rush, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Richard Rush of DeLand, Fla., to Ross Sinclair Cann, a son of Ross S. Cann and Laura Cann, both of Rochester.
The Rev.
Christopher Brown performed the ceremony.


Thomas W. McKnew, Geographic Figure, 94
LEAD: Thomas Willson McKnew, chairman emeritus of the National Geographic Society, died Friday at Carriage Hill, a nursing home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 94 and was a resident of McLean, Va.


Amanda Cook and Steven Spalten, Florists, Marry
LEAD: Amanda Pope Cook, a daughter of Edith Pope Cook of Washington, and Philip Sidney Cook of Santa Fe, N.M., was married yesterday to Steven Joseph Spalten, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert George Spalten of San Antonio.
The Rev.
Philip Compton, an Episcopalian, officiated at Beaulieu Gardens in Rutherford,


For Wonder Years, Actor Recalls L.I.
LEAD: DAN LAURIA is nothing like Jack Arnold, the grumpy character he plays on the ABC-TV series ''The Wonder Years.'' Nothing.


Janet Laub Wed To David Barcus
LEAD: Janet Lynn Laub, the daughter of Barbara Ann Laub of Plainview, L.I., and the late Mitchell Laub, was married last evening to David Ashley Barcus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert M. Barcus of North Brunswick, N.J.
Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein officated at Temple B'nai Sholom in Rockville Centre, L.I.
Mrs.


How to Install a Dimmer Switch
LEAD: DIMMER switches allow adjusting lighting levels; they also save energy and extend the lives of light bulbs.
Most often, dimmer switches are used for controlling incandescent ceiling lights.
Installing one is easy.
The job involves simply replacing the conventional wall switch with the dimmer.


Harlem Renaissance Gave Us 'Big Apple'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thomas Hyde Jr. Weds Carri Payne
LEAD: Carri April Payne, the daughter of Mrs.
Linton M. Rigg of Villanova, Pa., and Lloyd E. Payne of Dallas, was married yesterday in Rosemont, Pa., to Thomas Allen Hyde Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hyde of Midland, Tex.
The Rev.
John M. Holt performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd.


Climbing Mount Fuji By Night
LEAD: It's 3 A.M. on Mount Fuji as we grope our way up a massive scree slope in the dark.
In this hour of reckoning, thin air and night silence fuse with exertion, exhilaration and lack of sleep.
We're high.
The objective is to be on top of the sacred peak at sunrise.
The trail is indistinct but there's enough light to be aware of the elevation and the infinite black space that is not rock.


Facts and Feelings About Dresden
LEAD: I was quite moved by the heart-rending description of how a family physically and emotionally survived the bombing of Hiroshima 45 years ago in ''Stories My Parents Told Me, From the Horror of Hiroshima'' (Westchester Opinion, Aug. 5).
The oral testimony passed down from one generation to another is an important link to the human impacts of historic events -- impacts that are usually not described in the history texts from which our children learn of the past.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
CHRONICLE OF A REVOLUTION: A Western-Soviet Inquiry Into Perestroika.
Edited by Abraham Brumberg. (Pantheon, $24.95.) Just how the Soviet Union will emerge from the tumultuous events that are still shaking that country is still anybody's guess.
But ''Chronicle of a Revolution,'' a collection of highly readable, provocative essays edited by Abraham Brumberg, a visiting scholar at Georgetown University, suggests that most of the changes that have swept across the country over the past five years were predictable.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
''YOU GOTTA HAVE HEART.'' By Richard Adler with Lee Davis. (Donald I. Fine, $21.95.) ''Hernando's Hideaway,'' ''Hey There,'' ''Steam Heat,'' ''Heart,'' ''Whatever Lola Wants'' - for such songs from his first two shows, ''The Pajama Game'' and ''Damn Yankees,'' which opened on Broadway within a year of each other in the mid-1950's, Richard Adler remains one of the more beloved names in American musical comedy.


Spike Lee Riffs About an Artist, Not a Genius
LEAD: Spike Lee has done it again with ''Mo' Better Blues,'' his new film about black musicians that he describes as an answer to Clint Eastwood's ''Bird'' and Bertrand Tavernier's '' 'Round Midnight.'' As did his earlier films, ''Mo' Better Blues'' exists not only as a movie, as an end in itself, but also as a social phenomenon.


Hussein Has The Market Over a Barrel
LEAD: As stock and bond prices plunged around the world last week, it appeared that investors were losing hope that the Gulf crisis will end quickly.
If it doesn't, the markets' travails could continue.


Earthly Risks of Business in Space
LEAD: When the founders of Space Services Inc. built a rocket and named it the Conestoga, they had in mind an image of dogged determination in the face of daunting risk.
They never intended their pioneering enterprise to be facing that risk in the financial desert just short of the next watering hole.


1,500 Riot Over Siberian Shortages and March on Party Office
LEAD: Rioters in the Soviet city of Chelyabinsk smashed cars and shop windows and tried to storm a Government office in a third successive night of protests over food, tobacco and other shortages, the official press agency Tass said today.


Berkeley Journal;   Enter Politics, Stage Left
LEAD: Under the rustling oak trees at John Hinkel Park, before performances of ''Cymbeline,'' ''Othello'' or ''The Merry Wives of Windsor,'' the audience at the Berkeley Shakespeare Festival is wildly applauding the nightly announcement that the company has refused a Federal grant rather than sign an anti-obscenity pledge.


Are College Athletes' Rights Ignored?
LEAD: Are college athletes' rights ignored?


FASHION'S DESIGNING WOMEN
LEAD: Ask a fashion designer how she selects her business wardrobe, and she will mention the same concerns as other working women.
Although she may have a greater array of stylish choices, she wants her clothes to be comfortable as well as chic, as practical as they are handsome. and she doesn't want to have to think about them twice.


The Census Is Coming Up Short
LEAD: So much in commerce and politics hinges on the once-a-decade census that experts by the swarm leap to dissect and interpret even the most incomplete and preliminary data.
As a result, the Census Bureau has grown a bit testy on the subject of its accuracy.


Misusage Enshrined
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fashion;   Ever Comfortable, Oversized Sweaters Express Whimsy
LEAD: For women who have more than enough structured jackets in their closets, there is an alternative this fall: big, slouchy sweaters.
Some have hand-crocheted detail for an old-fashioned look.
Others have blown-up, large-scale patterns taken from sources as diverse as Scottish tartans, Walt Disney, African cloths and


She Too Disliked Poetry
LEAD:
MARIANNE MOORE
A Literary Life.
By Charles Molesworth.
Illustrated. 472 pp. New York:
Atheneum. $29.95.


In the Polls, the Economy Declines, Bush Doesn't
LEAD: Saddam Hussein has thrown America's election-year political forces into a strange and unpredictable alignment.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
The Handmaid's Tale
1990. HBO. $89.99. Laser disk, $39.95. 1 hour, 49 minutes. Closed captioned. R.
In Volker Schlondorff's adaptation of Margaret Atwood's novel, Natasha Richardson gives a perceptive portrayal of a Handmaid, one of a caste of women whose job in society is to bear children.


Review/Pop;   Dialogue and Harmony By Blaze, a Vocal Trio
LEAD: Most dance music seeks ecstasy in the moment it's heard, but Blaze, which performed Thursday night at S.O.B.'s, sets its mind to the future.
Over the thumping beat of house music, which currently reigns in urban clubs, Blaze's songs proclaim hope and self-affirmation, insisting ''Problems always work themselves out'' and ''Keep on reaching and keep on striving.


Rev. Berninger Wed to Vahe Keukjian
LEAD: The Rev.
Caroline Weston Berninger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Berninger of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Vahe Avedis Keukjian, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Emmanuel A. Keukjian of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The Rev.
William Davidson, the Rev.
Garen Gdanian of the Armenian Apostolic Church and the Rev.


Doctor Talk to Me
LEAD: When, in the Summer of 1989, I moved from Connecticut to Cambridge, Mass., I found that I had difficulty urinating.
I was like Portnoy, in ''Portnoy's Complaint,'' who couldn't fornicate in Israel.
I had always wanted to live in Cambridge, and the thought passed through my mind that I couldn't urinate because - like Israel for Portnoy - Cambridge was a transcendent place for me.


Jails Chief Is Criticized For Being Too Isolated
LEAD: Shortly after he took over New York City's jails, Allyn R. Sielaff brought in workers to remodel his suite so that a visitor must pass through two reception areas, and two sets of security buzzers, before getting to his corner office.


The Triumph of the Vulgar
LEAD:
DEMOCRATIC ELOQUENCE
The Fight Over Popular Speech in Nineteenth-Century America.
By Kenneth Cmiel.
351 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $24.95.


Britons' Families Torn Between Hope and Fear
LEAD: Mary Wright timed her first trip outside Britain in all her 70 years to coincide with the birth of her granddaughter.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on July 22 about Budapest, and an accompanying caption, misidentified the sculptor of a statue of Persephone.
As a reader has recently written to point out, he was Benno Elkan, not Benno Elkan Roma.


U.N. CALLS ON NAVIES TO BLOCK IRAQ'S TRADE; RESOLUTION PERMITS USE OF FORCE, U.S. SAYS
LEAD: The Security Council overwhelmingly adopted a resolution early today giving the United States and other nations the right to enforce the economic embargo against Iraq by halting shipping to and from that country.


THE TRAGEDY OF DETROIT
LEAD: Your article on Detroit implied that the 1967 riot caused whites to abandon Detroit and that Detroit and suburbs were more segregated than other cities.
The riot may have accelerated a trend, but the pattern of population shift was quite clear.
Blacks were already buying in the northwest, the city's most attractive area, and the housing available to Detroit's black citizens was probably the best of any major


Heimowitz, Tax Expert, Wed
LEAD: Emily Ruth Heimowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Heimowitz of Scarsdale, N.Y., and New York City, was married last evening to Mitchell Scott Spector, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gabriel Spector of Tinton Falls, N.J.
Rabbi Jack Stern performed the ceremony at the Westchester Reform Temple.


Detroit: America's Best Source of Oil
LEAD: At least one fact has become inescapably clear during the past two weeks.
The world cannot afford a continuation of the steady increase in dependence on Persian Gulf oil.
Means are available to reverse this trend.
We can make our cars, buildings and industry far more fuel-efficient than they are today.


Lyons
LEAD: The Lyonnais are not at all embarrassed to call their hometown France's second city.
They view Paris less as a rival than as the other great French city.


Annual Air Force Show Goes On, But Thoughts of the Mideast Prevail
LEAD: THEY came armed with picnic baskets and lawn chairs and rations of summer sandwiches and fruit juices.
But their minds, like those of the people in the planes they had come to see, were on events unwinding in the Saudi Arabian desert.


Miss Martin Wed To David Brown
LEAD: Cynthia Morris Martin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Newkirk Martin of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to David Noah Brown, the son of Carol Z. Brown of Boston, and Murton L. Brown of New York.
The Rev.
George Anastos, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Old Meeting House in Granville,


Fear Cracks Smooth Facade of the Saudi Capital
LEAD: The other day a mysterious message was faxed to offices in the Saudi capital here ostensibly offering advice on how to deal with the deadly effects of chemical weapons.
The fax soon became the talk of the town, fueling the already deep-seated worries over Iraq's poison gas capability.


Longtime Official Dropped From Michigan Ticket
LEAD: Lieut.
Gov.
Martha Griffiths, who served in Congress for 20 years and was a force behind its passage of the equal rights amendment, has been dropped from the 1990 Democratic gubernatorial ticket by Gov.
James J. Blanchard.


First, Financial Straits; Now, the Gulf Crisis
LEAD: Although the crisis in the Persian Gulf involves much broader and more crucial issues, it certainly has the potential to affect the sport of auto racing.


Census Lowers Estimate For State
LEAD: PRELIMINARY census returns show that Connecticut's population increased less than expected in the 1980's, and that the state's three largest cities reported drops in population.


Buildup of U.S. Troops Alarms the Arab World;   Friendly Dictators
LEAD: To the Editor:


After Shunning Black, A Legion Post Relents
LEAD: An all-white American Legion post that refused membership to a Vietnam veteran last month because he is black has now agreed to let him re-apply and has adopted a bylaws change that virtually insures he will be accepted.


Postings: Sheepshead Bay Condos;   An Alluring Site
LEAD: When Nicholas Cammarato, a Brooklyn developer, first saw the neighboring homes of a father and son, Eric and Richard Stockley, on East 23d Street in the Sheepshead Bay section during an exploratory drive through the neighborhood a few years ago, it was not just their Victorian-styled residences that caught his eye.


Tough Casino-Control Rules Kept Out Mob but Not Debt
LEAD: When the Casino Control Commission gave grudging approval this week to a bank loan package for Donald J. Trump's tottering casino empire, it tacitly acknowledged that its extraordinary regulatory powers had failed to shield New Jersey's casinos from the high-rolling borrowing practices of the 1980's.


Proudly Sinking, Hudson's One-Day Fleet
LEAD: A small red-and-green Viking boat, a kayak in the shape of a beer bottle and a lobster boat that looked a lot like a small brown bathtub were part of an unseaworthy armada that sloshed about on the Hudson River yesterday afternoon during New York City's strangest annual regatta.


Lauren Ruth Weinstock Is Married
LEAD: Lauren Ruth Weinstock, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Weinstock of Jericho, L.I., was married yesterday to David Edward Freedman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morris Freedman of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbis Michael Katz and Robert S. Widom performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck.


Will America Stand A Stalemate in Iraq?
LEAD: As the U.S. moves closer to military confrontation in the Middle East, people are beginning to wonder how long the American public will support the enterprise.
Historical experience suggests a few answers.


Jesse Fried Wed To Naomi Super
LEAD: Naomi Anne Super, a doctoral candidate in materials science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Jesse Mackenzie Fried, a Harvard University law student, were married yesterday at Congregation Shaarei Tefilla in Las Vegas, Nev.
Rabbi Abner Weiss officiated.


Lyons To Miss 12 to 16 Weeks
LEAD: In their 17-7 exhibition loss to the Giants on Saturday night, the Jets lost their most experienced player on defense when Marty Lyons suffered a torn right bicep muscle.


The Game on the Beach
LEAD: THE sportswriter sat on the beach recently under the shade of his red-and-white umbrella and was reading a book when he suddenly heard shouts.
He looked up and, as if in a bad dream, saw a football game breaking out a short distance away.


Allison Greenhut Is Married on L.I.
LEAD: Allison B. Greenhut, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald N. Greenhut of Jericho, L.I., was married yesterday to James P. Godman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Godman of New York.
Rabbi Dov Lerner performed the ceremony at the Old Westbury (L.I.) Hebrew Congregation.


9-0 Rout Returns Title to Taiwan
LEAD: Taiwan returned to business as usual today, topping Shippensburg (Pa.), 9-0, to earn the 14th championship since Taiwan teams began playing in the Little League World Series in 1969.


Mauritius' Political Quarrel Saves the Queen
LEAD: The Mauritians, a mixture of Indians, creoles, and Chinese who inhabit this small Indian Ocean island, want to be rid of the Queen of England.
That at least is how the political argument in one of Africa's few working democracies looked on the surface.


In Reversal, Alabama Club Allows a Japanese Member
LEAD: The all-white Selma Country Club has reversed itself and extended membership to a Japanese businessman barred last month amid lingering ill feelings about World War II.


Vienna Journal;   Forging a New Gypsy Spirit: Will Sanskrit Help?
LEAD: The group of gypsies had gathered for an evening of poetry and song, and their language and music bounced out over the audience, round and strong, full of dark tones and hissing sounds.


Already Weak, New York Area Is Spending Less
LEAD: Confronted with a fragile economy and haunted perhaps by the slide of the 1970's, consumers in the New York region are cutting spending and delaying purchases in a display of frugality that seems likely to make the slump worse.


Welfare Chief Battles Crises and Critics
LEAD: The job is daunting and she knows it.
Barbara J. Sabol, New York City's new Human Resources Administrator, is struggling -some say without success - to nudge a mammoth bureaucracy not known for compassion into being more responsive to the city's most vulnerable citizens.


Political Influence Corrodes the Civil Service;   Mired in Bureaucracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Media Business;   For Authors, the Key Words Are in the Book Contracts
LEAD: Publishing used to be about trust.
But today, the old relationships between authors and publishers have given way to growing differences over the contracts that define the business ties between them.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Miscellany
LEAD: *
Young &amp; Rubicam bought a minority share of Javelin, a Dublin advertising agency, which will be renamed Javelin/Young &amp; Rubicam.
The agency's billings are about $3 million.


Distant but Happy Second
LEAD: TO those who follow professional bowling, Earl Anthony is a household name - the name, of course, of bowling's first $1 million man, the winner of 41 tournaments in a 14-year-career that ended, for the first time, in 1983.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Aug. 26, 1990:
MONDAY
Bre Pptys Inc
Standard Prods Co
San Diego Gas &amp; Elec Co
United Illum Co
TUESDAY
Angelica Corp
Ipalco Enterprises Inc
Burnham Pac Pptys Inc
Kellwood Co


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about the rossland Savings Bank of Brooklyn misidentified the operator of the deposit insurance fund for credit unions.
It is the National Credit Union Administration, not the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


NBC Previews 5 of Its New Shows
LEAD: The television season doesn't start until Sept. 17, but last week was a kind of phony war anticipating the competition to come.


Morley Callaghan Is Dead at 87; Canadian Writer for Six Decades
LEAD: Morley Callaghan, a Canadian writer who lived in Paris in the 1920's and mixed with Ernest Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald, died Saturday, his son Barry said today.
He was 87 years oldandlived in Toronto.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Liberia Peacekeepers Ask Rebel to Quit Port
LEAD: West African peacekeeping forces called today on the rebel group led by Prince Johnson to pull out from the port area of Monrovia, the Liberian capital.


Books of The Times;   High Price of Putting a Song in the Heart
LEAD:
Hit Men
Power Brokers and Fast Money Inside the Music Business
By Fredric Dannen
387 pages. Times Books/Random House.19.95.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt
U.S. officials said economic sanctions against Iraq, while starting to have some effect, will probably not have a decisive impact for months. [Page A1.]  Oil prices have jumped because of what may turn out to be a modest interruption in supplies.
The forces of supply and demand are slow to respond to changes in oil prices, and neither producers nor consumers are likely to make changes that would restore an equilibrium.


Caribbeans Preparing For Hurricane Gustav
LEAD: Hurricane Gustav spun toward the northeastern Caribbean today with winds of 80 miles per hour.


Researchers Study Giant Sequoias To Determine Effects of Pollution
LEAD: Looking a little like a high-rise construction project, three tall trees stand surrounded by scaffolding here in an experiment to gauge damage to them from the pollutant ozone.


The Media Business;   As S.&amp; L.'s Sink, a Trade Weekly is Soaring
LEAD: Not too long ago, The National Mortgage News could not give away its reports about the savings and loan crisis.


U.N'S DIPLOMACY WELCOMED;   A Little Oil Means a Lot
LEAD: The price of crude oil jumped more than 70 percent since the beginning of July, the financial markets have plunged, and the economic future of the industrial world has been thrown into question, all because of an interruption in supplies that may turn out to be quite modest.
A host who bought two cases of beer for a party and broke one bottle would face about the same degree of shortage.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-10
Economic sanctions against Iraq, while already having some effect, will probably not have a decisive impact for months, U.S. officials said.
In Baghdad, 55 dependents of staff members at the U.S. embassy were freed, but the 54 staff members were not allowed to leave.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MEL TORME has finished ''Traps, the Drum Wonder,'' his biography of Buddy Rich.
The singer started it in 1975, put it aside for his own autobiography and completed the manuscript last month.
It has been submitted to publishers by STERLING LORD, who says that one will be chosen by mid-September.


Business Scene;   Mexico's Vibrant Untaxed Sector
LEAD: EIGHT blocks from Mexico City's ancient central plaza and historic cathedral is a major shopping district.
The streets are as packed with shoppers as Fifth Avenue in New York before Christmas.
The shops are mostly makeshift sidewalk stalls, but they display a huge variety of clothing, shoes, household wares, toys and electronic products.


Market Place;   Reviewing Deals After the Invasion
LEAD: THE best of Wall Street's merger experts in the 1980's specialized in determining how much debt their target companies could take on in a leveraged buyout.
To do so, they made assumptions about the future, including the direction of interest rates, economic growth, inflation, even oil prices.
But none of them figured on Saddam Hussein.


Ghanaians Celebrate New Babies and One Another
LEAD: The Ashanti chief, adorned with gold bracelets, rings and chains, closed his eyes, bent his head down and chanted a prayer to the health and fortune of the squirming 3-month-old boy before him.


A Nose Decides Forego
LEAD: It is only fitting that the tightest and most competitive race of the Saratoga meeting will probably turn out to be the one that decides the riding title.


Randi Justus Wed To Howard Simon
LEAD: Randi Michele Justus, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Justus of East Northport, L.I., was married yesterday to Howard Keith Simon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Simon of Jericho, L.I.
Cantor Marvin Antosofsky performed the ceremony at the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.


Estimate Panel Faces a Delay In Last Session
LEAD: The last meeting of the 92-year-old New York City Board of Estimate should finally come to an end today - nearly two weeks after it began.


Israel Says It Will Block Exports Bound for Iraq at Jordan's Border
LEAD: The Israeli military announced its first tangible involvement in the gulf crisis today by saying it will begin blocking exports of Palestinian-produced fruits, vegetables and other items shipped through Jordan to Iraq.


Lillian Lampkin, 75, Retired Social Worker
LEAD: Lillian C. Lampkin, a retired social worker and professor of social work, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center.
She was 75 years old.


Popular Durham Bulls Are Seeking a New Home
LEAD: THE Durham Bulls, undaunted by cinematic fame and unprecedented attendance levels, are continuing their efforts to lead the renaissance of minor league baseball in the United States.


Ilene Chugerman Is Wed
LEAD: Ilene Paula Chugerman, a daughter of Evelyn Chugerman of Brooklyn was married yesterday to Steven Jay Amiel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman R. Amiel of New York.
Rabbi Shlomo Carlebach performed the ceremony at the James House in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Amiel, 29 years old, graduated from Boston University and is an account supervisor at DCA Advertising in New York.


Microchip Technology Names New President
LEAD: Microchip Technology Inc., a semiconductor manufacturer based in Chandler, Ariz., has named Steve Sanghi president and chief operating officer.
He has been vice president for operations of Microchip, a privately held company that was spun off by the General Instrument Corporation in September 1987.


Vikings Edge Oilers on Kick
LEAD: Jim Gallery atoned for missing a 24-yard field goal with 5 minutes 14 seconds left by hitting a 24-yarder with one second to go yesterday as the Minnesota Vikings posted a 22-21 preseason victory over the Houston Oilers in Minneapolis.


Jordanian King Begins Effort in North Africa
LEAD: King Hussein left today for a tour of North Africa, and diplomats said he would also travel to Britain and West Germany in an effort to defuse the crisis in the Persian Gulf.


North Dakota Town Enlists Bats In War on Mosquitoes
LEAD: This summer, residents of this town at the confluence of the Missouri and Yellowstone rivers may have finally hit on a way to combat its oldest problem, mosquitoes, by using natural forms of control: bats and birds.


Max Gordon, an Architect, 59; Known for His Exhibition Spaces
LEAD: Max Gordon, an architect internationally known for his mastery of exhibition spaces, both public and private, died on Friday in London, where he lived.
He was 59 years old.


RIOT POLICE BATTLE BUCHAREST YOUTHS
LEAD: The riot police clashed tonight with anti-Government demonstrators in the fifth night of protests in central Bucharest.


Review/Television;   The Irreverence of a Lifelong Radical
LEAD: Jessica Mitford is best known for her 1963 book, ''The American Way of Death,'' a funny-serious assault on the funeral industry that goaded the Federal Trade Commission to act against price fixing by funeral directors. ''Jessica Mitford: Portrait of a Muckraker,'' the subject-friendly documentary at 10 on


Critic's Notebook;   Theater in Britain Is No Longer a Bargain
LEAD: Even when the plays have been less than perfect here, the price of a ticket has always been exactly right for American visitors.
Not this year.


Exciting Positions Available At Connecticut Enterprise
LEAD: STARTING a varsity football program can be difficult, especially at a small commuter school like Sacred Heart University in Fairfield, Conn., which doesn't even have a football field.


Buybacks Set By Companies
LEAD: The stock market's depressed prices led a number of companies last week to start or extend stock buyback programs.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday headed Washington at Work, about Representative Joe Moakley, referred incorrectly in some copies to the late Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero of San Salvador.
The Archbishop was not a leader of the Arena Party; the party was organized after he was assassinated in 1980 by a gunman who was later linked to a current party leader.


Abortion Pill Might Well Fix Roe v. Wade;   A Necessary Option
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chrysler's Japan Ties Stir a Fuss
LEAD: With a flourish of patriotism, the Chrysler Corporation's latest advertising campaign, ''Advantage: Chrysler,'' takes aim at the company's Japanese competitors, but the company is being accused of hypocrisy.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Kellogg Files Lawsuit To Protect Ad Claims
LEAD: The Kellogg Company has filed suit in Federal District Court in Iowa to protect the company's right to make what it says are truthful claims in advertising for its Frosted Flakes, Special K and Bran Flakes cereals.


Slovak Rally Demands An Independent State
LEAD: Tens of thousands of Slovaks demanding an independent state demonstrated today at a rally that was part of a separatist upsurge since the end of Communist rule in Czechoslovakia.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Nudging a Bureaucracy
After five months on the job, New York's welfare chief is struggling -some say unsuccessfully - to improve her agency.
Page B1.
Chrysler Ads Assailed
The No. 3 auto maker, whose ads carry a patriotic theme, has provoked charges of hypocrisy by buying Japanese machinery.


Metro Matters;   After the Conflict At Rikers Island, A War of Words
LEAD: In his eighth month on the job, Mayor David N. Dinkins finally seems to have met a man he doesn't like.


Take a Hike, on Cross-Country Trails
LEAD: A SCOUTING party has taken to the woods and backroads to mark a trail that will offer, if you are fit and eager, the opportunity to take an eight-month nature walk across the United States.
But the purpose for staking out the new path has to do as much with image as reality.


Dr. Renee Frankel Marries
LEAD: Dr.
Renee Ellen Frankel, a resident at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, and Dr.
Keith Fred Silverman, a dentist in Manhattan, were married yesterday at the Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminister, N.J., by Rabbi Louis Sigel.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.


From Lithuania to Seton Hall
LEAD: Less than two years ago, Arturas Karnishovas did not speak English.
He had never heard of Seton Hall University.
And he lived in Vilnius, Lithuania, which is a long way from New Jersey both geographically and culturally.


International Report;   Huge Withdrawals Hurt Gulf Banks
LEAD: A huge withdrawal of deposits and the cutting of vital Western and Japanese credit lines have dealt severe blows to the banking systems and economies of the Persian Gulf region.


Utah Is Divided Over Prayer at Graduations
LEAD: An impending legal battle over prayers at public school graduations has divided Utah residents on religious lines perhaps more sharply than any other issue since efforts to permit liquor served by the drink failed in 1968.


Suzanne E. Mumma Wed To William E. Hegarty Jr.
LEAD: Suzanne Elizabeth Mumma, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Mumma of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to William Edward Hegarty Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hegarty of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph deSantos performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church.


Sax and Barfield Show Youth Can't Do It All
LEAD: The second-half surge of the Yankees has been one built for the most part on the youthful strength of players like Kevin Maas, Oscar Azocar and Jim Leyritz.


In the Drive to Revive Schools, Better Teachers but Too Few
LEAD: In the struggle to revive America's schools, the news is bittersweet.
Despite growing evidence that more and better qualified people are choosing teaching, educators say there are nowhere near enough of them.


Working Out for 2 in Comfort
LEAD: The tendency for women to continue working out while they are pregnant has prompted Avia, the athletic footwear company, to design a special line of fitness clothing for mothers-to-be.


Miriam Berken and R. E. Vidal Wed
LEAD: Miriam L. Berken, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Berken of Huntington, L.I., and Roberto E. Vidal, the son of Gloria A. Vidal of Ventnor, N.J., were married yesterday on the yacht Princess in the Hudson River.
Rabbi Barton A. Shallat officiated.


To Cut the S.&amp; L. Losses . . .
LEAD: Washington budget summit negotiators have been engaged in a political tug of war over which taxes to raise to pay for the savings and loan bailout.
What they should be addressing is the more important question of how to keep the tab from rising.
Policy-makers have ignored one of the most effective steps we can take to stem further S.&amp; L.


Treaty Oak Pruning Planned
LEAD: The historic Treaty Oak, a centuries-old tree that was poisoned with a powerful herbicide early last year, will be severely pruned later this year in an effort to save it, the city forester says.
The pruning will leave only one living section, he said.
The tree is supposedly where Stephen F. Austin, founder of the American colony in the Mexican territory of Texas, signed a treaty with the Indians.


Not a Fun Sunday For Giant Linemen
LEAD: On this hot, sticky Sunday, most of the Giants, like most civilized people, had the day off.
But not the Giants' offensive line.


With Embargo, U.S. Farmers Lose One of Their Best Clients
LEAD: The Middle East crisis is confronting farmers, the United States Treasury and taxpayers with costs that go far beyond the rising price of oil.


Crippled Yacht Found With Its Crew Safe
LEAD: The Coast Guard found a yacht that had been crippled in rough seas southwest of Guam and sent a patrol boat today to tow the boat and its crew to safety, officials said.


A Decisive Victory For Edberg in Hamlet
LEAD: Stefan Edberg, his volleys precise and his attention unwavering despite the shimmer of heat that wrapped the stadium court in a cloudy blanket, defeated Goran Ivanisevic of Yugoslavia, 7-6, 6-3, in the final of the Norstar Hamlet Challenge Cup this afternoon.


Laura M. Stein Is Married
LEAD: Laura Michele Stein, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan Stein of Woodbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeffrey Robert Winkler, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul B. Winkler of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel officiated at the ceremony in the South Huntington Jewish Center in Melville, L.I.


Fitness Taking a Leap Into the Pool
LEAD: EARLY morning.
A businessman recovering from back surgery works through his water-therapy routine in his backyard pool.
Across town at the Y.M.C.A., a marathoner runs in the shallow end of the pool to vary his road-running routine.
In an apartment nearby, a ballerina reads the morning paper as she moves her sprained ankle up and down, then in circles, in a large bucket of ice water.


Melanie Cohen, a Lawyer, Is Married
LEAD: Melanie Cohen and Lawrence Greenberg, 1986 magna cum laude graduates of Harvard University, were married yesterday at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Rabbi David Greenberg performed the ceremony.


Weicker Honeymoon Over as Governor's Race Heats Up
LEAD: Former United States Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., an independent running for governor, has enjoyed nothing less than a political honeymoon for the last six months.
He has held wide leads in all public opinion polls.
His campaign has been gentlemanly and issue-oriented.
He also has been successful at raising funds, frequently attracting the news media and collecting endorsements from Democrats and


Saudis Provide Wherewithal For a Growing U.S. Force
LEAD: A top United States military official said today that the Saudi Arabian Government is providing the bulk of the fuel, transportation, food and installations for the thousands of American soldiers sent here.


Airlines Plan Gulf Risk Fee
LEAD: The leading international airlines are planning fare increases for the Persian Gulf region to absorb war-risk charges, airline and travel industry officials say.


M-1 Tanks Arrive
LEAD: In a sign of increasing American military punch in Saudi Arabia, the first of more than 200 M-1 Abrams tanks are expected to arrive by fast transport ship in northeastern Saudi Arabia on Monday.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Analysis &amp; Technology Inc., North Stonington, Conn., an engineering service, named John P. Cretella a senior vice president.


Republican Fund Raising Is Attacked in Federal Suit
LEAD: The Federal Election Commission has sued a Republican Party fund-raising organization, charging that in 1986 the group illegally gave Republican senatorial candidates more than $2 million raised through solicitation letters signed by Vice President George Bush.


Peru Activist and Son Killed
LEAD: Rebels killed a prominent political activist and his 8-year-old son today as the family took a drive outside the capital, the police said.
Arturo Pacheco, a member of the Aprista party of former President Alan Garcia Perez, was killed by a dynamite charge that was placed on his chest after the assailants stopped the car, officers said.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: SIR PETER HALL is not looking back, his untimely resignation on Aug. 7 as artistic director of the Glyndebourne Festival Opera notwithstanding.
He will direct ''The Homecoming'' in London in October to celebrate the 60th birthday of his pal, HAROLD PINTER.
Sir Peter first directed the play 25 years ago, which won a Tony award on Broadway.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: As the closing tribute to Charles Mingus on the 10th anniversary of his death, several pop musicians have recorded his works.
ELVIS COSTELLO sings the lead song, ''Weird Nightmare,'' on the album of the same name to be released at the end of the year on A &amp; M Records.
Other performers include SONNY ROLLINS, KEITH RICHARDS and CHARLIE WAT


At Gulag Cemetery, a Struggle Against Forgetting
LEAD: These morn-ings, as the all-night twilight of an Arctic summer brightens into real day, Stanislavas Grintsyavicius can be found tending anonymous graves in a gnat-infested field near the Yurshor Coal Mine.


Runaway Train Goes 15 Miles
LEAD: A freight train with no one aboard started up and traveled more than 15 miles and as fast as 35 miles an hour on Saturday before an engineer hopped aboard and halted it, the police said.
Railroad crossing lights, which are normally activated by train engineers, were not working so the police blocked crossings with patrol cars.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''My parents say, 'Amy's going to be a teacher and that's nice.'


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Olazabal Wins by 12: Jose-Maria Olazabal started out with consecutive birdies yesterday and went on to a 12-stroke victory in the World Series of Golf in Akron, Ohio, shooting 18-under-par 262.
The 24-year-old Spaniard's edge was the largest margin in 15 years on the PGA Tour.
After going 12 in front on the second hole, Olazabal turned the last round into a victory lap over the Firestone Country Club course, which he dominated as no one ever had.


Question Box
LEAD:
Runners Left Stranded
Q.
When the Dodgers beat the Atlanta Braves, 5-4, a month ago in Los Angeles, they left 25 players on base in the 12-inning game.
What team holds the mark for runners left on in a regulation game of nine innings?
A.
The National League mark is 18, shared by nine teams going all the way back to Boston in 1897 and a short trip back to Atlanta in 1986, also in a game against the Dodgers.


Molly M. Fowler Is Married
LEAD: Molly Macklin Fowler, an associate producer for ''The Phil Donohue Show,'' and Jack Levine, a photographer and film maker, were married yesterday at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Rosen, the bridegroom's sister and brother-in-law, in Patterson, N.Y.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated.
The bride, 33 years old and a graduate of the University of Utah, is keeping her name.


Iraqi Tanker, Its Cargo of Oil Refused, Will Sail Elsewhere
LEAD: A fully laden Iraqi tanker returned to the Mediterranean Sea today after its oil cargo was rejected by Sweden and agents said it would head for a friendly country, shipping officials said.


Edberg Comfortable at the Top
LEAD: STEFAN EDBERG, the world's new No. 1 tennis player and for the longest time the most prolific shrinking violet on the men's tour, swiveled and swayed on the first tee of the Fresh Meadows Country Club last week as he got set to play host to a celebrity golf tournament.


U.N. Leader to Meet With Iraqi Minister
LEAD: The United Nations Secretary General, who said this weekend that he would personally intervene in the Persian Gulf crisis, is to meet with the Iraqi Foreign Minister on Thursday in Amman, the Jordanian capital, a spokeswoman said today.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills and Notes
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to bill and note auctions, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
Tomorrow there will be an auction of new two-year notes and on Wednesday an auction of new five-year notes.


Machine Tool Orders Fell 11.9% Last Month
LEAD: New orders for American-made machine tools dropped by 11.9 percent in July, according to a monthly report by the Association for Manufacturing Technology.
Economists said the figures showed that the nation's economy had begun slowing before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


A Robbery Suspect Is Shot in Times Square
LEAD: An armed-robbery suspect was shot and critically wounded and three other supects arrested by police officers in a Times Square grocery last night, the police said.


Passenger Shoots at Driver Of a Livery Cab in the Bronx
LEAD: A 43-year-old livery-cab driver was injured early yesterday during an apparent robbery attempt when a passenger shot at him through the cab's plastic security divider, the police said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Military Drops Gulf Press Pool
LEAD: The Pentagon disbanded its Persian Gulf news media pool today, saying it was no longer needed because open coverage was now being permitted.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When ROSE BOYT wrote her first novel, published in London last year to considerable praise, interviewers were fascinated by her background.
When the 31-year-old great-granddaughter of Sigmund Freud writes about Oedipal love and calls the book ''Sexual Intercourse,'' all sorts of skeletons might tumble from the closet.


Refugees' Picture of Kuwait: A Plundered, Fearful Nation
LEAD: Refugees pouring into Jordan from Kuwait talked today of rising fears of chemical warfare and occasional skirmishing between Iraqi troops and Kuwaiti guerrilla groups.


In New-Day Romania, The Deprivation Lingers
LEAD: A man was dancing on the steps of the House of Culture here at noon today, waving his arms as he circled his bottle of plum brandy and mumbling the words of a song.


Protecting Democracy in Pakistan
LEAD: Pakistan's President, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, carefully observed constitutional formalities when he ousted the elected Government of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto earlier this month.
Ms.
Bhutto was nevertheless the victim of a coup in constitutional clothing, sponsored from behind the scenes by military leaders.


Four Killed in California as Train Crashes Into Car


The Board of Estimate's Upbeat End
LEAD: New York City's Board of Estimate, due to die on Sept. 1 under the new City Charter, in its protracted final session last week reached acceptable compromises on four disputed matters.
A last issue remains for today.


2d-Largest Philanthropy Widens Role
LEAD: Even here in Philadelphia, where the Pew family amassed a fortune from Sun Oil Company profits, the Pew Charitable Trusts are hardly a household name.
But they are the country's second-most generous philanthropy, behind only the Ford Foundation and comfortably ahead of better-known giants like the Rockefeller, Carnegie and


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   The Masses, Fashion and J. C. Penney
LEAD: THE name is J. C. Penney, but the advertising portrays a style-conscious retailer that is sort of a Saks Fifth Avenue for the masses.


The Media Business: Ad Scene;   Sponsors' New Message: Buy It, but Have Patience
LEAD: ADVERTISING, with its brassy promise of immediate, when-it-absolutely-positively-has-to-be-there-overnight results, has begun to croon a softer, sweeter tune: Buy now, be satisfied later.


R. Caird Watson, 61, Radiology Researcher
LEAD: Dr.
R.
Caird Watson, a radiologist and chairman of the medical-imaging department at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, died there on Thursday.
He was 61 years old.


A Festival Embraces The Pacific Cultures
LEAD: Back in 1988, when the innovative opera and theater director Peter Sellars became director of the 1990 Los Angeles Festival, no one would have been shocked to hear that the festival would include Mr.
Sellars directing the West Coast premiere of John Adams's opera ''Nixon in China.'' Few would also have been particularly amazed to find that the festival, which is to take place Sept.


Official Urges Lower Rates
LEAD: Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher said today in a television interview that interest rates should be cut to help avoid recession.


Review/Dance;   Cunningham Alumnus Offers His Own Program
LEAD: Is there life after the Merce Cunningham Dance Company?
The answer would seem to be yes, to judge by a first independent program of choreography presented by Dennis O'Connor, a former Cunningham dancer, on Saturday night at the funky Gas Station theater on Avenue B at Second Street in Manhattan.


What Makes Some Crimes More Unacceptable Than Others?;   Anti-Gay Violence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Attacks by Sikhs Reported
LEAD: Sikh gunmen raided the home of a police interrogator in Punjab on Saturday and killed four members of his family, the police said today.
Elsewhere in the state, eight deaths on Saturday were attributed to Sikh militants who are leading a violent campaign for an independent homeland, news reports said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Cox Landley Awarded Acura Dealers Account
LEAD: Cox Landey &amp; Partners has won the $8 million to $10 million account for the Tri-State Acura Dealers.
The campaign created by the New York agency will begin in October.


Church Poses No Threat To Park, Lujan Asserts
LEAD: For nearly a decade, followers of Elizabeth Clare Prophet have come to the spectacular Upper Yellowstone Valley, drawn by the woman they call Guru Ma.
Hundreds of members of her Church Universal and Triumphant settled here, near huge bomb shelters they have cut into the mountainside and stocked with radiation suits, food and automatic weapons.


Gulf Crisis Has Brazil in a Tailspin
LEAD: Shock waves from the crisis in the Persian Gulf are rippling through Brazil's economy, swelling the bill on oil imports, threatening an anti-inflation program, deepening a recession and freezing a close trade relationship with Iraq.


White Plains Plan by Saks
LEAD: Saks Fifth Avenue will build a new 120,000-square-foot store in White Plains, which will replace the chain's existing store there, the company said last week.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Currents column of The Home Section on Aug. 2 about the Design Review of ID Magazine misidentified a photograph.
It showed the Rhode Gear CS1001 bicycle seat, which was given special recognition by the magazine, not the Baby Bob Car Seat by Dremefa, which won a design award from the magazine.


Abortion Pill Might Well Fix Roe v. Wade
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trump Shuttle Looking to Expand Service
LEAD: The Trump Shuttle plans to become more than a shuttle by expanding its charter flights to the Caribbean and Mexico and by expanding service to Atlantic City in a move to make better use of its fleet and broaden its customer base.


Sri Lankan Troops Report Seizing Island From Rebels
LEAD: The Sri Lankan Army said today that it had captured the strategic island closest to the 300-year-old Jaffna Fort, killing dozens of Tamil guerrillas now engaged in a bitter battle for the heart of their traditional homeland.


Protesters Storm Bulgarian Socialist Offices


Key Talks On Output For OPEC
LEAD: As members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries gathered informally here today to confront some of the most crucial issues in the group's 30-year history, some predicted that a formal meeting would be announced on Monday to address questions of oil production and prices.


Outdoors: Tautog A Northeast Treat
LEAD: IF you live in the Northeast and have a yen to try saltwater spearfishing, the chunky tautog is your logical quarry.
It is fairly abundant, is a relatively slow swimmer that is not overly chary of intruders, and is an excellent chowder fish.


Francine Kravetz Marries
LEAD: Francine Amy Kravetz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Kravetz of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joseph Pepe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene N. Pepe of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Westchester Country Club in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Pepe, 25 years old and a graduate of Boston University, is a registered sales assistant at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith Consumer Markets in White Plains.


Catch-22 For Menem
LEAD: Carlos Menem, the Peronist who as President has startled Argentines with frugal government and plans for an open-market economy, has encountered a sort of Catch-22 in his attack on inflation.


Carol H. Amsterdam Wed To Arthur D. Fornari
LEAD: Carol Helena Amsterdam, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert J. Amsterdam of Alexandria Bay, N.Y., was married yesterday to Arthur David Fornari, a son of Dr.
Ermanno D. Fornari of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Alice N. Fornari.
Rabbi Louis C. Gerstein and Cantor A. Lopez Cardozo officiated at Congregation Shearith Israel, the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue, in New


Mets Lose Game And Chance to Gain
LEAD: Ten days after they flew West only half a game out of first place, the Mets flew home tonight three games out.
It was, they admitted, a lost trip: they lost three of four games in Los Angeles.
They lost 6 of 10 in California.
They lost their bats and their smarts and even their confidence.


Czech Brings Enthusiasm To Fed Event
LEAD: The star of the proceedings at the Federal Reserve's annual summer retreat, dedicated this year to a discussion of central banking in Eastern Europe, turned out to be the Finance Minister of Czechoslovakia, Vaclav Klaus.


For Ill Children, a Chance at Camping
LEAD: Oxygen tanks, respirators and intravenous tubes share cabin space with sleeping bags and backpacks at a camp for children whose medical needs make them dependent on technology.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   People
LEAD: *
Robin Davenport has been appointed senior vice president of Sudler &amp; Hennessey, a New York agency.


Parades, Contests and Races in Honor of the Crab
LEAD: AN event that may provide some excitement along with a lot of fun and good eating will take place in Crisfield, Md., Labor Day weekend.


Search For a Philippine Rebel


Give Me, Also, Your Skilled
LEAD: America is about to enhance its reputation as a nation of immigrants, and not just for tired, huddled masses.
Legislation moving through Congress would increase the number of immigrants, making it easier for families to unite and for businesses to recruit skilled workers.
This first major overhaul of legal immigration in 25 years would be as welcome as it is overdue.


Epileptic Driver Is Charged In Car Crash That Killed Boy
LEAD: A man whose driver's license was taken away because he has epilepsy was charged with homicide after he suffered a seizure while driving and struck and killed a 7-year-old boy, the authorities said.


The Media Business;   Magazines Follow Readers to the Beach
LEAD: Summer is ending soon, but the lure of the beach remains strong -especially for magazine readers.


SANCTIONS STARTING TO PINCH IRAQ ECONOMY, U.S. AIDES SAY; U.N.'S DIPLOMACY WELCOMED
LEAD: Amid tentative new stirrings of diplomatic activity in the Middle East crisis, American officials said today that economic sanctions against Iraq, while already starting to have some effect, will probably not have a decisive impact for months.


A Market Slumps and Real-Estate Lawyers Scramble
LEAD: When houses and apartments were selling in days or weeks during the mid-1980's, real-estate closings were the bread and butter of many law practices in the New York metropolitan region.
Some lawyers conducted hundreds of closings a year, collecting from $750 to $1,000 for each one.


Bridge
LEAD: It is not often that two teams with national credentials meet in the semifinal of a regional tournament but it happened in February in a Knockout Championship in Cromwell, Conn.


Tokyo Stocks Set a Record
LEAD: Share prices in Tokyo today rose to its ninth-largest one-day gain on techincal factors and investor relief after a weekend without news of military conflict in the Middle East.


Higher Long-Term Rates Predicted
LEAD: The week before Labor Day is normally one of Wall Street's slowest periods.
But with the Persian Gulf crisis becoming increasingly volatile, the atmosphere in the financial markets will hardly be holiday-like in the coming days.


Mulroney Hints at Force Against Mohawks
LEAD: Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said today that unreasonable demands by militant Mohawk Indians may force the Canadian Government to send in the army to end six-week-old standoffs at two places in Quebec.


Officer Accidentally Shoots His Partner Instead of Dog
LEAD: A police officer accidentally shot his partner in the leg last night when they attempted to halt a dispute between two tenants at an apartment building in Jamaica, Queens, and were attacked by a pit bull, the police said.


Political Influence Corrodes the Civil Service
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Says Iraqis Briefly Entered Chinese Embassy in Kuwait
LEAD: Iraqi authorities reportedly entered the Chinese Embassy in Kuwait and tightened their grip on other foreign embassies there today by shutting off their water supply, Administration officials said.


Political Influence Corrodes the Civil Service;   Foxes in Chicken Coop
LEAD: To the Editor:


Flags Fly Over South For Troops
LEAD: As the news swept through this area last week that military convoys were moving along the Interstates carrying soldiers bound for the Middle East, clutches of people waving flags seemed to appear magically along the highway overpasses to salute them.


Ford Plant Stays Closed
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said Friday that an engine parts shortage would force it to extend a two-week shutdown of its Dearborn assembly plant for another two weeks, until Sept. 10.
Initially, the factory, which makes Mustang automobiles, was closed because of a shortage of dealer orders.
The shutdown this week was attributed to the parts shortage.


Belinda Ward, Writer, Wed
LEAD: Belinda Ward, a writer for the television program ''Sesame Street,'' was married yesterday to Frank Kirby, the vice president of finance for the E &amp; B Giftware Corporation in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel and the Rev.
James Gardner, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Stamford, Conn., home of the bride's parents, Mr.


Red Sox Capture 3d Straight Shutout
LEAD: The Boston Red Sox swept to a third straight shutout for the first time in 28 years and increased their largest lead of the season in the American League East to four games today, beating Toronto, 1-0, on a combined two-hitter by Greg Harris and Jeff Gray.


Cambodian Rebels Say They Repelled Army
LEAD: A Cambodian guerrilla group said today that it had repelled an offensive by that country's Communist Government.


Dale C. Reyer Married to Jonathan Mondschein
LEAD: Dale Caryn Reyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Reyer of Kings Point, L.I., was married yesterday to Jonathan Mondschein, a son of the late Saul Mondschein and the late Gloria Mondschein Warshaw and the adoptive son of Milton Warshaw of New York.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom and Cantor Henry Weintraub officiated at the DeSeversky Conference Center in Old Westbury, L


Return of the Doves
LEAD: Longtime doves of the left, joined by anti-Israelites of the far right - plus sober second thinkers who want to give pacifism a chance -have combined forces to try to stop the worldwide momentum aimed at driving Saddam Hussein from power.


OPEC Braces for a Showdown
LEAD: Some oil producing nations expect the deeply split group to call a formal meeting.
A majority believes some members will raise output.
Page D1.


178 Miners Feared Dead In Yugoslav Explosion
LEAD: A total of 178 miners were believed dead today after a gas explosion ripped through a coal mine in central Yugoslavia.


DEALS
LEAD:
FOOTBALL
CHICAGO (NFC) - Waived Dave Duerson, safety; Bill Anderson, center; Brian Taylor and James Lott, cornerbacks; Steve Thompson, defensive end; Bryan Bero, fullback; Steve Hyche, linebacker; Alan Koch, offensive guard; Roman Matusz, offensive tackle; Kent Sullivan, punter; Ray Tarasi, kicker; Steve Fumi, tight end; and Chris Roscoe and Henry Tuten, wide receivers.


What Makes Some Crimes More Unacceptable Than Others?
LEAD: To the Editor:


United Airlines' Rates
LEAD: United Airlines will increase its air freight rates 5.3 percent on all domestic flights effective Oct. 1 to cover rising jet fuel costs, the airline announced Friday.
United will also impose a 5.3 percent fuel surcharge on passenger flights, beginning at the end of August.


Mayor Barry's Verdict Outraging Colombians
LEAD: Anger among Colombians over the verdicts in the drug trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington appears to be threatening a keystone of American anti-cocaine policy here: extradition of Colombian drug suspects to the United States for trial.


International Report;   Brazil Data Show Recession
LEAD: President Fernando Collor de Mello's anti-inflation plan, begun on March 16, has produced Brazil's worst recession in 10 years, data from the Government Statistics Institute show.


Mario de Andrade, 62, a Founder of Angola's Governing Movement
LEAD: Mario Pinto de Andrade, the father of Angolan nationalism and first president of the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola, which has governed Angola since independence in 1975, died in London today.
He was 62 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Friday about the performance of the stock market misstated the ranking of the New York Stock Exchange volume on Thursday.


U.S. Put Germans In Detention Camps
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bulgarian Socialist Offices Are Stormed by Protesters
LEAD: Several hundred rioters tonight stormed the headquarters of Bulgaria's Socialist Party, the country's former Communist Party, to protest the continued presence of Communist symbols in public places throughout the country.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - Addenda;   Accounts
LEAD: *
BellSouth Mobility, a unit of BellSouth Corp., Atlanta, a cellular phone service, to Tucker Wayne/Luckie &amp; Co., Atlanta, with billings of $7.5 million.
The company will continue to use Hutcheson Shutze, Atlanta, through 1990 for media placement.


Benicia Journal;   Bible and Constitution Clash in a Liberal Land
LEAD: The greater Bay Area, with San Francisco to the west and Berkeley to the east, is generally considered so philosophically far from the Bible Belt that some might argue it constitutes an emotionally different country.


Calmen Fleisig Dead; Viola Player Was 81
LEAD: Calmen Fleisig, a viola player who led fellow musicians in a bitter labor dispute with the New York Philharmonic in the 1940's, died Friday at Booth Memorial Hospital in Flushing, Queens.
He was 81 years old and lived in Bayside, Queens.
He died of a cerebral hemorrhage, his son Paul said.
Mr.
Fleisig was a member of the Philharmonic from 1938 to 1943 and was its union chairman when the Philharmonic's board announced that it would not renew the contracts of 14 musicians, including Mr.


Osel Tendzin, 47, First Westerner to Lead Tibetan Buddhist Sect
LEAD: Osel Tendzin, the first Westerner to lead an international Tibetan Buddhist sect, died Saturday, members of the religious group said today.
He was 47 years old.


Jennifer Hisrich, Librarian, Weds
LEAD: Jennifer Dell Hisrich, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Glenn D. Hisrich of Washington, Pa., was married yesterday to Jason Drew Zions, a son of Leona Rund Zions of New York and Herbert G. Zions of Island Park, L.I.
Rabbi Albert Goldman performed the ceremony at Chestnut Farm, the home of the bride's parents.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
Personal Income
July
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
New-Home Sales
July
New-Home Prices
July
Thursday
Factory Orders


Contra-Supply Pilot Wins No Jury Award
LEAD: A jury decided against awarding money today to Eugene Hasenfus, whose plane was shot down in Nicaragua while he was flying supplies to the contras.


New Advances Offer Cystic Fibrosis Victims Heartening Prospects
LEAD: INSPIRED by a string of recent advances in basic and clinical research, scientists say the prospects for cystic fibrosis patients have never been more heartening.


Metro Datelines;   2 Morning Mishaps Snarl Newark Flights
LEAD: A jetliner's engine caught fire and a commuter plane skidded across a runway when its nosewheel failed to engage in separate incidents at Newark International Airport this morning.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It's hot, but not any hotter than army gear and a helmet.


Dust Mites In Houses And Risk Of Asthma
LEAD: Solidly built houses that hold in heat may raise the risk of childhood asthma by increasing exposure to dust mites, a new study concludes.


'Give and Get' in the Comptroller's Race
LEAD: This year's race for New York State Comptroller has evolved into a discouraging test of campaign fund-raising practices.
Both the Republican incumbent, Edward Regan, and his leading Democratic opponent, Carol Bellamy, give reason to question their sensitivity to government ethics.


NEW YORK TAKING AGGRESSIVE STEPS TO PROTECT WATER
LEAD: Facing billions of dollars in cleanup costs it can hardly afford, New York City has undertaken an aggressive legal and regulatory effort to preserve its high-quality drinking water, which is increasingly threatened by pollution.


Letter: On Georgia;   Primary Law Hasn't Hurt Blacks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Six Eastern Teams Set Out to Lose Their Independence
LEAD: The possibilities seem infinite, the waiting interminable, and the worst scenario frightening: to be left out, alone.


Human Rights Group Accuses Zaire of Abuse
LEAD: A report released by the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights asserts that the Government of Zaire has engaged in a ''systematic pattern of abuses'' that includes arbitrary arrests and beatings, banishment of political opponents and severe restrictions on freedoms of speech and the press.


FOOTBALL: Jets Make Big Changes; Giants Simply Trim;   Rembert Is Traded And Sweeney Signs
LEAD: Reggie Rembert, who became expendable before the opening of training camp, was traded today to the Cincinnati Bengals as the Jets cleared up their contract squabbles.


Uncertainty Is in Stock In the Damascus Bazaar
LEAD: Deep in the Suk al Hamidiye, the magnificent labyrinthine bazaar that is the heart of the old city, a merchant paused in a shop crammed with Oriental artifacts but empty of customers to consider the dizzying events of the last three weeks that have thrown the Arab world into turmoil.


Investor Acquires Stake in Watsco
LEAD: Watsco Inc. said H. Wayne Huizenga had bought 50,000 shares from the company, or about 4.8 percent of Watsco's class A common stock, for $10 a share and a five-year warrant allowing him to buy 45,000 class B shares at $11.25 each.
Watsco is in the climate-control business through Gemaire Distributors Inc.


A Friendly, Competitive Symbiosis In a Play Looking for a New Home
LEAD: On his last night in the small village of Ballybeg, Ireland, 25-year-old Gareth O'Donnell sits at tea with his father, a sad, uncommunicative man with whom Gar has been trying unsuccessfully to connect all his life.
On the morrow, Gar is leaving Ireland, escaping the failure of his old world for the hope of a new life with his aunt in Philadelphia.


Jury's Award To Liggett Overturned
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday overturned a $148.8 million judgment awarded to the Liggett Group, the cigarette maker, against the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
Liggett had accused its larger rival of predatory pricing intended to kill its business.


Romanians Hold Sixth Day of Protest
LEAD: For the sixth day running, several hundred anti-Government demonstrators assembled at the main crossroads of the capital today, but there was no repetition of the confrontations with security forces that took place the previous five days.


Oil Falls, Stocks Soar
LEAD: Oil prices fell steeply on the news of diplomatic efforts to avoid war, and OPEC is close to authorizing higher output.


Population Tops 29 Million As California Widens Gap
LEAD: A decade of explosive growth in the suburbs stretching east and south from Los Angeles pushed California's population above 29 million for a 10-year growth rate of 23.7 percent, according to preliminary 1990 census figures released today.


Careers;   New Focus On Quality Control
LEAD: MANY corporate managers in charge of quality control may be talking to the wrong people, says Dale Winston, president of Battalia and Associates Inc., a management recruiting firm.


Yellowstone Journal;   Cookout Crasher Rekindles Park Issue
LEAD: Every visitor to this mountainous park is warned not to approach or feed the grizzly bears.
But the other night 180 paying customers at the daily Western cookout at Yancey's Hole got a rare close-up glimpse of a grizzly, and promptly abandoned their meals to him.


Loews Acquires Stake in Champion
LEAD: The Loews Corporation, the New York company headed by Laurence A. Tisch, who is also the president of CBS Inc., has acquired a 7.92 percent stake in Champion International Corp. for $204 million.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Loews said it had acquired the shares of the paper products company based in Stamford,


Better Prenatal Care Will Lower Baby Deaths
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: SINEAD O'CONNOR, the 23-year-old Irish rock star who has a history of throwing tantrums and getting her way, was singing a different tune yesterday about her concert in New Jersey on Friday.


Stars Outshine the Weather as Open Begins
LEAD: Even before an unpredicted tempest touched down and saturated the United States Open yesterday afternoon, forcing the defending women's champion, Steffi Graf, to make an inelegant scurry from her first-round match on the stadium court, opening day had offered up a controversy, an upset, and the first assault by heat prostration, the event's perennial plague.


Avon Completes Sale of Mediplex
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. has completed the sale of its only remaining health-care businesses.
The sales of Mediplex Group Inc. to the Diamond Health Care Acquisition Corporation and of Mediplex Construction to the Diamond Health Care Development Corporation concluded the cosmetics company's plan to leave the health care industry.


Critic's Notebook;   The Future of the Philadelphia And Germanism on the Rise
LEAD: Although the management of the Philadelphia Orchestra, still enmeshed in its labor negotiations, will neither comment nor confirm, it seems likely that shortly after Labor Day, Wolfgang Sawallisch will be named to succeed Riccardo Muti as the orchestra's music director.


Our Towns;   Odd Beach Balls Are as Much Fun As Hungry Shark
LEAD: Dr.
Andrew D. McBride is a sewage-ball expert.
He is the director of health here.
He is also responsible for the ''No Swimming'' signs that have been posted frequently along Stamford's beaches the last three summers.


Nigerians Capture Liberian Rebel Gunboat
LEAD: Nigerian warships have captured a gunboat carrying weapons for a Liberian rebel group, a spokesman for the West African forces trying to impose a cease-fire said today.


Fight to House Homeless at Old Missile Base Turns Nasty
LEAD: Someone poured gasoline outside Sgt.
Johnnie Peters's home at a defunct Nike missile site here last week in another expression of vandalism and hostility surrounding a plan to turn the old military base and its 36 bungalow-style homes into a project for the homeless.


Bulgarian Socialists Rally After Attack
LEAD: After a night of violence that left much of their party headquarters in ashes, about 15,000 undaunted backers of the Bulgarian Socialist Party, this country's renamed Communist Party, rallied in Sofia's main square this evening against what their party leaders called ''newborn neo-fascism.''


Harmful Effects Dioxin Can Have on Humans
LEAD: To the Editor:


W.C.T. Out of Business
LEAD: World Championship Tennis, which staged the Tournament of Champions at the West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills, Queens, has gone out of business.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   New Tactics By Magazine Publishers
LEAD: WITH circulation down, publishers of many of the nation's best-known magazines are grappling with ways to keep the bad news from further scaring off skittish advertisers.


World Stocks Climb; Tokyo Index Gains 4%
LEAD: Stock markets around the world continued to climb yesterday from their steep losses of recent weeks, with Japanese stocks adding more than 4 percent and French and German markets faring even better.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Apple Bancorp shareholders have until Sept. 4 to tender their common shares for $38 a share under the offer whose deadline was extended yesterday by the investor Stanley Stahl.


2 Cardinals Acquitted
LEAD: A jury in Covington, Ky., cleared two St.
Louis Cardinal players yesterday of disorderly-conduct charges stemming from a brawl May 19 at a service station.


Soviets Open Prisons and Records To Inquiry on Wallenberg's Fate
LEAD: The Soviet Union has agreed for the first time to open prisons and archives to an international commission investigating the fate of Raoul Wallenberg, the Swedish diplomat who disappeared into the Soviet prison system after saving thousands of Jews from the Nazis, members of the commission said today.


Israelis Devise Plastic Suit as Shield Against Iraqi Gas
LEAD: Hadar Polak was ambling past a bicycle rack, looking like a primitive astronaut in the plastic chemical warfare protection suit he was demonstrating, when a friend drove past and shouted at him, ''Don't publicize our factory too much, or we'll be Saddam Hussein's No. 1 target!''


St. John's Suspensions Continue
LEAD: A St.
John's University dean said yesterday that she would not reinstate six suspended students until charges that they sexually assaulted another student are resolved.


Chronicle
LEAD: An entrepreneur from Ghana and a statesman from Nigeria will share the $100,000 Africa Prize for Leadership, to be awarded next month by the Hunger Project of San Francisco.


H. Thorkilsen, 64, Ocean Spray Chief In Its Growth Years
LEAD: Harold Thorkilsen, a leader in the agricultural cooperative movement who built Ocean Spray Cranberries from a small New England producer into a Fortune 500 concern, died Thursday at his home in Osterville, Mass.
He was 64 years old.


New York Recommends a Broader Policy on AIDS Testing
LEAD: New York State residents who have been sexually active or have used any illicit drug in the last 10 years will be urged to be tested for the AIDS virus under a broad new policy that state health officials will announce this week.


On Horse Racing;   Winners and Losers at Saratoga
LEAD: The highest and lowest moments amid the 24 days of Saratoga racing that ended here yesterday:


Glass Deal in Europe
LEAD: A Belgian glass maker, Glaverbel S.A., said today that it had bought a 30 percent stake in Termofrost, a Swedish company specializing in coated glass, glass doors used for freezer cabinets and heated windows.
Glaverbel, a subsidiary of the Asahi Glass Company of Japan, said the acquisition should lead the two companies to develop jointly speciality glass, particularly coated glass and heated glazings.


This Embargo Can Work
LEAD: Trade embargoes have often proved feeble instruments of coercion.
Those who favor quick military action against Iraq argue that the present blockade won't work, or will take many months to bite.
They may prove right.


Scientists Find Chemical Clue To Body Odor
LEAD: Scientists have identified the chemicals that produce underarm odor, they reported at a meeting here today.
The culprits are two forms of a chemical that produces odors when exposed to certain bacteria.


Auto Workers Expected to Make G.M. a 'Negotiation Target'
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers is expected to name the General Motors Corporation on Tuesday as its ''negotiation target'' in talks covering half a million industry workers in the United States, just two weeks after the No. 1 auto maker granted concessions to strikers in Flint, Mich.


Books of the Times;   The Shapes and Textures of 3 Lives
LEAD:
The Woman Lit by Fireflies
By Jim Harrison
247 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.


Better Prenatal Care Will Lower Baby Deaths;   High Federal Priority
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.N. CHIEF TO SEEK RETREAT OF IRAQIS
LEAD: The United Nations Secretary General said today that when he meets in Jordan this week with the Iraqi Foreign Minister he will seek ''full implementation'' of Security Council resolutions calling for the full withdrawal of Iraq from Kuwait.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Playboy in Deal To Buy Back Stock
LEAD: Playboy Enterprises Inc. said it had negotiated the purchase of 200,000 non-voting class B Playboy shares from Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd. for $825,000.
Industrial Equity, a Hong Kong investment company, remains the second largest owner of Playboy stock, holding a 7.6 percent interest.
Playboy's founder, Hugh M.


Virtuoso of the Rock Guitar, He Helped Define the Blues
LEAD: Stevie Ray Vaughan, one of the leading blues and rock guitarists of his generation, came from obscurity to enjoy a meteoric success in the early 1980's.
Mr.
Vaughan was a technical virtuoso who played with lightning speed and was a master of the explosive sound effects that had been pioneered by Jimi Hendrix, one of the most significant of many influences on his playing.


Review/Theater;   Indecency in the Eye of the Beholder
LEAD: The borderline between politics and political theater is crossed with polemical results in ''Indecent Materials,'' two one-act plays that opened last night at the Public Theater.
The plays, one dealing with AIDS, the other with Senator Jesse Helms's attack on the National Endowment for the Arts, come to New York from the Manbites Dog Theater Company of Durham, N.C.


Osel Tendzin, 47, Head of Tibetan Buddhists, Dies
LEAD: Osel Tendzin, the first Westerner to lead an international Tibetan Buddhist sect, died Saturday at Pacific Presbyterian Medical Center here.
He was 47 years old.


Bridge
LEAD: In two weeks, a handful of American pairs will go into action in the semifinal stage of the World Women's Pairs in Geneva.
Among them is likely to be the New York partnership of Jacqui Mitchell and Amalya Kearse, who won the title four years ago in Miami Beach.


Union Leader Fights to Control Rikers Ranks
LEAD: Struggling to maintain control over his 11,000-member union, Phil Seelig, the head of the Correction Officers Benevolent Association, escalated his war of words with Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday, accusing him of trying to divide the union along racial lines.


Spot Gold Plummets $26.70, Its Biggest Drop Since 1983
LEAD: Precious metals prices plunged yesterday, with gold bullion posting its biggest one-day drop since early 1983.
Platinum and silver prices also dropped, as investors and traders who bought bullion in reaction to Iraq's seizure of Kuwait on Aug. 2 sought to unload their holdings.


FOOTBALL: Jets Make Big Changes; Giants Simply Trim;   Morris and Anderson Survive Roster Cuts
LEAD: For the moment Joe Morris is still a Giant, and Ottis Anderson is one, too. ''Yes, I survived,'' Morris said today at his locker-room stall in Giants Stadium.


G.M. Says It Will Put Air Bags In All of Its U.S. Autos by 1995
LEAD: In a move destined to make air bags as common in cars as seat belts are now, the General Motors Corporation said today that it would install the bags on the driver's side in all its cars built in the United States starting in the fall of 1995.


Thai Prime Minister Shakes Up His Cabinet
LEAD: After persistent accusations of corruption within his ruling coalition, the Thai Prime Minister shuffled his Cabinet today, replacing the country's longtime Foreign Minister and bringing in some well-known technocrats.


BellSouth Plans Paging Venture
LEAD: BellSouth Enterprises and the Celltelco Nationwide Paging Partnership announced plans today to begin a joint nationwide paging service.


Clues in DNA And Isotopes Help Identify Ivory Origin
LEAD: In an effort to help regulate the trade in elephant ivory, scientists have devised two ways of identifying the origin of a tusk.
One method analyzes DNA; the other analyzes ratios of certain isotopes.


Metro Datelines;   Woman Is Charged In Beating of 2d Child
LEAD: A Yonkers woman who served two years in prison for beating her infant son so severely he was left partially blind and permanently disabled was charged yesterday with breaking the leg of another infant son, the Westchester District Attorney's office said.


Brush Fire Continues to Rage in Utah


SATELLITES KEEP WATCH ON THE DESERT
LEAD: IN the Middle Eastern war of nerves, the United States has one great weapon the Iraqis cannot match: a small fleet of spy satellites that can monitor Iraqi troop movements night and day, see through camouflage and hear the most sensitive battlefield communications.


Ex-Guinness Head Guilty in Fraud
LEAD: After a trial that lasted more than 100 days and raised serious questions about business ethics in the wave of takeovers that swept Britain in the 1980's, the former chairman of Guinness P.L.C. and three other prominent British business executives were found guilty today of charges stemming from the brewery giant's acquisition of the Distillers


U.N. Plan on Cambodia Reported
LEAD: After eight months of negotiations, the five permanent members of the Security Council agreed today on a proposal for a comprehensive political settlement to end the Cambodian civil war, diplomats said.


Greenpeace Faults U.N. Panel
LEAD: The environmental group Greenpeace sharply criticized a key United Nations conference on global warming today, saying plans to prevent climate change were inadequate.


Horse Racing;   Meadow Star Wins Spinaway
LEAD: Meadow Star won the Spinaway Stakes and Chris Antley won the riding title as the 122d season of racing reached the finish line today at Saratoga.


Efforts to Reshape Teaching Focus on Finding New Talent
LEAD: To become a teacher, John Davis gave up his job as a treasurer for the teamsters' union and took a pay cut of $10,000 a year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


Auto Racing;   CART Eliminates Detroit Race From 1991 Indy-Car Schedule
LEAD: The city of Detroit, which lost the Formula One auto race through its downtown streets in 1988, lost the race that replaced it for the last two years when Championship Auto Racing Teams voted this past weekend to drop the event from its 1991 Indy-car schedule.


Tiny Tonga Seeks Satellite Empire in Space
LEAD: Spurred by an ambitious American entrepreneur, a tiny South Pacific kingdom has started what amounts to a turf battle in space that could affect the future control of satellite communications between Asia and the United States.


The Press Corps in the Desert: Lots of Sweat but Little News
LEAD: At the combined Joint Information Bureau the sign-up sheets for today's press activities have long been filled.


OPEC Close To Raising Output Level
LEAD: The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is close to authorizing its members that can produce more oil to do so immediately, up to a total OPEC production ceiling of 22.5 million barrels a day.


Leonard Drops Title
LEAD: Sugar Ray Leonard renounced his World Boxing Council supermiddleweight title yesterday but left open whether he would continue his boxing career, the W.B.C. said.
A statement by the agency said that in a telephone call to the W.B.C.'s president, Jose Sulaiman, in Mexico City, Leonard said he had no plans to defend his title and offered his resignation on the ground that he was far below fight weight.(


69 Miners Dead, 100 Missing After Explosion in Yugoslavia


Accused Dodgers Settle
LEAD: Charges of simple assault filed against two Los Angeles Dodger players after a scuffle with a bartender at a nightclub in Pittsburgh were withdrawn yesterday after an out-of-court settlement was reached.


Treasuries Make Strong Advance
LEAD: A steep $4-a-barrel drop in oil prices and what traders saw as a slight easing of tension in the Persian Gulf served as a tonic to the credit markets yesterday, as prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose sharply and interest rates fell.


Hong Kong Journal;   Underpaid, Overworked and From the Philippines
LEAD: Every Sunday, tens of thousands of Filipino women stream into the heart of Hong Kong, filling the park in front of City Hall and spilling out along the sidewalks beneath the stylish skyscrapers and luxury hotels.


Increase City's Revenue Without Raising Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Agreement to Preserve Environment Provides Help for Madagascar
LEAD: IN the first debt-for-nature swap that cancels both trade debt and bank debt, the Central Bank of Madagascar has agreed to allow a private conservation group to pay $5 million of the Government's international debt in exchange for a commitment to try to save Madagascar's unique and endangered plants and animals.


Consumer Confidence Low
LEAD: Increasingly worried about the economy and pessimistic about the future, Americans are demonstrating the lowest consumer confidence since the nation was recovering from recession more than seven years ago, a business research group said yesterday.


Mary Papajohn Haris; Ad Executive, 51
LEAD: Mary Papajohn Haris, vice president of the Newspaper Advertising Bureau, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Anchor Savings Bank Fills President's Post
LEAD: The Anchor Savings Bank named Richard W. Dalrymple president and chief operating officer yesterday, almost 10 months after his successor, William G. Schneider Jr., resigned because his duties had been reduced after a management reorganization.


Dow Gains 78.71 Points, To 2,611.63
LEAD: Stocks demonstrated surprising bounce yesterday, gaining back much of last week's loss in the wake of a big drop in crude oil prices and tentative signs of a relaxation of tensions in the Persian Gulf.


Ireland Seeks Beef Pact
LEAD: The Irish Agriculture Minister, Michael O'Kennedy, will fly to Iran to try to receive a beef contract worth $150 million, the Prime Minister, Charles Haughey, said on Sunday.
The trip was approved by the European Community, which had banned such visits to Teheran last year because of Iranian death threats against the British author Salman Rushdie for his novel ''Satanic Verses.


Robber Shoots Robber as a Victim Ducks
LEAD: A man who the police believe is a member of the Vietnamese gang Born to Kill was accidentally shot and critically injured by another gang member during a robbery of a Chinatown produce store yesterday morning, the police said.


Over $2 Billion in Remics In 3 Fannie Mae Offerings
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, yesterday announced three real estate mortgage investment conduit security offerings totaling more than $2 billion.
Since the beginning of the year, the Congressionally chartered, privately owned company has sold more than $100 billion of these securities, known as


Chess
LEAD: ''Usually I have one good tournament a year.
A lot depends on the opponents' play.'' That was how Lev Alburt explained his winning the 1990 United States Championship, which ran from Aug. 5 to 16 at the Jacksonville Hotel in Jacksonville, Fla.


Choral Society Season To Present a Premiere
LEAD: The premiere of a work by Robert DeCormier, a festival of antiphonal and liturgical music and a performance of the Bach B-minor Mass are among the highlights of the New York Choral Society's 1990-91 season.
The group will sing three concerts, each to be conducted by its music director, John Daly Goodwin.


2-HomerS In the 4th For Burks
LEAD: Ellis Burks became the second player in Red Sox history to hit two home runs in one inning and Mike Boddicker extended Boston's shutout streak to 33Z innings in a 12-4 victory tonight over the Cleveland Indians.


Deals
LEAD:
Football


Metro Datelines;   Exxon to Improve Refinery Safeguards
LEAD: Exxon will spend $2.8 million to upgrade environmental safeguards at its Bayonne refinery to settle a 1989 lawsuit brought against the company for fouling the Kill Van Kull, officials said yesterday.


Better Prenatal Care Will Lower Baby Deaths;   Ratify Convention
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Man Who Told Hitler, 'No'
LEAD: ''Wer Ist Rodenkirchen?''


S.E.C. Acts in Fraud Case
LEAD: Federal securities regulators began an administrative action today against a Florida man accused of selling more than $4 million in unregistered or risky securities.


TV Deal for Expos
LEAD: In a bid to lure local investors, the Montreal Expos reached a $23 million agreement with Labatt's Brewery for television rights over the next five years.


Oil Company Profits Drop
LEAD: Despite a rise in revenues, the profitability of the 20 largest United States oil companies fell in the first half of the year, the American Petroleum Institute said on Sunday.


Airlines in Dispute
LEAD: American Airlines Inc. today accused United Airlines Inc. of misleading passengers in the Chicago market by filing false schedule information.
In a lawsuit filed in Federal court in Fort Worth, American said United schedules that take effect Oct. 1 reflect an as yet unapproved deviation from Federal guidelines governing takeoffs and landings at O'Hare International Airport.


Nissan and Hitachi
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company and the electronics giant Hitachi Ltd. are studying the possibility of creating a company to develop and manufacture information systems for automobiles.
Potential projects include facsimile machines, navigation systems, digital telephones and other devices to be built into Nissan automobiles, the companies said.


Wax, Not Flame, May Lure Moths
LEAD: IT is the warm wax rather than the flame that attracts male moths to lighted candles, a Florida biophysicist says.


Corrections
LEAD: Two picture captions on Sunday about the United Nations vote on the embargo of Iraq misidentified the Chinese chief delegate.
He is Li Daoyu; Li Luye was his predecessor.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
8.12
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.49
7.46
7.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.48
7.48
7.92
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.75
8.90
8.31
30-YR.


INSIDE
LEAD:
An AIDS Mystery Unravels
Scientists in the United States, Africa and Europe have found explanations for varying rates by which the AIDS virus spreads among heterosexual couples.
Science Times, page C1.
Sun Belt Boom Charted
The census shows just how big the Sun Belt migration of the 1980's was, with California gaining 23 percent and Florida 31 percent.


E-Systems Pleads Guilty In Army Radio Fraud
LEAD: The manufacturer of the Army's main combat radio, E-Systems Inc., pleaded guilty today to conspiring to defraud the Government by falsifying test results on the radios.
It agreed to pay $4.65 million in fines and restitution to settle the civil and criminal charges.


Rig Count Up in Week
LEAD: The number of rigs exploring for oil in the United States rose by 15 last week, to 1,002, according to the weekly report of drilling activity released today by Baker Hughes Inc.
A year ago the count was 909, the Houston-based oil toolmaker said.
At the height of the oil boom in December 1981, the rig count reached a peak of 4,500.


Pepsico Unit Plans 5,000 More Stores
LEAD: Kentucky Fried Chicken said it planned to double its fast-food restaurant chain in the United States in the next decade by opening another 5,000 outlets.
The company, which has been owned by Pepsico Inc. the food and beverage giant since 1986, opened its 5,000th outlet in United States in the San Francisco Bay area town of Daly


Risk in 'Boot Camp' Handling of Inmates
LEAD: To the Editor:


Scholastic Tests Show Decline in Verbal Skills
LEAD: The average verbal skills of college-bound high school seniors declined to their lowest level in a decade and the average mathematics skills showed no improvement, according to college admissions test data to be released today by the College Board, which administers the Scholastic Aptitude Test.


Stake in Measurex Increased to 14%
LEAD: Harnischfeger Industries Inc., a machine manufacturer based in Milwaukee, has raised its stake in the Measurex Corporation, a Cupertino, Calif., computer company, to 14 percent from 12.64 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Harnischfeger said it might acquire additional shares of


Northrop-McDonnell Fighter Plane Is Tested
LEAD: A team from Northrop and McDonnell Douglas made the first flight today of a version of the Air Force's advanced tactical fighter.


Iraqis Who Face Expulsion Show Defiance and Sadness
LEAD: Iraqi diplomats stationed in Washington responded with defiance and a touch of sadness today to the State Department's announcement that it would expel most of their colleagues from the Iraqi Embassy here.


Mathematical Brush-Up
LEAD: To the Editor:


Keating Quits Chairman's Job
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr., the chairman of the American Continental Corporation, former operator of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, resigned on Friday, a lawyer for Mr.
Keating has said.


Strong Mark Forcing Dollar to Move Over
LEAD: The German mark, the currency of the soon-to-be-united Germanys, is rivaling the dollar in its pre-eminent role in the world economy.


Reviews/Music;   The Madness of Berlioz's Requiem
LEAD: Meticulous, clear, lovers of light, the French hide somewhere a lust for exaggeration.
It is less advertised today, in a time when conservation at the gas tank and light socket is a virtue and grandeur for its own sake a sin of taste.


Patterns
LEAD:
Bergdorf Men


New Isolationism, Same Old Mistake
LEAD: So far, the chief critics of President Bush's bold military action in the Middle East are not liberals but conservatives such as Patrick Buchanan, Robert Novak and Edward Luttwak - yesterday's most redoubtable hawks and interventionists.
Strange new world!
The sudden disappearance of the cold war has pulled the rationale out from under the internationalist foreign policy that America has pursued for 40 years.


Dollar Drops Over 2 1/2 Yen, Falls to Low Against Mark
LEAD: The dollar fell more than two and a half yen in New York trading yesterday, as a slide in oil prices relieved some anxiety about the inflationary consequences of a prolonged Persian Gulf conflict.


By Design;   Caring for Your Cat Suit
LEAD: While the cat suit, or stretch bodysuit, is heralded as the base for the ''easy'' modern wardrobe, many women are discovering drawbacks to one-piece dressing.


Bush Facing Scrutiny by Congress On His Policy in the Persian Gulf
LEAD: After 25 days of remarkably clear sailing, perhaps unparalleled in a foreign policy crisis in the last quarter-century, President Bush is about to face closer scrutiny from Congress for his policy in the Middle East.


Note to Readers
LEAD: The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Steel Imports Decline by 9%
LEAD: Imports of steel into the United States fell by 9 percent in the first half of 1990, chiefly because of lower shipments from Japan, Western Europe and Brazil, the American Iron and Steel Institute said today.


Thomas Gillhooly, 79, Priest and Former Dean
LEAD: Msgr.
Thomas J. Gillhooly, a former dean at Seton Hall University and a retired priest, died on Saturday at Newton (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 79 years old and had lived in Sparta, N.J., since retiring in 1987.


End Comes With Hisses For Board Of Estimate
LEAD: The Board of Estimate died yesterday in much the manner that it lived for more than nine decades: with a series of protracted behind-the-scenes maneuverings, an emotional head-butting with the public and a quick vote.
In the end, a 7-to-4 vote approved a United Parcel Service proposal to expand a sorting plant in lower Manhattan by up to a million square feet.


Jordan Hopes U.N. Leader Cuts Tension
LEAD: Jordanian officials and others expressed hope today that Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations could create a breathing space in the Persian Gulf crisis where diplomacy might, at least for now, take center stage.


Triton Is Asked To Sell Three Units
LEAD: Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd., the Hong Kong investment arm of the New Zealand businessman Ronald Brierley, has urged the board of the Triton Energy Corporation to expand its restructuring plan to include the sale of three subsidiaries.
In a letter dated Friday, Robert G. Sutherland, Industrial Equity's president, said three oil and gas subsidiaries - Triton Europe, Crusader and Triton Canada Resources - ''are mature assets and not strategic.


Air Controller Fights Removal Over AIDS Drug
LEAD: When Ronald Wilkinson, an air-traffic controller at Dulles Airport in Washington, tested positive for the AIDS virus last year, he began taking AZT, a drug that helps delay the onset of AIDS in people, like Mr.
Wilkinson, who are infected with the virus but do not show symptoms of the disease.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: * Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., New York, promoted Jose M. de Lasa to vice president.


Police Dog Sniffs Out Suspect in Crime Spree
LEAD: A teen-ager was charged today in a robbery spree that began when he reportedly stole a car and ended after he was tracked down by a police dog, Suffolk County authorities said.


In Egypt, Some Skepticism
LEAD: Egypt is eager for a breakthrough but skeptical that King Hussein will find a formula that will persuade Iraq to move toward an early withdrawal of its troops from Kuwait, diplomats here said today.


Head of Otis Elevator To Become Carrier Chief
LEAD: The decision of William A. Wilson, the head of the United Technologies Corporation's Carrier Corporation unit, to take early retirement next spring has cleared the way for 41-year-old Karl J. Krapek to add another famous industrial name to his resume.


Marriott Notes
LEAD: A $150 million financing by the Marriott Corporation was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
The 9.125 percent senior notes due in 1993 were priced at par to yield 77 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
Underwriters said the issue was noncallable and rated A-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc.


Chargers' No. 1 Pick Is Reluctant, but Signs
LEAD: Junior Seau, the San Diego Chargers' top draft choice, became a reluctant millionaire yesterday, signing a five-year, $4.5 million contract that left him feeling underpaid.


Qatar Offering Installations To Foreign Forces in the Gulf
LEAD: Qatar joined other Arab countries in the Persian Gulf today in agreeing to make military sites available to the growing international force intended to deter an Iraqi attack.


Taylor Talks Continue
LEAD: Negotiations continued today between the Giants and Lawrence Taylor's agent.
But agreement on a contract extension for the holdout All-Pro outside linebacker did not seem imminent, although both sides indicated that could change quickly.


Conservatives Try for G.O.P. Inroads
LEAD: For the first time in 20 years, the Conservative Party and its candidate for governor are waging a serious statewide campaign with the goal of making deep inroads into the Republican vote.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-15
Iraq ordered its merchant ships not to resist if foreign naval forces try to board and inspect their vessels.
Although some called the move possibly conciliatory, President Bush said he saw no immediate hope for ''fruitful negotiations.''
Page A1


Interesting Way to See Interest On Money
LEAD: FOR anyone who often deals with matters of interest - interest on money, that is - PercentEdge can be a great timesaver.


Stevie Ray Vaughan Killed; Blues Guitar Player Was 35
LEAD: Stevie Ray Vaughan, one of the nation's top blues guitarists, and four other people were killed in a helicopter crash here early today after a performance with Eric Clapton at an outdoor theater.
Mr.
Vaughan was 35 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about new teachers graduating from the Teach for America program misidentified the university at which it was held.
It was the University of Southern California, in Los Angeles, not the University of California at Los Angeles.


Keeping Track of Time
LEAD: THE computer in our one-person office used to share the desk with an alarm clock, a desk calendar and a to-do list.
We added the alarm clock because we often forget to look at the desk calendar and to-do list in time to remember the scheduled events we so diligently write down.
It was not an elegant solution, but it was less expensive and intrusive than an office assistant.


Reviews/Music;   Final Weekend of Brahams at Bard College Festival
LEAD: Leon Botstein, a historian, the president of Bard College and the music director of the new Bard Music Festival, is a versatile man.
He may even be privy to some arcane science, or simply favored by the gods.


Bush's Boat Is Unfaithful
LEAD: The White House said that it had been nothing like a rescue at sea and that there had been no real danger to the leaders of the United States and Canada.


Dangers of Alcohol Get Hearing Among Blacks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quebec Premier Asks Army To Remove Indian Barricades
LEAD: Premier Robert Bourassa of Quebec asked the Canadian Army today to tear down fortified Mohawk barricades in the province after talks with the Indians broke down.


L.I. Backs Sludge Plan Despite Foes' Concerns
LEAD: Facing a Federal deadline to stop dumping sewage sludge into the ocean by the end of 1991, the Nassau County Board of Supervisors today authorized a $3.5 million plan to study building a plant to process sludge for burial in landfills.


Gas Up 5.2/ in 2 Weeks
LEAD: Gasoline prices rose more than a nickel a gallon at the pump in the last two weeks in a jump attributed to the effects of the Persian Gulf crisis, the Lundberg survey has found.
The average price for all grades of gasoline rose 5.2 cents, to $1.3316 a gallon, the survey of 13,500 gas stations reported on Sunday.


Fed Reports Bank Loan Tightening
LEAD: Reflecting a further tightening of credit conditions for commercial borrowers, the Federal Reserve Board said today that the nation's banks had increased restrictions on lending since May.


Thousands in South Africa Protest Ethnic Violence
LEAD: Tens of thousands of South African blacks stayed away from work today to commemorate the deaths of 515 people in factional clashes over the last two weeks that have drawn widespread accusations of police bias against the African National Congress.


Merrill Lynch Settles Claims From $250 Million '87 Loss
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and its insurers have quietly settled a set of claims filed after the brokerage firm stunned Wall Street by announcing in April 1987 that it had lost more than $250 million trading mortgage-backed securities, it was disclosed yesterday.


Arabs to Discuss the Crisis
LEAD: Arab diplomats here said a quorum had been reached today to call a disputed meeting of Arab League foreign ministers in Cairo on Wednesday to discuss the crisis in the Persian Gulf region.


July Home Resales Up 3.3%
LEAD: Sales of existing homes rose 3.3 percent in July, the second straight monthly increase, as mortgage rates dropped into the single digits, a real estate trade group reported today.


Personal Income Rose 0.6% in July
LEAD: Personal incomes grew six-tenths of a percent in July and consumer spending rose five-tenths of a percent, the Government said today in a report that some analysts said pointed to a stronger economy than expected.


Bush Gives Approval To TV Aimed at Cuba
LEAD: President Bush said today the Voice of America television station aimed at Cuban viewers has passed a five-month preliminary test and will become a permanent operation.


Chronicle
LEAD: On a different level of rock, DR.
MASANOBU SHINOZUKA of Princeton University will become the director of the National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research in Buffalo next month.
Dr.
Shinozuka, 59, will take a leave of absence from his position as Sollenberger Professor of civil engineering.


People
LEAD: *
Wayne Buder has been promoted to director of operations and Anne Spoon to director of business affairs at Young &amp; Rubicam/San Francisco.


Lost Opportunities Weigh Heavily on Road-Weary Mets
LEAD: The Mets were back home yesterday beating the bushes for a hitter to energize a comatose offense.
But they were physically hurt and artistically scarred, and admitted they were worried about their chances of catching the Pittsburgh Pirates in the last 37 games of the season.


Metro Datelines;   Robbery Intervention Leads to Man's Death
LEAD: A good samaritan was shot and killed early yesterday when he tried to intervene after a robbery, the police said.


Bills, Thomas in Accord
LEAD: Thurman Thomas, who led the National Football League in total yards from scrimmage last season, agreed to a contract extension yesterday evening with the Buffalo Bills and ended his holdout.


A Louder Voice for the Largest State
LEAD: In Presidential elections, California is regarded as a showdown state.
But in Presidential primaries, Calfornia hardly shows up.
The reason the most populous state has so little to say about who runs is simple: California's primary is held in June, after nearly all other states have voted and the race in both parties has largely been decided.


G.M. Is Selling Cars in Poland
LEAD: A Polish entrepreneur said today that he had opened the General Motors Corporation's first sales outlet here since World War II, selling Chevrolets, Pontiacs and Cadillacs on request.


Swiss Know How to Conserve Gasoline
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alternatives to Oil Move From the Lab to the Road
LEAD: IN the last 10 years, scientists and engineers have taken long strides toward the day when alternative energy sources can compete with oil from the Middle East, and some of the more promising alternatives are on the verge of practicality.


Time Warner Hires Editor
LEAD: The president of the Gannett News Service, Nancy J. Woodhull, has been named executive vice president and editor in chief at Time Warner Inc.'s Southern Progress Corporation.


Berra Will Still Watch The Yanks From Afar
LEAD: George Steinbrenner signed his resignation a week ago yesterday and tendered it the next day, leaving Yankee Stadium in other hands for the first time since 1972.


3 Bicyclists Hit by Lightning
LEAD: A surprising, fast-moving line of thunderstorms swept across the New York metropolitan area yesterday afternoon, disrupting traffic, causing a number of injuries and bringing the area within a fraction of its normal quota of rain for the year.
More thunderstorms were forecast for today.


Corrections
LEAD: A table with an article on Saturday about preliminary figures from the new census misstated the 1980 population and preliminary 1990 count for Oklahoma, and in some copies misstated the Census Bureau's 1990 estimate for the District of Columbia.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Jet Trails and Weather
Q. What is a jet trail made of? Does it have an effect on the weather?
A. ''A jet trail is basically composed of tiny ice crystals,'' said Lee Grenci, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University in University Park, Pa., ''and under certain circumstances it can have an effect on the weather.


British Hostages Seen On an Iraqi Broadcast
LEAD: Britons held hostage by Iraq appeared on Iraqi television today, addressing the camera with assurances to their families.


Satisfying Evening for Hawkins
LEAD: With a crowd gathered around him tonight in the Yankee clubhouse, Andy Hawkins said he would not attempt to dissect what has been a season of inconsistency and frustration.
If he did, he might never find an answer.


Skunk Musk's Secret
LEAD: A scientist has identified the components of skunk musk that cause its unpleasant smell to linger on the victims of a spraying.


Westair Merger
LEAD: Westair Holding Inc. said it would merge its two regional airline subsidiaries to cut costs.
The company said that after merging its NPA Inc. and Westair Airlines subsidiaires, it would lay off up to 75 people from its administrative staff.
NPA and Westair Airlines will function as two operating divisions of the same company.


Hall Still Eager for Trade
LEAD: Mel Hall, the Yankees' angry outfielder, renewed his demand for a trade today and made his feelings emphatic, meeting behind closed doors with Manager Stump Merrill in what appeared afterward to be a heated exchange.
When he left, Hall slammed the door to the manager's office, breaking the doorknob.


Mexico Sells Copper Mine
LEAD: Mexico sold the state-run Cananea copper mine today to a private Mexican and Belgian mining group, ending a two-year struggle to pass the giant operation into private hands.


Amid Jitters, Luminaries Hunt for Dialogue
LEAD: If you don't think it's tough holding a peace conference on ''resolving conflict through dialogue and democracy'' in the middle of war jitters, then just listen to this.


Corrections
LEAD: The Guide column of the Westchester Weekly on Sunday misstated dates for the International Auto Show at the County Center in White Plains.


Market Place;   Goals of T.C.I. In Cable Spinoff
LEAD: FEW company officials try to placate both Wall Street and Washington with the same maneuver.
But John C. Malone, president of Denver-based Tele-Communications Inc., is ready to try.


The Spread Of AIDS: A Mystery Unravels
LEAD: RESEARCHERS are finally finding answers to one of the biggest mysteries surrounding the heterosexual spread of AIDS: why some people contract the virus after a single act of intercourse while others have sex with an infected partner for years without using condoms and are not infected.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD
A Record 3 in a Row for Mota Rosa Mota of Portugal fought off Valentina Yegorova of the Soviet Union yesterday and won the gold medal in the women's marathon for a record third consecutive time at the European championships at Split, Yugoslavia.
The 32-year-old Mota, world and Olympic champion, opened a big lead from the start, but had to fight to stay ahead of Yegorova late in the 26-mile-385-yard race.


Dinkins Responds to 2d Boycott of a Korean Store
LEAD: The Dinkins administration scrambled yesterday to prevent a new boycott of a Korean-owned grocery in Brooklyn from resembling the bitter protests against another Korean-owned store in the borough, the Family Red Apple.


Salomon Stock Plan Set
LEAD: Salomon Inc. said yesterday that it had begun a plan under which employee compensation would include bonus awards in the form of shares of company stock.
Salomon said that to put its previously reported plan in effect, an independent trustee would purchase the shares on the open market.
The financial services company said it expected two million to three million shares would be required by the end of the year, with most to be acquired this quarter.


Jackson Aide Seeks Presidency in Third-Party Bid
LEAD: One of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's deputy campaign managers in 1988 announced today that he was organizing a third-party campaign to run for President himself in 1992.


A Safe Emergency Landing
LEAD: A United Airlines jumbo jet with 323 people aboard skidded to a safe emergency landing today at Los Angeles International Airport when it was unable to get its front landing gear down, the authorities said.
The passengers and crew safely evacuated the Boeing 747 by the emergency chutes.
The aircraft was on approach when the crew notified the tower it was unable to get the landing gear down, said Fred O'Donnell, spokesman for the Federal Aviation Administration.


Moscow Can Help
LEAD: The Security Council vote endorsing military enforcement of the U.N. blockade on Iraq was an impressive feat of diplomacy.
It not only strengthened the international coalition against President Saddam Hussein; it blocked the temptation of American hawks to plunge into war.


Oil Price Tumbles $4 a Barrel l
LEAD: The price of oil for October delivery tumbled $4 yesterday, to $26.91 a barrel, as commodity traders reacted to an apparent easing of tensions in the Persian Gulf and the possibility that some OPEC members would increase production.
The decline of 12.9 percent was the largest daily selloff in the crude oil futures markets in four years.


Business and Health;   Method of Pricing Drug Is Assailed
LEAD: IN the latest battle over drug pricing tactics, state and Federal officials, doctors and advocates for patients say one company is opening the door to a novel and inflationary marketing method.
The company, the Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corporation, requires patients who purchase clozapine, a promising treatment for schizophrenia, to buy a Sandoz-licensed program of weekly blood tests.


IRAQ IS SAID TO ORDER SHIPS NOT TO OPPOSE INSPECTIONS; U.S. EXPELS BAGHDAD ENVOYS
LEAD: Iraq has reversed orders to its merchant ships, instructing them not to resist if American or other naval forces try to board the vessels for inspections as part of the international blockade, United States officials said today.


Willard Beaulac, 91, Ambassador To Five Latin American Nations
LEAD: Willard L. Beaulac, a Foreign Service career officer who served as United States ambassador to five Latin American countries in the 1940's and 1950's, died Saturday at his home in Washington.
He was 91 years old.


BILL ON INTERNEES RAISES NEW ALARM
LEAD: A state legislator has raised concerns among Japanese-Americans in California by proposing a resolution to revise what schoolchildren are taught about the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II.


Review/Fashion;   The Galanos Style: In a Word, Glamorous
LEAD: James Galanos designs for wealthy women who go to luncheons and cocktail parties, dine at the finest restaurants and are invited to the best parties.
His clothes are rarely seen in business offices.
It isn't only because of the five-figure price tags, although they are daunting to all but the highest-paid executives.


Peacekeeping in a New Era: The Superpowers Act in Harmony
LEAD: The new spirit of unanimity at the United Nations reflects an emerging partnership between the two superpowers at the end of the cold war era.
But it also affirms a basic principle of international relations: collective action works when national interests coincide.
Sweeping Security


Distributor Withdraws Rap Album Over Lyrics
LEAD: The first major-label album by the Geto Boys, a rap group from Houston, was withdrawn last week on the eve of its release because its distributor, Geffen Records, would not endorse its explicitly violent and sexual lyrics.


What's the Best Answer? It's Survival of the Fittest
LEAD: A Seattle company has developed a personal computer program that ''evolves'' the best solution among various models run on spreadsheets by financial planners for businesses.
The new program, called Evolver, was developed by Axcelis Inc..
It works as an addition to a computer spreadsheet and finds the best answer by using principles taken from theories of natural selection and evolution.


Minimum Terms for Gulf Peace
LEAD: President Bush is right to be skeptical that Saddam Hussein will withdraw from Kuwait soon.
But he is also right not to block talks with Baghdad.
Washington cannot appear to oppose efforts to promote a peaceful resolution of the Persian Gulf conflict.
What it can do is stress the minimum conditions for a settlement - that Iraq withdraw from Kuwait unconditionally, and stop threatening the region.


Canada's Military Prepares Move Against Mohawks at Barricades
LEAD: The Canadian military stepped up pressure on Mohawk protesters today, sending fighter planes over fortified Indian barricades that it has been ordered to destroy.


A Spirited Capriati Survives Challenging Open Debut
LEAD: Jennifer Capriati's debuts are always auspicious, and the one she made last night at the United States Open, the event she describes as her ''hometown Grand Slam,'' proved no exception.


Washington Talk;   2 Roads Diverge in Task Of Measuring Poverty
LEAD: Poverty, like beauty, resides in the eye of the beholder.
Many Americans think they know it when they see it, but definition has proved difficult.


Police Display Confiscated Weapons


Army's Young Retiring After This Season
LEAD: Jim Young, who is largely credited with resurrecting the Army football program during his seven years as head coach, announced yesterday that he would retire after this season for personal reasons.
Bob Sutton, the defensive coordinator and an assistant to Young at Army since 1983, will take over as head coach in 1991.


Pretoria Raids Union and Seizes Leaders
LEAD: The South African police raided the Johannesburg headquarters of the country's biggest black labor federation and arrested several of its senior leaders today after union members reportedly abducted a black undercover agent, assaulted him and then forced him to address a news conference.


Regard for Own Species
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   IRAQI LEADER SAYS HE WILL FREE FOREIGN WOMEN AND CHILDREN
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq announced tonight that he would allow the departure of all foreign women and children, whom he had previously barred from leaving his country.


Corrections
LEAD: A graph on July 28, in the Business Day chart grouping headed ''Tracking the Markets,'' plotted the 150-day moving average incorrectly for the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index, and the panel has since been incorrect each Saturday.
Two readers' letters this week alerted The Times to the error.
A corrected graph appears today on page D8.


Confrontation in the Gulf: Neutralizing Iraq's Threat;   For Bush, Toppling Hussein Isn't Required
LEAD: While President Bush has made it clear that he would like to see Saddam Hussein removed from power, the Administration's diplomatic plan in the Persian Gulf rests on the more modest goal of forcing the Iraqi leader to withdraw his troops from Kuwait.


Dinkins to Ask State Inquiry On 2d Boycott
LEAD: Moving against the latest boycott of a Korean-owned grocery store in Brooklyn, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he would ask state officials to investigate whether the boycott violated state civil rights statutes.


Accounts
LEAD: *
United Parcel Service in Korea to McCann-Erickson Worldwide with a budget of $500,000.


Insider Case Reconsidered
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has decided to reconsider a ruling in an insider trading case that the Government fears could undermine its ability to prosecute white-collar criminals.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Reserves Face the First Major Test of Their New, Broader Role
LEAD: In calling up the reserves, President Bush is offering the first test of a military structure reorganized over the last two decades to give the part-time soldier a more central role in the application of American military force.


New Futures Rules Weighed
LEAD: Federal futures regulators announced plans today to explore changes for handling the liquidation of customer accounts, in the wake of the collapse of Stotler Group Inc.
The Commodity Futures


Review/Art;   San Francisco Revolution in Style Recalled in a Traveling Exhibition
LEAD: In the early 1950's, when Abstract Expressionism was first gaining widespread attention and the New York art scene was heating up, a quieter revolution was taking place in San Francisco.
The Abstract Expressionist style, already embraced by many of the city's forward-looking painters, was being abandoned for a return to figuration that was heavy on the use of raw color and muscular paint handling, and light on traditional drawing.


Matterhorn Victims Identified
LEAD: The police have identified an American mountain climber killed last week on the Matterhorn as Marc A. Swanson of San Francisco.
Mr.
Swanson, 37 years old, a mathematician working for the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, died Aug. 20 when a roped three-member party fell 240 feet while climbing down from the most famous peak of the Swiss Alps, the authorities said.


Blacks and Whites Share Control in Selma
LEAD: Blacks and whites have agreed to rotate control of the troubled Selma school system in an effort to end months of racial tension, protests, arrests and lawsuits.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Japan Putting Limits on Aid To Nations Hurt by Embargo
LEAD: Japanese officials attached new conditions today to the financial aid pledge Japan made last week to help Middle Eastern countries hurt by the trade embargo on Iraq.


Critic's Notebook;   British Playwrights Look Toward an Era After Thatcherism
LEAD: What will the left-wing playwrights of England do when they don't have Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to kick around anymore?
While Mrs.
Thatcher is still very much on the scene, the possibility of her political exit in a year or two, as predicted by public opinion polls, may already be sapping the energy from a theater whose most inventive recent writing has often been in red-hot opposition to her policies and values.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Illinois Tornadoes Kill 23
At least four tornadoes ripped across northern Illinois on Tuesday afternoon, causing widespread destruction and injuring 280.
Page A19.
Tomorrow's Teachers
Teacher training pits traditionalists, who accept the way schools are, against critics, who view training as part of school reform.


FIVE U.N. POWERS ANNOUNCE ACCORD ON CAMBODIA WAR
LEAD: The five permanent members of the Security Council announced an agreement today on the main elements of a wide-ranging political settlement that could end almost 20 years of civil war in Cambodia by transferring temporary control of the country to the United Nations.


James E. Snyder, 61, Art History Professor
LEAD: James E. Snyder, a professor and art historian, died Thursday at Mercy Hospital in Port Jervis, N.Y.
He was 61 years old and lived in Sunrise Lake, Pa.


Fluor Contracts
LEAD: The Fluor Corporation said it had won a contract worth more than $200 million to upgrade a Valero Refining and Marketing Company oil refinery in Corpus Christi, Tex.
The construction giant, based in Irvine, Calif., also announced a $50 million contract to engineer, build and manage a copper ore and molybdenum processing plant 200 miles north of Santiago, Chile.


Helping Prague: Act Two
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia has what the playwright Vaclav Havel would recognize as a second-act problem.
In February, the United States Congress applauded his personal account of Prague's democratic revolution.
The applause continued as Czechoslovakia and the U.S. signed an agreement to normalize trade and to make permanent most-favored-nation tariff cuts.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From Iraqi Chief's Remarks
LEAD: Following are excerpts from remarks by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq during a visit with Western hostages, as broadcast by CNN and recorded by Federal News Service, a transcription company.
Mr.
Hussein's remarks were translated by an Iraqi interpreter.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   For Freed U.S. Families, a Tearful Homecoming
LEAD: Relieved to be home but visibly anxious over the fate of husbands and fathers left in the Middle East, 47 women and children, the dependents of American diplomats who remain in Iraq and Kuwait, returned to a tearful welcome in the United States this evening.


Frederick Schang, 96, Manager of Musicians
LEAD: Frederick Schang, a founder and former president of Columbia Artists Management Inc., the world's largest classical-music management firm, died Sunday at Bethesda Memorial Hospital in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 96 years old, said his granddaughter, Gabrielle Schang of Manhattan.


Investment Group Raises USAir Stake
LEAD: An investment group led by the New York money manager Michael H. Steinhardt has raised its stake in the USAir Group to 9.46 percent from 8.38 percent, according to a Securities and Exchange Commission filing.


Dr. Hugh Banks, 61, N.Y.U. Assistant Chancellor
LEAD: Dr.
Hugh C. Banks, assistant chancellor at New York University, died on Saturday at New York University Hospital.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Protest Closes Liberty Island


Cable in Manhattan May Lose Channels With Sex Programs
LEAD: Two little-noticed provisions of the cable television franchise contract passed by New York City in June will likely banish nearly all sexually explicit programming, a much-debated broadcast feature in the city for 14 years, from television sets in Manhattan.


Catching The Bus To Victory
LEAD: He had not yet called Lufthansa to reserve a flight to Berlin.
There would be plenty of time for that later.
Aleksandr Volkov wasn't saying he was going to lose to Stefan Edberg in the opening round of the United States Open, and he wasn't saying he was going to beat the top-seeded player, either.


Notre Dame in Europe TV Deal
LEAD: A changing European television market has given Notre Dame a ''window of opportunity'' to sell its football broadcast rights to a London-based sports channel, Athletic Director Dick Rosenthal said today.


Resolution Trust Backed
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled today that the Resolution Trust Corporation can override Arkansas bank branching laws in approving the sale of a failed savings and loan association.
The 2 to 1 ruling by the


Americans Can't Afford to Alienate the Saudis;   'Crimes of the Tongue'
LEAD: To the Editor:


At Last, an End to Supreme Court Activism
LEAD: It is a measure of just how political the subject of the Supreme Court and the Constitution have become that it took Saddam Hussein to get Judge David Souter off the front pages.
Perhaps the only benefit we have reaped from Iraq's aggression is the sudden disappearance of opinion pieces by law professors who think that a man who is a bachelor and lives in a small town cannot have the proper ''sensitivities'' (read ''politically correct positions'') on women, minorities and the poor.


C.D. and Bank Funds Mixed
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were mixed for the week ended yesterday.
It was the second consecutive week in which yields ended mixed.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Bush Briefs Legislators on Crisis And They Back His Gulf Strategy
LEAD: President Bush won overwhelming support today from more than 170 members of Congress whom he briefed on the crisis in the Middle East, but several senior lawmakers expressed worry about the patience of the American people in supporting a strategy that may take months to work.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Oil Prices Moves Up
LEAD: The price of oil turned back up, rising nearly $1, to $27.88 a barrel, after falling $4 Monday.
Business Day, page D1.
OPEC delayed a final decision to increase production.
Page D19.
Many companies are gaining from the military buildup as they receive orders to supply bullets, bug spray and more.
Page


Stake Is Acquired In Georgia Gulf
LEAD: The New York investor Julian H. Robertson Jr. has acquired a 5.1 percent stake in the Georgia Gulf Corporation, an Atlanta-based chemical company.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Robertson said he had bought the shares as an investment.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If it's drug-related, I can count myself out.
If it's a domestic situation, I'm safe.
But with this, you wonder who's next.''
- Laura Dougherty, a University of Florida student who has moved back with her parents after a string of murders in Gainesville.
[A1:3.]


Fiat Planning 35,000 Layoffs
LEAD: Fiat S.p.A. announced today that it would temporarily lay off 35,000 of its 116,000 factory workers.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV has a new spokesman, according to a Reuters dispatch from Moscow.
He is VITALY IGNATENKO, editor in chief of New Times magazine, who was named assistant to the president and head of Mr.
Gorbachev's own personal press service.


4 Shot in a Brooklyn Grocery
LEAD: An 8-year-old girl, two women and a man were struck by shotgun pellets fired yesterday by men trying to rob a Brooklyn grocery, the police said.
Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, said two or three men entered the store at 39 Mott Avenue in the Brownsville section about 5:30 P.M.
One man man fired a shotgun, striking a 46-year-old man in the groin, a 33-year-old woman in the stomach and a 27-year-old woman in the leg.


MGM Grand Seeks A Buyer for Hotel
LEAD: MGM Grand Inc. said it had retained Bear, Stearns &amp; Company to help it sell the Desert Inn Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nev.
The 185-acre property, which includes a casino, 821-room hotel, golf course and 34 vacant acres on the Las Vegas Strip, could be worth more than $200 million, Bear, Stearns said.


Bailout Aide's $130 Billion Burden
LEAD: Elisabeth Spector is sitting on some $130 billion in financial securities, including one of the nation's largest portfolios of high-yield ''junk bonds.'' It is all for sale, too, and that makes Ms.
Spector, director of finance for the Resolution Trust Corporation, one of the most popular people on Wall


Suspect Taken off Respirator
LEAD: A suspected gang member, believed to have been shot accidentally by another gang member, died yesterday after being disconnected from a respirator at the family's request, hospital officials and the police said.


Battles So Real They Almost Hurt
LEAD: THE quest for another reality, more fabulous, more heroic - at the least, slightly more entertaining - has been an unending pursuit of humankind.
In a sense, this search has been epitomized by the movies, which often set forth a Technicolor world that seems more vivid than real life itself.
But always there were cracks in the reality, the screen ended somewhere and the auditorium - and you - began.


Americans Can't Afford to Alienate the Saudis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dow Edges Up 3.22 Points on Slow Volume
LEAD: Stock prices moved ahead slightly yesterday on slow volume as some investors and traders took to the sidelines.
Many said they were waiting for further signs as to where oil prices and the Middle East crisis might be heading.


Children Who Fear Guns Suffer Trauma
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oracle Stock Drops After Profits Restated
LEAD: Shares of the Oracle Corporation, a leading producer of data base management software, fell today in heavy trading after the company restated its earnings for three quarters in its fiscal year ended May 31.


Kodak Is Sued Over Test Dye
LEAD: Victims of a spinal nerve disease sued the Eastman Kodak Company and four other companies over a dye used for diagnostic purposes.
The 25 plaintiffs, who live in 18 states, contend they were not adequately informed of the dangers of Pantopaque, a dye that is injected into the spinal membrane.


To a Child, Staff of Life Is Surely Peanut Butter
LEAD: LIKE many primordial preferences, personal taste in peanut butter is idiosyncratic.


Angola Foes Continue Talks on Ending War
LEAD: Angola's leftist Government and the United States-backed rebels met again today to seek an end to the 15-year civil war.


Family Gets $1.7 Million for Stewart's Death
LEAD: Seven years after Michael Stewart died following his arrest by the transit police, his family has won a $1.7 million settlement of a damage suit.


Guilty Plea in Futures Case
LEAD: A soybean broker has changed his plea to guilty just two weeks before he was to have gone on trial in the Government's investigation of fraud at the nation's largest futures exchanges.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the criminal case arising from Guinness P.L.C.'s takeover of the Distillers Company in 1986 misstated a business affiliation of Roger Seelig, a defendant.
He is a former corporate finance director at the investment banking firm of Morgan Grenfell in London.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A third century mosaic panel depicting the head of Medusa will be returned to the Sparta Museum in Greece, from which it was stolen four years ago.
TORKOM DEMIRJIAN, president of New York's Ariadne Galleries, will present the panel during a ceremony Sept. 18 at the Greek Consulate General in New York.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From Bush's Speech on Iraq Policy
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's statement this afternoon on the Persian Gulf crisis, as recorded by The New York Times.


Contra Helper Who Was Seized Loses Suit for Pay and Damages
LEAD: Eugene V. Hasenfus, who helped ferry supplies to the Nicaraguan rebels until his plane was shot down, is due no damages because he knew the risks when he took the job, a jury decided Monday.


Offering a Compromise
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Local Units Called or Alerted
LEAD: The Pentagon has called up or put on alert the following units of the Army Reserve, the Naval Reserve, the Air Force Reserve, the Air National Guard and the Army National Guard in New York and New Jersey.
The Pentagon has said no units from Connecticut have been ordered to duty or put on alert.
The units and their duties:


Bias by Age and Credit Is Found in Car Rentals
LEAD: Eleven car rental companies in New York City were charged yesterday with discriminating against drivers who are younger than 21 or who do not have major credit cards.


Rinfret Attacks Cuomo's Flights As Free Junkets
LEAD: Attacking one of the more cherished spoils of incumbency, Pierre A. Rinfret today demanded that the State Board of Elections investigate Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's use of state aircraft for what Mr.
Rinfret described as ''political campaign activities.''


Option for Ex-Coach
LEAD: Kevin Mackey, Cleveland State's recently dismissed coach, will be considered for a possible treatment option instead of a conviction on state charges of using cocaine and driving under the influence.


Rebels Open New Front in Eastern Sri Lanka
LEAD: As Sri Lankan troops inch toward Jaffna Fort along a causeway carpeted with mines, Tamil guerrillas have opened another front on Sri Lanka's east coast, a Government spokesman said today.


Panic on a Florida Campus After 5 Are Slain
LEAD: Five college students have been slain in the past few days near the campus of the University of Florida, creating widespread panic that a serial killer is loose here.


SLOVAKS ARE HURT BY ARMS-SALES BAN
LEAD: A hand-scrawled, blue-and-white banner hangs limply over the arms factory entrance, proclaiming, ''Democracy.
Full Employment.
Economic Welfare.''


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bechtel Group, San Francisco, an engineering concern, said its Bechtel Houston unit had been awarded a contract to design and build a $140 million petroleum coke-sulfur recovery plant in Billings, Mont., for Conoco Inc., Houston, an oil and gas company.


Berio Opera Canceled
LEAD: Luciano Berio's opera ''La Vera Storia,'' which was to have had its American premiere in concert form at Carnegie Hall on Oct. 4, has been canceled.
Judith Arron, the executive director of the hall, attributed the cancellation to insufficient financial support in Italy.
All ticket buyers will automatically receive refunds.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JOHN LEE HOOKER, the legendary blues singer and guitarist who has recorded more than 100 albums in his 60 years in music, will be honored at an all-star concert in Madison Square Garden on Oct. 16.
The benefit performance is intended to raise funds for the Delta Blues Museum in his native Clarksdale,


U.S. TO SELL SAUDIS ADVANCED ARSENAL
LEAD: The Bush Administration has agreed to sell Saudi Arabia a $6 billion emergency package of advanced weaponry, including F-15 fighter planes, M-60 tanks and Stinger anti-aircraft missiles, Defense Department officials said today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Chesapeake Packaging Co., a division of the Chesapeake Corp., Richmond, appointed George F. Barnes president of the Display and Packaging Co., a unit in Sandusky, Ohio.


2 Merchant Bankers Leaving Merrill Lynch
LEAD: The two Merrill Lynch executives who guided the firm into merchant banking and ''junk bonds'' in the 1980's have resigned and will leave the firm on Friday.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Common Stock


Draft Revival Ruled Out
LEAD: Despite the largest American military buildup since the Vietnam War, the Government says it has no plans to revive the draft, which was abandoned 17 years ago.


Sabres' Top Pick To Miss 12 Weeks
LEAD: Brad May, the Buffalo Sabres' first-round selection in the 1990 National Hockey League draft, will be out for about 12 weeks after injuring a knee while trying out for the Canadian national junior team in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, the Sabres said today.


Ex-Trump Official Hired by Resorts
LEAD: Jack O'Donnell, who recently quit as president of the Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino, was named to run Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Baron EDMOND DE ROTHSCHILD, who heads an international banking and business empire, has chosen a rarely used means of satisfying an inheritance tax problem with the French Government: he is donating to the Louvre an art collection worth millions of dollars that will occupy a special wing to bear his name.


Advise And Lament
LEAD: Question: Having been stung by a bee moments before it was time to compose one of his twice-a-week effusions, what did the columnist contemplate?


Grain and Soybeans Mixed; Livestock Prices Are Down
LEAD: Grain and soybeans futures prices were mixed yesterday, and livestock and pork futures fell.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CINCINNATI (NL) - Recalled Terry McGriff, catcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
Sent Chris Hammond, pitcher, to Nashville.
FOOTBALL
ATLANTA (NFC) - Traded Ronnie Lee, offensive tackle, to the Seattle Seahawks for an undisclosed draft choice.
Placed Titus Dixon, wide receiver, on injured reserve and Malcolm Taylor, defensive lineman, on the waived-injured list.


About New York;   A Crescendo In the Concerto Of Competition
LEAD: ''This is the Grand Central station of the New York music world,'' Michael Meltzer said.
He said this in the Steinway &amp; Sons showroom on West 57th Street, between playing a Scarlatti sonata and telling how the man who invented the windshield wiper and the shock absorber also dreamed up something that made the moving parts inside a grand piano move faster.


In Moscow, More Fanfare Than Action
LEAD: YOUNG &amp; RUBICAM and Ogilvy &amp; Mather opened offices with great fanfare in Moscow 18 months ago, and while both have been busy learning the ins and outs of doing business in the Soviet Union, the one thing they have not been doing much of is creating advertising.


Giants Keep Morris (for Now), but Waive Thorson
LEAD: Joe Morris is still here with the Giants.
Lawrence Taylor is not here yet, but may be soon.
That is the latest report on the ins and outs of a team preparing for the start of the National Football League season in 12 days.


Sylvia Deutscher Kushner, Bassoonist, 65
LEAD: Sylvia Deutscher Kushner, a bassoonist who played with the New York City Opera and other orchestras, died on Monday at St.
Patrick's Hospital in Lake Charles, La.
She was 65 years old and lived in Lake Charles.
She died of lung cancer, her sister, Martha Deutscher, said.
A graduate of the Eastman School of Music in Rochester, Mrs.


Rates Mixed At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates at Citicorp's weekly auction of commercial paper yesterday were mixed, but the average rate on 91-day paper was the highest in more than a month.


RAGING UTAH FIRE SLOWED BY CREWS
LEAD: A brush fire that killed two firefighters, razed 19 houses and blackened more than 2,600 acres of timber and brush defied control today, although its progress slowed, officials said.


Salute to New York Schools Begins
LEAD: New York City's First Lady, Joyce B. Dinkins, sporting a button that said ''Make The First Day Second to None,'' began a campaign yesterday to encourage parents to accompany their children to school on the first day and to get businesses to give employees time off to do so.


First-Time Cooks, Don't Fret: Failure Is Just a Part of Fudge
LEAD: FUDGE may be what you do intentionally on your tax return, but fudge, the candy, began as a mistake: ruined caramel.
It happened in someone's kitchen in Maryland, or maybe in Michigan, around 100 years ago.
The confection was too good to throw away and good enough, in fact, to reproduce.


California Prices $700 Million Issue
LEAD: The State of California priced a $700 million general obligation bond issue through Bank of America, which made the best offer in competitive bidding yesterday.


I.B.M. Expands Sale of New PC
LEAD: Saying that the three-city introduction of its new PS/1 home computer in June had been well received by customers, the International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it had begun selling the computer nationwide.


American Acquisitions In Europe Up Sharply
LEAD: American acquisitions of European companies, led by the purchase by Philip Morris of the Swiss chocolate maker Jacobs Suchard, rose sharply in the second quarter after a sluggish performance in the first three months of the year.


Delay Sought In Meeting Of OPEC
LEAD: Iran's oil minister, Gholam Reza Aghazadeh, whose country said it would not support an accord proposed by a majority of the members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to raise output, asked today that the OPEC meeting be postponed a week to consider alternative courses.


Study Finds 'Uncounted' TV Viewers
LEAD: Hoping to attract more advertising to summer programs, ABC released a study yesterday that it said showed that millions of viewers watching television during summer vacations are not being counted in the regular Nielsen ratings.


Police Criticized for Idleness in Bulgaria Fire
LEAD: Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov today criticized police idleness at a fire that destroyed the headquarters of the governing Communist Party but said it might be ''the price we have to pay'' for avoiding clashes with protesters.


Economic Scene;   The Oil Reserve: Big Is Beautiful
LEAD: HOW much energy insurance is really enough?


Berkeley Feels Mideast Storm as a Ripple of Fear
LEAD: At the University of California campus that was once the national stage for student unrest, young men and women with bright eyes and promising futures warily started a new semester this week in a world poised for war.


Michigan Plan on Gasoline
LEAD: Michigan's Governor, James J. Blanchard, today proposed legislation that would bar the leading oil companies from running service stations.


Americans Can't Afford to Alienate the Saudis;   Emirs No Better
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ferranti Case Charges Filed
LEAD: A holding company headed by the former vice chairman of Ferranti International P.L.C., James Guerin, has been formally charged with participating in a scheme to defraud the British military contractor, the United States Attorney's office said today.


In Moscow, Cigarette Addicts Will Get Just Half Pack a Day
LEAD: Facing a tobacco shortage that has produced street protests and riots in some cities, Moscow's City Council decided today to ration cigarettes starting this Saturday.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.06
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.49
7.49
7.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.47
7.48
7.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.81
8.75
8.29
30-YR.


Rev. Paul J. Murphy, Pornography Opponent, 82
LEAD: The Rev.
Paul J. Murphy, a Jesuit priest who was a former president of Morality in Media, the national anti-pornography organization, died Monday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 82 years old and lived in Weston, Mass.
A spokeswoman for Morality in Media said he died of pneumonia.


Douglas Manager in Low Profile
LEAD: John Johnson, the manager of the heavyweight champion, James (Buster) Douglas, was out of character last week in Columbus, Ohio.


Paul Fitchen, 88, Dies; Ex-Banking Executive
LEAD: Paul Russell Fitchen, a former banking executive, died on Saturday at his home in Brewster, N.Y.
He was 88 years old.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Strains of Embargo on Iraqis Reported
LEAD: As a result of the trade embargo against Iraq, food lines are growing in Baghdad, hoarding is common, rationing has begun and the Government is urging Iraqis to make dates a larger part of their diet, a French newspaper reported today.


Keating Is Replaced
LEAD: A Federal judge today named Thomas Arnold, a Phoenix real estate developer, as the ''temporary responsible party'' for the American Continental Corporation, the parent of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association.
Mr.
Arnold will replace Charles H. Keating Jr., the chairman of American Continental who resigned.


Wine Talk
LEAD: THANKS in part to a weaker dollar, imports of French wines fell by 14 percent in the first half of 1990, which, in the simplest terms, meant that prices were too high.
If the usual round of autumn price increases arrives within the next two or three weeks, it will be tougher than ever to find good


Drug Chief Defends Abduction of Mexican Doctor
LEAD: The new head of the Drug Enforcement Administration today defended the agency's role in the abduction of a Mexican doctor charged in the 1985 torture and killing of an American drug agent in Guadalajara.


Arab-Americans Face Wave of Threats in U.S.
LEAD: Since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait nearly a month ago, several dozen Arab-Americans have reported being threatened with death or receiving harassing telephone calls in what leading Arab-Americans describe as a nationwide wave of anti-Arab sentiment.


In Uruguay, Two Leaders and Two Ideologies
LEAD: While Uruguay's national Government tries to push the country down the capitalist path, the popular Mayor of Montevideo is governing on a platform typical of the socialist world - before that world was turned upside down.


Eating Well
LEAD: A STUDY published Aug. 16 in The New England Journal of Medicine created quite a stir when it suggested that margarine, the spread that has been considered more healthful than butter, may actually raise cholesterol levels and increase the risk of heart disease.
Some headlines mistakenly simplified the message to, ''Is butter better?


Apple to Offer Cheaper Macintosh
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. will introduce a lower-priced line of Macintosh personal computers in October.


Building a More Fuel-Efficient Jet
LEAD: Concerned about sharply higher oil prices, aircraft manufacturers are taking a fresh look at technology that can help planes squeeze more miles out of a tank of jet fuel.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: TRACK AND FIELD
East German Sweep


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 24
Aug. 17
Aug. 25
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
210.9
214.0
223.5
Distillate stocks
124.0
121.6
116.3
Crude imports, daily
6.6
6.5
6.5
Product imports, daily
2.2
3.2
2.2
Crude stocks
376.6
375.7
337.3
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
92.4
92.3
91.2


Review/Television;   New Breed Of Blacks On Politics And Power
LEAD: With images of racial polarization dominating the tube, a documentary about black politicians who have won support from sizable numbers of white voters comes as a relief and a corrective. ''Politics: The New Black Power,'' tonight at 8 on Channel 13, focuses on three men who are making it in the mainstream: Gov.


Jury Orders Ernst to Pay $18.9 Million
LEAD: A Honolulu jury has decided that the accounting firm of Ernst &amp; Young should pay $8.9 million in actual damages and $10 million in punitive damages to a group of tax-shelter investors.
The jury has found that the investors relied upon fraudulent financial forecasts, reviewed by Ernst &amp; Young, before they put $8.9 million into various partnerships that turned out to be worthless.


Martha Dodd Stern Is Dead at 82; Author and an Accused Soviet Spy
LEAD: Martha Dodd Stern, an American author who in the 1930's and 1940's wrote popular books about Nazi Germany and later fled behind the Iron Curtain when she and her wealthy husband, Alfred K. Stern, were accused of being Soviet spies, died on Aug. 10 in Prague, friends reported.
She was 82 years old and had lived in the


New York Post to Discuss Cuts With Unions
LEAD: Peter S. Kalikow, owner of the financially beleaguered New York Post, has called a meeting next week with leaders of the paper's unions to request significant cost cuts that he says are needed to avoid the possibility of closing the paper.


Mobilizing for Desert Warfare
LEAD: As American soldiers mobilize in the Saudi Arabian desert, hundreds of American companies are mobilizing in their own way to deliver to the armed forces everything from bullets to bug spray.
While no one is hoping for a war, many companies have a chance to reap unexpected profit from the military buildup.


Chinese Execute an Official Convicted of Taking Bribes
LEAD: A Government official convicted of taking bribes was one of four people put to death recently, official reports said today.


Seeing Meat as Wasteful
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Shuler and Vick Won't Be Starting Against Bucs
LEAD: In this preseason of surprises for a Jets team in ferment, Coach Bruce Coslet has waited until virtually the last moment to make changes that could drastically revamp the club.


Warning Strikes Hit 10 Cities in East Germany
LEAD: About 45,000 municipal workers in several East German cities walked off their jobs for a few hours today in warning strikes for better wages and job security in a united Germany.


Rates Move Up as Oil Prices Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities yesterday continued to move in tandem with world petroleum markets, as a small rise in oil prices prompted credit market participants to sell notes and bonds, lifting interest rates.


Cops on Bikes Can Fight Traffic Mayhem
LEAD: To the Editor:


Deadly Error Halts Sales of Larousse
LEAD: In a country that takes its champignons seriously, Larousse, the venerable French publishing house, has suspended sales of the new edition of its famous dictionary because the book errs in saying that some highly poisonous wild mushrooms are harmless.


2 More Livery Drivers Wounded in Shootings
LEAD: Two livery-cab drivers were shot early yesterday, one in Brooklyn and one in the Bronx, the police said.
No arrest was made in either shooting.


Corrections
LEAD: The ''Week in Connecticut'' column of the Connecticut Weekly on Sunday misstated the admission policy for the Eli Whitney Folk Festival at Edgerton Park in New Haven on Saturday.
It is not free; tickets are $9 in advance and $12.50 at the gate.


Corrections
LEAD: An article and an illustration in Science Times yesterday about alternative energy sources misidentified the maker of an electric-powered van that is to go into limited production next month.
It is Vehma International Inc. of Markham, Ontario, a subsidiary of Magna International Inc. of Canada.
The General Motors Corporation supplies the van bodies.


More Soviet Oil Urged
LEAD: Eastern European countries today asked Moscow to catch up on its contracted deliveries of oil in the face of rising world oil prices and falling supplies from the Soviet Union.
The request came at a quarterly meeting of senior oil officials from the Soviet Union, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Poland.


Papal Statement Could Shake the Church
LEAD: Pope John Paul II is completing a major statement on Roman Catholic moral teaching that is already generating rumors and anxiety among Catholic theologians.
Some suggest - and a leading Vatican official denies - that it will declare the church's condemnation of contraception to be infallible teaching.


New York City In Violation On Diesel Soot
LEAD: New York City, already plagued with one of the nation's worst smog and carbon-monoxide problems, is also violating the Federal health standard for the soot and dirt emitted by the diesel engines of buses and trucks, new government data show.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Jesse Jackson Visits Jordan On Way to Meet Iraqi Chief
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson arrived in Jordan today on his way to Iraq to meet President Saddam Hussein.


Books of The Times;   Italian Fiction Over Four Decades
LEAD:
Name and Tears and Other Stories
Forty Years of Italian Fiction
Edited and translated by Kathrine Jason
231 pages. Graywolf Press. $17.95.


Former Head of Guinness Is Given 5-Year Jail Term
LEAD: The former chairman and chief executive of Guinness P.L.C. was sentenced today to five years in prison for his role in one of Britain's biggest financial scandals in decades.


Falcon's Season Ends
LEAD: Joe Falcon, the world's fastest miler this year, will miss the rest of the track season because of a tear in the sheath of his left Achilles' tendon.


Alzado Goal Thwarted
LEAD: Lyle Alzado's dream of returning to the National Football League at the age of 41 ended yesterday when the Los Angeles Raiders announced his retirement.


Alternative to Caesarean Grows More Popular
LEAD: An increasing number of pregnant women are giving birth through vaginal delivery after a previous Caesarean section, partly because more doctors say they are discussing this option with patients, according to a national survey released today.


Budapest Journal;   Comes the Evolution, a Nation of Shopkeepers
LEAD: For as long as anyone can remember, there has been a grocery store at 13 Szilagyi Erzsebet Avenue.
Until December 1988, it was run by the state, which ran it in the red.


Teufel's Shot Leads Mets Past Padres
LEAD: The shot to left was gone.
Tim Teufel, watching as the ball smashed off the first deck of seats, nearly crashed across first base, then downshifted deliberately, did not trip, and safely touched each bag.
At last, his cleats hit the plate as he completed probably the most exquisite 360 feet he has traveled in a disorienting season.


Jordan Tries To Cope With a Flood of Refugees


People
LEAD: *
Bill Dunlap, chief executive officer of Campbell-Mithun-Esty Advertising, has been named chairman of the central region of the American Association of Advertising Agencies.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-17


Fielder on List For Japan Visit
LEAD: Cecil Fielder, who hit 38 home runs for the Hanshin Tigers of the Japanese league last season and has 41 for the Detroit Tigers of the American League this season, will be heading back to Japan as part of a major league team that will play an eight-game series against Japanese all-stars beginning Nov.


Bridge
LEAD: Strong unbalanced hands often present major bidding problems when the response is one no-trump.
Even when, as in South's situation in the diagram, the suit to be played is obvious, the right level can be very difficult to determine.


In a Maine Kitchen, The Style Is Italian
LEAD: THE narrow, twisting road down to Peter Cox's house at the end of Indian Point in this little community is like a path back to another era.
It dips and winds between salt marshes on one side and the long reach of Sagadahoc Bay on the other.
The tang of the ocean is all around, and when the car stops to let an ancient truck cross an even more ancient bridge, the clean smell of the tide drifts through the window, mingling with the fragrance of balsam fir from the woods and rock roses along the shore.


Slain Hospital Police Officer Is Buried


Old Republic Appoints New Chief Executive
LEAD: The Old Republic International Corporation announced yesterday that A. C. Zucaro had been appointed chief executive of the insurance holding company based in Chicago.
Mr.
Zucaro, 51, succeeds William R. Stover, 67, who had served as chief executive for the last 14 years.


ABOUT EDUCATION
LEAD: Five years ago, a group of teachers met on this idyllic site in the Green Mountains to recall how six weeks of intensive study here at Bread Loaf's School of English, a graduate division of Middlebury College, had changed their way of teaching.
But while praising the Program in Writing for what it taught, they also celebrated the liberation it offered from their isolated lives in rural communities or small towns.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: SUMMER'S finale coincides with a finish-line rush from my garden, yielding a plethora of zucchini, squash, tomatoes, peppers and more.
Many home gardeners become diligent canners when Labor Day approaches.
I do not have the time or patience to do that.
Most of my excess produce becomes my neighbors' windfall, and


U.S. Foreign Trade Deficit Declined by 14% in Quarter
LEAD: The gap between United States imports and exports shrank to its lowest level in six and a half years between April and June, the Commerce Department said today, but the improvement was largely caused by cheaper oil imports that have since shot up in price.


Editorial Notebook;   The Estimate Board's 'Ritual Populism'
LEAD: As New York City's doomed Board of Estimate gathered this month for its last marathon series of hearings and meetings, Mayor David Dinkins, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman and some others on the eight-member board actually showed up.
That was notable: in recent years, elected officials took to sending surrogates to listen to the speakers at public hearings and to cast votes according to their masters' wishes.


Syracuse Is Facing Puzzle at Quarterback
LEAD: Two days before Syracuse opens its 101st football season with the challenge of facing Southern Cal in the eighth Kickoff Classic at Giants Stadium, two quarterbacks wonder which one will start.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: THE scene is the garden of a Greenwich Village cafe.
A profusion of large planters overflow with a lavish display of riotously shaded flowers.
At a corner table, two petite women survey the scene.
Finally, one of the women releases a deep sigh and confides:


Early Exit for Edberg


Church Allowed to Exhume Body of Candidate for Saint
LEAD: Justice Phyllis Gangel-Jacob of State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday gave the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York permission to exhume the remains of Pierre Toussaint, a former slave, as one of the first steps toward canonizing him as the first black American saint.


Virginia Beach Journal;   City and Black Students Plan Holiday Together
LEAD: A year after racially charged rioting on the waterfront here left a hundred stores looted, dozens of people injured and scores more arrested, this resort city says it is trying to do the right thing.


Red Sox Rally in 9th To Win 5th Straight
LEAD: Mike Greenwell had three hits, including a two-run triple that drove in the tying and lead runs in the ninth inning, as the Boston Red Sox beat the Cleveland Indians, 6-5, tonight and continued to pull away in the American League East.
It was the Red Sox's fifth straight victory and gave them a six-game lead over


Philadelphia Is Delaying $400 Million Note Offering
LEAD: A $400 million short-term note sale by the City of Philadelphia has been delayed for at least two weeks, and because of numerous problems, the issue may not come to market until the end of September.


Mozambique Moving to Democracy
LEAD: Mozambique, once a loyal follower of the Marxist-Leninist line, has gone as far and perhaps further than any sub-Saharan African country on the path toward multi-party democracy.


Cummins Engine Slows Production
LEAD: The Cummins Engine Company said it would reduce engine assembly to one shift at its headquarters operation here.
Cummins said North American demand for heavy-truck engines had significantly declined because of the prevailing economic uncertainty and the Persian Gulf crisis.


Devils Sign Ysebaert
LEAD: Paul Ysebaert, the American Hockey League's most valuable player last year, has signed with the Devils, the team announced yesterday.


Americans Can't Afford to Alienate the Saudis;   Sophisticated Citizens
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Ends Mixed in U.S.; Gold Prices Continue to Fall
LEAD: The dollar turned mixed in domestic trading yesterday after finishing mostly higher overseas, but much of the day's activity centered on other currencies.


Saudi Force's Chief Vows Iraq's Leader 'Will Be Destroyed'
LEAD: The newly appointed top commander of the joint Arab force here said today that the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, would be swept aside unless Iraqi troops left Kuwait.


Dr. Selvan Davison, 78, Professor at Mt. Sinai
LEAD: Dr.
Selvan Davison, a rheumatologist who was chief of the arthritis clinic at Mount Sinai Hospital and clinical professor of medicine emeritus at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, died on Sunday at the hospital.
He was 78 years old and lived in Bayside, Queens.
He died of leukemia, his family said.


Defense Considered By Kansas Utility
LEAD: The Kansas Gas and Electric Company said it might explore a merger or recapitalization to thwart a hostile $857 million offer from the Kansas City Power and Light Company.
The disclosure in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission was the first in which the Wichita, Kan., utility said it might talk to third parties to fight the Kansas City


Boren Is Renominated In Oklahoma Primary
LEAD: Senator David L. Boren easily defeated two challengers in Oklahoma's Democratic primary on Tuesday.


Henry Duncombe, 76, Former G.M. Executive
LEAD: Henry L. Duncombe Jr., a retired vice president of General Motors, died on Aug. 18 at Baptist Memorial Hospital in Miami.
He was 76 years old and had homes in Key Biscayne, Fla., and Southampton, L.I.


Market Place;   A New Way to Bet on 1995 Price of Oil
LEAD: Wall Street, it is said, is an odd sort of market, a place where demand regularly rises as the price goes up.


G.E. Engine Order
LEAD: The All Nippon Airways Company of Japan has ordered $580 million worth of aircraft engines from the General Electric Company, G.E. said.
The airline ordered G.E.'s CF6-80C2 engines for 17 Boeing 747's.
With the new order, G.E. will supply the engine to 43 All Nippon 747's.
All Nippon will take delivery of its first 747 later this month, with deliveries for the new order scheduled to begin in 1995, G.E.


Clothes Make the Cocktail Party, Too
LEAD: Bergdorf Goodman held a cocktail party last night to celebrate the opening of its swank new men's store.
A lot of suits showed up.


William Leslie Jr., 71, Insurance Executive
LEAD: William Leslie Jr., an insurance executive who was general manager of the National Bureau of Casualty Underwriters and the National Council on Compensation Insurance, died Aug. 22 at the Villa Pomerado nursing home in San Diego at the age of 71.
He lived in San Diego and was a former resident of Bronxville, N


TORNADOES KILL 23 IN CHICAGO REGION
LEAD: Tornadoes ripped through several northern Illinois towns today, tossing automobiles into the air and flattening an apartment complex, a high school and at least 90 homes.
At least 23 people were killed, and hospitals said 280 or more were injured.


Ware Reports to Camp
LEAD: Andre Ware, the Heisman Trophy winner from the University of Houston, joined the Detroit camp Monday night after he signed a four-year contract with the Lions.
The contract will pay Ware $1.15 million a year, plus a $2 million signing bonus. (AP)


Teacher Education: Realities of Present And Dreams of Future
LEAD: Tomorrow's teachers sit at their desks at Illinois State University, listening as a classmate explains how he would teach penmanship.


Long Island Flounders in Closing Landfills
LEAD: Almost seven years after a New York law ordered Long Island to close most landfills by the end of 1990, a third of the Island's towns and cities do not know how they will meet the approaching deadline.


Perfect Attendance
LEAD: One runner who plans on being in the Mercedes Mile is John Walker, who has competed in every one of the nine other one-mile races down Fifth Avenue and won it in 1984.
Walker announced his entry yesterday.
In 1975, Walker was the first person to run the mile in less than 3 minutes 50 seconds.


Oil Prices Increase by 97/ a Barrel
LEAD: Oil prices turned up yesterday, with the contract for October delivery rising 97 cents, to $27.88 a barrel, as traders searched for a new balance in the market after Monday's $4 plunge, to $26.91.


California Sees Housing Boom Become Slump
LEAD: On front lawns in many cities along the California coast, the for-sale sign has become almost as common as the palm tree, and to some sellers seemingly as permanent.
After several years of breathtaking price increases and demand so strong that houses were snapped up within hours of being listed, California's giant real estate market has slowed drastically.


Arthur Rich, 52, Dies; Researcher in Physics
LEAD: Arthur Rich, a professor of physics at the University of Michigan, died Saturday at his home in Ann Arbor at the age of 52.
His family said he died of a brain tumor.


Three 'Mmmmm's and One 'Yuck'
LEAD: CHILDREN are thought to be the taste makers when it comes to peanut butter, so last week at the House of Little People, a child-care center in the Yorkville section of Manhattan, 14 children were asked their impressions of four peanut butters - the three top-selling national brands and Krema, a smooth natural peanut butter sold in the


Volkov Gives No. 1 Edberg a First-Round Exit
LEAD: Floundering like a fish out of water on a hot, dry day, Stefan Edberg found himself quickly ambushed and ultimately hogtied on the Stadium Court at the United States Open yesterday as he was defeated, 6-3, 7-6, 6-2, by Aleksandr Volkov, an unheralded baseliner who wears the No. 3 ranking back home in the Soviet


As Others Fold, One Show Just Keeps Tapping Along
LEAD: Why is this weekend on Broadway different from all other weekends?
Because three Tony Award winners are closing, two of them prematurely by industry standards.


Food Notes
LEAD:
An Annual Delectation


Civil War in Liberia Threatening To Divide West African Neighbors
LEAD: The eight-month-old civil war in nearby Liberia is threatening to become a wider conflict as neighboring West African countries begin to take opposing sides, African and Western diplomats said today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
OIL AND THE MIDEAST
Oil prices turned up, with the contract for October delivery rising 97 cents, to $27.88 a barrel, as traders searched for a new balance in the market after the $4 plunge on Monday. [Page D1.]
Hundreds of U.S. companies are mobilizing in their own way to deliver everything from bullets to bug spray to the armed forces in the Mideast.


Bodily Intrusions
LEAD: Allison and Jimmy Curran are 3-year-olds, too young to make any but the simplest decisions.
Any problem knottier than, say, choosing a television channel must be solved by their mother, Nancy Curran.
Their father, Tamas Bosze, has had little say in their lives.
Indeed, he was the object of a successful paternity suit brought by Ms.


Why Holocaust Art Deserves Public Funds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about attracting and training teachers misstated the name of a recruiting organization.


Suppliers' Employees Sent to the Mideast
LEAD: Thousands of civilians employed by military contractors are being sent to the Middle East as part of the military buildup in and around Saudi Arabia, industry and military officials say.


Corrections


Barfield Sparks Yanks In Rout of the Orioles
LEAD: Jesse Barfield made his feelings known in late July, but things have changed.


Ceausescu's Snipers Still at Large, Ex-Officials Say
LEAD: Some members of elite sharpshooting units of the secret police force of the Communist dictator Nicolae Ceausescu are still at large in Romania, two recently retired Government officials say.


Pop Life
LEAD:
Rocking Rabble-Rouser


Critic's Notebook;   Comedy, Heartbreak And Offbeat Casting On London Stages
LEAD: Two summers ago the Gate Theater, Dublin, jolted New York audiences with the festering, dark-brewed, tragic reality of its ''Juno and the Paycock,'' a brief Broadway tenant courtesy of the New York International Festival of the Arts.
Now the Gate is offering Londoners an equivalent thrill with its visiting production of ''The Three Sisters'': a stunning collaboration between Ireland's acting dynasty -Cyril Cusack and a trio of his daughters - and the English director Adrian Noble, the newly named artistic leader of the Royal Shakespeare Company.


A Bigger Rise In Food Prices
LEAD: Food prices are likely to rise as much as 7 percent this year because of a citrus freeze in Florida last winter and disruptions in milk and red meat production, the Agriculture Department said on Tuesday.


Loose Ends in Gulf Policy
LEAD: Despite President Bush's nearly flawless handling of the Persian Gulf crisis, several key issues still dangle dangerously, unresolved or unclarified.


California Closer to Its First Execution Since 1967
LEAD: California moved closer to its first execution in nearly a quarter of a century today when a divided Federal appeals court upheld the death sentence of Robert Alton Harris, who was hours away from execution at San Quentin prison last April when his sentence was stayed.


Oil-Freeze Plan in Italy
LEAD: Italian finance officials proposed today that prices of petroleum products be frozen for three months to combat rising inflation resulting from the Gulf crisis.
The Treasury Minister, Guido Carli; the Finance Minister, Rino Fomica, and the Budget Minister, Paolo Cirino Pomicino, will ask the Cabinet on Friday to approve a freeze that would be in effect from September through November.


5,000 Positions To Be Cut at Volvo
LEAD: The Swedish car maker Volvo said it would cut 5,000 jobs this year and next because profits in the first six months of 1990 have declined by half.
The company has already dropped 1,000 employees in the car and truck sector this year and plans to reduce the work force by another 4,000 through 1991.


Metro Matters;   2 Unlikely Allies Strike Deal On Office Tower
LEAD: Lost amid the billion-dollar development deals approved by the Board of Estimate in its final meeting, which ended on Monday, was a modest proposal for a 28-story office building on West 34th Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues.


Elster Sidelined For Rest Of Season
LEAD: Kevin Elster, one of the National League's premier defensive shortstops, whose absence because of injury has provoked the Mets into an array of dramatic lineup shuffles, will undergo surgery to repair his right shoulder next week and be lost for the season.


In Pakistan, Martial Law Waits to Return
LEAD: To the Editor:


Raymond St. Jacques, an Actor Of TV and Films, Is Dead at 60
LEAD: Raymond St.
Jacques, an actor who helped lower racial barriers for blacks in television and films, died Monday in Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 60 years old and lived in Beverly Hills.


Books of The Times;   Breathing Under Water in Poland
LEAD:
Breathing Under Water and Other East European Essays
By Stanislaw Baranczak
Harvard University Press. $22.50. 258 pages.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Apache Corp., Denver, an oil and gas company, said it would buy certain oil properties of CNG Producing Corp., a unit of Consolidated Natural Gas Co., Pittsburgh, for $23.5 million.


Grace Eddy Peabody; Artist, 66
LEAD: Grace Eddy Peabody, an abstract artist, died on Aug. 19 at her home in San Francisco, where she had lived for the last 14 years.
She was 66 years old.
Mrs.
Peabody died of cancer, her son, Reese, said.
She was a native of West Hartford, Conn.
She graduated from Mount Vernon Seminary in Washington and studied at the Museum of Modern Art.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Travellers Corp., Warrington, Pa., an insurance company, appointed John Riordan president and chief operating officer.
Thomas Parry was named vice president of product development and compliance.


The Hate Conference
LEAD: Somewhere in the world may be another person who could have conceived and organized this extraordinary Oslo conference, but the name does not come to mind.


Campbell Kids to Utter First Words Since 1958
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company is giving the Campbell Kids speaking roles in a commercial for the first time since 1958.


A Long, Hot Day at the Hilton as Fire Cuts Power
LEAD: A smoky electrical fire in the basement of the New York Hilton, the city's largest hotel, forced a power shutdown at the 45-story building for much of yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Sylvia Deutscher Kushner, a bassoonist with the New York City Opera, omitted a survivor.
He is her husband, William Kushner.


Judge Orders Tuna Import Ban Over Dolphin Kill
LEAD: A Federal district judge has ordered a ban on imports of tuna fish caught by five nations until they can show that they are not killing more dolphins than United States law allows.


Fujitsu Introduces Two Supercomputers
LEAD: Fujitsu Ltd., Japan's biggest computer maker, today introduced two powerful supercomputers and an operating system that can run all the company's computers.


Kickoff Classic May Hold Answers
LEAD: After a cross-country journey that has little to do with their traditional goal of a Pacific-10 Conference championship, will the Southern California Trojans show that they want to be here?


Revamping Approved, Resorts Names Officer
LEAD: Resorts International Inc. announced yesterday that a Federal Bankruptcy Court in New Jersey had approved its plan to emerge from bankruptcy law protection.
In a separate move, the company said it had named Jack O'Donnell, the former president and chief operating officer of the Trump Plaza hotel and casino in Atlantic City, as executive vice president and chief operating officer of Resorts' Atlantic


2 Surprises: Diane Suzanne Wins, and Charon Doesn't
LEAD: If the rest of the races at Belmont Park this fall are anything like those on yesterday's opening card, the meeting is going to seem a lot longer than 54 days.


Leading Indicators Unchanged
LEAD: The Government's main guide for forecasting the direction of the economy was unchanged in July from June, the Commerce Department said today, and economists predicted it would soon point downward because of the Persian Gulf crisis.


Precious Metals End Slide; Grain and Soybeans Drop
LEAD: Precious metal futures halted their plunge on the Commodity Exchange in New York yesterday, largely disregarding a sharp drop in energy futures prices.


In Pakistan, Martial Law Waits to Return;   Elections Are Pledged
LEAD: To the Editor:


Britain to Allow Appeal for 6 Convicted of 1974 Pub Murders
LEAD: The British Government said today that it would send to the Court of Appeal the case of six men who were convicted of murdering 21 people in the bombings of two pubs in Birmingham, England, in 1974.


Treasury Bonds Post Solid Gains
LEAD: Interest rates fell and the price of Treasury securities rose yesterday, with the benchmark long bond jumping more than a point.
The gains were fueled by a drop in oil prices and rising hopes among market participants that the Federal Reserve Board may move to ease short-term interest rates soon, perhaps by the end of the week.


Alternative Screening On Fetal Neural Defects
LEAD: Research at Harvard Medical School suggests that women at high risk of having a baby with a neural tube defect can be screened just as well with ultrasound as with the standard method, amniocentesis, which is more expensive and can itself cause miscarriage.


Pentagon Orders Big Cuts To Free Money for the Crisis
LEAD: The Pentagon has ordered worldwide spending cuts in supplies, maintenance, travel and training to free money to help pay for the Persian Gulf military operation, Defense Department officials said today.


Metro Datelines;   Suspension Is Lifted For a Trauma Ward
LEAD: The Emergency Medical Service began taking trauma patients to the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center again yesterday, ending a five-day suspension.


Deals
LEAD:
Football


Phillies Sign Dykstra
LEAD: The Philadelphia Phillies and the center fielder Len Dykstra agreed yesterday to a three-year contract.
Financial terms were undisclosed and the deal includes a fourth year at the club's option.
Dykstra, the National League's leading hitter at .340, could have become a free agent at the end of the season.


NO U.S. HOSTAGES RELEASED;   No Americans Permitted to Go After Iraqi Vow
LEAD: None of the roughly 1,000 American women and children trapped in Kuwait and Iraq left today, despite President Saddam Hussein's promise on Tuesday to permit them and other Westerners to depart.
Baghdad said that it would require each one to procure an exit visa first.


Shearson Unit Seeks Agency
LEAD: Lehman Brothers, a unit of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., is searching for an agency to handle its print advertising account, a spokesman said yesterday.


Ships Under Glass


Trebelhorn Keeps Job
LEAD: Tom Trebelhorn, whose job was rumored to be in jeopardy, will continue as manager of the Milwaukee Brewers.
In an interview with The Milwaukee Journal on Tuesday night, Harry Dalton, Milwaukee's general manager, said the Brewers would honor Trebelhorn's contract, which runs through the 1991 season.


Barriers Are Down in Mohawk Dispute in Quebec
LEAD: Masked Mohawks helped soldiers today to tear down barricades set up seven weeks ago near the Mercier Bridge, avoiding a bloody confrontation.


Sandy, Mutt Who Made It On Broadway, Dies at 16
LEAD: Sandy, who overcame abuse as a puppy and was nearly put to death at a pound before achieving Broadway fame as the best friend of Little Orphan Annie and a member of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's inner circle, died in his sleep yesterday at the age of 16.
The dog, a beige terrier mix, lived in Haddam, Conn., with his owner and trainer, William


Crash of Transport Plane in Persian Gulf Airlift Kills 13 in West Germany


Metro Datelines;   Boy Shot in Stomach Playing With Pistol
LEAD: A 10-year-old boy from Utica, N.Y., was shot in the stomach yesterday in Brooklyn while he and an older boy were playing with a pistol, the police said.


Harris Levin; Lawyer, 83
LEAD: Harris Levin, a lawyer who specialized in bankruptcy law, died yesterday at Franklin Medical Center in Valley Stream, L.I.
He was 83 years old and lived in Woodmere, L.I.


Merged Bank Sets Officers
LEAD: The Citizens and Southern Corporation of Atlanta and the Sovran Financial Corporation of Norfolk, Va., which plan a merger on Saturday that will create the nation's 13th-largest bank, have named a management team for the new company.


Gilbert Lesser, 55, Poster Designer For Plays and Promotion Director
LEAD: Gilbert Lesser, a designer of theater posters and a former promotion director for Life magazine, died on Tuesday at the Milstein Hospital of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 55 years old and lived in Manhattan.


U.S. Judge Approves Order On the Use of Force in Jails
LEAD: After weeks of negotiations between the Department of Correction and lawyers for inmates, a Federal judge yesterday approved a revision of the rules on the use of force by jail guards that have been at the heart of the recent turmoil at Rikers Island.


Jet Fighter By Lockheed
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation today presented its version of a futuristic fighter proposed for the 21st century.
Lockheed's display of the


Bridge
LEAD: Among the hundreds of Americans who will be competing in the world championships beginning on Sunday in Geneva will be two who have a very short journey.
Bill Russ and Irene Rothenberg are New Yorkers who have lived in Switzerland for many years and now represent that country.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: VIRTUALLY all building codes now require that the outlets in new and remodeled kitchens, bathrooms and garages be protected by a ground-fault circuit interrupter, usually called a G.F.C.I. or G.F.I.
This protection is recommended for all outlets in damp locations.
A G.F.C.I. protects you from shock by shutting off the power to an outlet when it detects a leak in the flow of electricity, as when a faulty appliance or cord touches a wet floor.


Not All Country Houses Are in Britain, You Know
LEAD: SO much attention has been paid to the English country house that the American country house heritage may seem insignificant by comparison.
But according to two new books published by Yale University Press - ''The American Country House'' ($55) by Clive Aslet and ''The Architect and the American Country House'' ($55) by Mark Alan Hewitt - the


Japanese to Buy Laura Ashley Stake
LEAD: Laura Ashley Holdings P.L.C. will sell a 15 percent stake in itself to a Japanese retailing group for $58.3 million.
The British retailer said it would sell 35.2 million newly issued shares of its stock to the Aeon Group of Japan for $:29.9 million.
The price represented a 73 percent premium over the closing price of the company's shares on


Moscow Journal;   More Than a Movie, It's a Whisper of Civil War
LEAD: For months the Soviet press studiously ignored Pavel Lungin's new film, ''Taxi Blues,'' about the relationship between an alcoholic Jewish saxophone player and a bigoted Russian taxi driver.


Chairman Quits At Ameritrust
LEAD: The chairman of the Ameritrust Corporation, which reported big losses in the first half of this year, has resigned, the bank holding company said on Tuesday.


Jets' Picture Not Clear
LEAD: The winner of the Jets' quarterback showdown Thursday night may not win the starting job after all.


PROTESTS IN SYRIA REPORTED HALTED
LEAD: Syrian Army units may have killed dozens of people in several Syrian towns who were demonstrating in support of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and against Syrian involvement in the allied military force based in Saudi Arabia, the British Broadcasting Corporation and The Associated Press reported today.


Alaska and Oklahoma Select Candidates
LEAD: Alaska voters overwhelmingly rejected a measure to legalize casino gambling on Tuesday and set up a contest for governor between a Republican State Senator, Arliss Sturgulewski, and the former Mayor of Anchorage, Tony Knowles, a Democrat.


Renamed Exxon Valdez Sets Out for Sea Trials


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary headline in some editions on Tuesday about Ozel Tendzin misstated his affiliation with Tibetan Buddhists.
Mr.
Tendzin was the leader of the Vajradhatu International Buddhist Church, a Tibetan Buddhist sect in Boulder, Colo.; the Dalai Lama is the head of Tibetan Buddhists.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Leo Burnett Worldwide, Chicago, bought a share of Allied Communications, a new agency in Seoul, South Korea.
The venture was created after the agency ended their three-year association with Dong Bang Advertising Co. because of a client conflict.
Allied will serve local and multinational clients, including Procter &amp; Gamble, Philip Morris and Cathay Pacific.


Puerto Rico Prices Tax-Free Bonds
LEAD: The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico yesterday tentatively priced $274 million in tax-exempt public-improvement bonds with a maximum yield of 7.80 percent for an issue due in 2020 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Home Section last Thursday about the Collapsible Classics furniture line gave an incorrect number for the designer, Bower Studios.
Its number is (802) 877-6868.


Blazing a 27,000-Mile Trail at Sea
LEAD: A disarming quiet pervades the docks here each morning, but the stillness is misleading.
Anxious yachtsmen are up at dawn preparing to race round the world in the BOC Challenge.
They are moving with purpose through the innards of their boats.
In two weeks, these sailors - for the first time, both men and women - will be setting sail in a competition that has no mercy for the unprepared.


Adultery Arrests Rise To 4 in Connecticut
LEAD: Three more arrests have been made in southeastern Connecticut under the state's rarely enforced adultery law, bringing the total since June to four.


Put Periwinkle Everywhere, Please!
LEAD: FOR those fanatics who like everything to match, a 20-month-old company in St.
Louis called Dyeing to Please might be a dream come true.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Miles to End Health Claims On Vitamins
LEAD: MILES INC., a maker of health and household products in Elkhart, Ind., agreed yesterday to stop making health claims in advertising for its One-A-Day vitamins that Attorney General Robert Abrams of New York said were ''false'' and ''unfounded.''


Energy Plan in California
LEAD: California utility commissioners approved an incentive plan today for four state utilities to promote energy conservation.


Film Executive Pleads Guilty
LEAD: A former executive at the Paramount Pictures Corporation has pleaded guilty to charges arising from a scheme to extort kickbacks from vendors who did business with the company.
The executive, Gordon


Chrysler Is Silent On Polish Reports
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation would neither confirm nor deny a report that a Polish concern was negotiating to buy assembly equipment from the United States auto maker to build a Chrysler-based car in Poland.
But a company spokeswoman, Karen Stewart, said Chrysler definitely had no plans to build vehicles itself in the Eastern


Colorado Pianist, 20, Is Competition Winner
LEAD: Christopher Taylor, a 20-year-old pianist from Boulder, Colo., has won first prize in the 1990 University of Maryland International William Kapell Piano Competition, which ended in July.
His award includes $20,000 in cash and a recital in November at Alice Tully Hall.


Matsushita-Tandy Venture Reported
LEAD: The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan and the Tandy Corporation of Fort Worth will produce personal computers at a Texas plant under a joint venture, The Dallas Morning News reported yesterday.
The size of the planned investment was not known, the newspaper said.


The Hero of Saratoga? Benedict Arnold
LEAD: To the Editor:


At Least 25 Dead in Illinois Tornado


The Flow of Refugees from Kuwait Continues


A Timely Hit by Boston Lets Mets Edge Padres
LEAD: Late in a game late in August.
The score deadlocked.
The nightly stakes readily apparent to anyone who cares to look at the scoreboard.


Judge Threatens to Void Payola Case
LEAD: The Federal judge presiding over the biggest music payola trial in 30 years threatened today to dismiss all charges against the record promoter Joseph Isgro and two other defendants after defense lawyers told him the prosecution had apparently withheld a key document in the case.


Tin Prices Drop Sharply
LEAD: Tin prices plunged today to their lowest level in 44 months, and market analysts said chances for a sharp recovery in the near future appeared slim.


Metro Datelines;   Bail Is Set for Man In Slaying of Girl, 9
LEAD: A judge yesterday set bail for a former professional baseball player, prompting an emotional outburst from the family of the 9-year-old girl he is accused of killing with a stray bullet.


The Five vs. the Four in Cambodia
LEAD: From the Persian Gulf to Phnom Penh, the end of the cold war has brought no respite from deadly regional conflicts.
But the superpower role in these confrontations has been dramatically transformed.
The agreement on Cambodia announced Tuesday by the Security Council's five permanent members converts major sponsors and suppliers of the rival factions into peacemakers.


Art Wedded to Architecture: A View Through Stained Glass
LEAD: WHEN Brian Clarke was an art student, he was shown some photographic slides that a teacher had made on a vacation in Italy.
A few tourists had wandered into the frames and were dwarfed by the great frescoes.


Japan Promises Grants and Food, But Lack of Arms Aid Nettles U.S.
LEAD: Japan unveiled a long-awaited program on Wednesday night to help finance the international effort against Iraq, but the package drew unusual criticism from American officials for the absence of direct tangible aid to the military buildup in the Persian Gulf.


Emergency Rule Is Declared in Armenia
LEAD: Armenia's Parliament declared a state of emergency throughout the republic today after a member of the Parliament was shot dead by a rogue paramilitary group, Soviet press accounts and Armenian officials said.


Farm Exports Steady
LEAD: The projected value of United States farm exports this year is holding steady at $40 billion despite a decline in the volume of wheat shipments, the Agriculture Department said on Tuesday.


THE U.N.'S WATERSHED: A SPECIAL REPORT:   CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;   Putting Teeth in an Embargo: How U.S. Convinced the U.N.
LEAD: The phone call to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d on Aug. 22 at his Wyoming ranch was not the first to interrupt his vacation, but it was one of the most important.
The Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, called Mr.
Baker's remote mountain retreat to say Moscow was leaning toward supporting a United Nations resolution giving the world's navies the right to enforce the international trade embargo against Iraq.


Oil Drops Nearly $2 A Barrel
LEAD: Oil prices fell sharply yesterday as traders responded to the decision by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to allow an immediate increase in oil production, as well as to reduced fears of war in the Persian Gulf.


Albanian Protest Broken Up in Yugoslavia
LEAD: Riot policemen used clubs and tear gas today to disperse thousands of ethnic Albanians awaiting a United States Congressional delegation to complain about human rights abuses.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: A TODDLER is sitting alone in a psychology laboratory with a hidden game, and she has a problem.
Should she peek at the game even though the adult told her not to?
And if she does peek, and if the adult asks, should she admit her transgression or tell a lie?


Market Place;   A Short, Sad Tale Of In-Store Inc.
LEAD: THE story of In-Store Advertising Inc. as a publicly held company is now six weeks old, but to many buyers it probably seems much longer.


Julian B. Abbott; Decorator, 64
LEAD: Julian Bingham Abbott, an interior designer based, died on Aug. 20 at Southampton (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 64 years old and lived in East Hampton, L.I.


Foreign Genes Are Inserted In Humans, a Study Reports
LEAD: The first effort to insert foreign genes into human patients has succeeded on every possible front, researchers say in a new report.


CBS Specials May Take On 'Nightline'
LEAD: CBS News plans to use Dan Rather's exclusive interview with the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein, which was broadcast last night, to begin a continuing series of late-night news specials focusing on the crisis in the Persian Gulf.
The specials may evolve into a regular news program to compete with ABC's ''Nightline.


A Chip Patent Is Granted That May Rewrite History
LEAD: In a shock to the computer industry, a virtually unknown California inventor has been issued a patent that he says covers a fundamental development of the computer revolution - the microprocessor.


Karen Finley Quits as Host Of Awards Show
LEAD: Karen Finley, a performance artist who was recently denied a grant by the National Endowment for the Arts, has withdrawn as a host of this year's Bessie Awards ceremony because one of the event's sponsors is a supporter of Senator Jesse Helms.


In New York, Low Count Draws Chorus of Criticism
LEAD: Preliminary 1990 census figures show New York City with a population of 7,033,179, significantly smaller than the Census Bureau estimated in 1988 and at least 600,000 people short of estimates by city planners and at least one outside expert.


Dow Rises 17.58 Points on Low Volume
LEAD: The stock market continued to gain yesterday as crude oil prices slid further, bond prices advanced and the danger of war with Iraq seemed increasingly distant.


Homeless Man Killed When Sidewalk Grating Collapses


A's Acquire McGee
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics, in their second big deal of the day yesterday, acquired the outfielder Willie McGee - the National League's second-leading hitter - from the St.
Louis Cardinals for the outfielder Felix Jose and two minor leaguers.
McGee, 31, was batting .335 for the Cardinals.
He was eligible for free agency at the end of the season and indicated he would not stay in St.


Dispute Over Fights
LEAD: Bill White, the National League president, yesterday disputed Joe West's interpretation of what White said about breaking up player fights and the umpire's handling of an ejection.


NO U.S. HOSTAGES RELEASED
LEAD: After weeks of deliberations, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries authorized its key oil producers today to begin pumping all the oil they can immediately, averting a feared shortage that has sent prices surging on world markets.


Allergies in Infants Are Linked to Mothers' Diets
LEAD: Researchers exploring how and when allergies begin are finding that allergic reactions and asthma in infants are often caused by exposure to foods and tobacco smoke introduced by parents, sometimes before the babies are born.


Venezuela's New Oil Prominence
LEAD: The lines of oil wells that stretch across Lake Maracaibo here are pumping higher volumes of crude to help offset the shortage caused by the embargo of oil from Iraq and Kuwait.


Marilyn Quayle Is Rescued From River in Grand Canyon
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle's wife, Marilyn, fell into the Colorado River during a rafting expedition through the Grand Canyon last weekend, a park spokesman said today.
Mrs.
Quayle was thrown from the raft when it was in Lava Falls rapids, said Chuck Lundy, a spokesman for Grand Canyon National Park.


$5 Million FNN Effort To Begin Next Month
LEAD: The Financial News Network is beginning its largest advertising campaign in its nine years as a cable network.


Retrain New York Transit Officers to Use the Guns They Have
LEAD: To the Editor:


Funds Show Mixed Yields
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempts and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday.


Washington at Work;   Political Lifeguard at the Justice Dept.
LEAD: Being second in command at the Justice Department under Dick Thornburgh has proved a high-risk career choice.
But William P. Barr, the Attorney General's third appointee to the post, seems to be settling in.
His daunting task: to turn around one of the Bush Administration's more troubled departments.


ISRAELIS WORRIED BY U.S. RESTRAINT
LEAD: As the Persian Gulf crisis drags on, Israelis are coming to the conclusion that the United States wants a political solution and is not looking for a military confrontation with Saddam Hussein.
That has caused many Israeli politicians, academic experts and ordinary citizens to grow restive, nervous and in some cases angry.


Guerrilla Bands in Kuwait Killed Hundreds, a U.S. Official Asserts
LEAD: Small guerrilla bands in Kuwait have killed or wounded ''a couple hundred'' Iraqi troops and have destroyed a handful of tanks and more than 20 trucks and small military vehicles, a United States Government official says.


Earl Veron, 68, Judge On U.S. District Court
LEAD: Earl E. Veron, a judge of the United States District Court for the Western District of Louisiana, died Tuesday at Tulane Medical Center in New Orleans.
He was 68 years old.
He collapsed at the Federal courthouse in New Orleans and was pronounced dead of heart failure at the medical center.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Wax Buildup on Tile
Q.
Over the years, the slate tile floor in our entrance hall has been washed with warm water and polished with a liquid wax.
The tiles now have a blotchy look that is apparently due to wax buildup.
How can we remove this, and how should we maintain the tiles to keep them shiny?


Slow Back-to-School Sales Hurting U.S. Retailers
LEAD: Mired in a slow back-to-school season, America's biggest retailers have expressed deep concern that the Middle East crisis will hurt their business even further in the weeks heading into the all-important Christmas season.


Review/Opera;   American Premiere of Janacek's 'House of the Dead'
LEAD: The new production of Leos Janacek's ''From the House of the Dead,'' unveiled on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater, amounts to Christopher Keene's calling card as the new general director of the New York City Opera.
It is the first new production - indeed, the first opera - he has conducted since he took over the company in


Workers, Hail!
LEAD: WEATHEREND, a company in Rockland, Me., that makes outdoor furniture, is holding an art exhibition called ''Construction - Works.''


INSIDE
LEAD:
Consumer Confidence Down
Two major indexes of consumer confidence plunged sharply this month, indicating that the economy may be sliding into recession.
Page D1.
Japan Raises Interest Rate
The Bank of Japan raised its discount rate, which it charges commercial banks, to 6 percent from 5.25 percent to fight inflation.


Campbell-Mithun-Esty Splits Account Team
LEAD: Campbell-Mithun-Esty Detroit has split its account management team into two parts.
One group will serve the agency's primary client, Chrysler Jeep Eagle.
The other will try to find new accounts.


Talbert Abrams Dies; Aerial Pioneer Was 95
LEAD: Talbert Abrams, an aviation pioneer and the developer of aerial mapping, died Saturday at a nursing home in Lansing, Mich.
He was 95 years old and lived in Lansing.


Official Will Be Named To Police S.&amp; L. Assets
LEAD: Concerned about the huge potential for fraud and abuse in the savings and loan bailout, the Government agency managing the rescue effort will name an overseer within the agency to ferret out corruption among Federal officials and private firms managing the assets of failed institutions.


Chronicle
LEAD: NANCY REAGAN had a cancerous tumor removed from her face yesterday at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., a family spokesman said.
She and former President RONALD REAGAN left for their home in Los Angeles later in the day.


Japanese Wary Of Toys 'R' Us
LEAD: Eleven Japanese toy retailers have formed an association to try to protect domestic toy stores from competition by Toys ''R'' Us.
The Japan Association of


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.00
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.47
7.49
7.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.44
7.47
7.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.71
8.81
8.26
30-YR.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: WHEN I go home at night, the light is different from what it was only a few weeks ago.
Inside the bus it is cold, but outside heat is rising up from the sidewalks and pushing down from the sky.
The people streaming into Penn Station are jacketless if they are men and bare-armed if they are women, and the boys on bikes are stripped to singlets and shorts.


Census Data Show Sharp Rural Losses
LEAD: From the Mississippi River delta to the Appalachian mountains of Kentucky to the high plains of North Dakota, rural America suffered far greater losses in population during the 1980's than had been expected, according to preliminary figures from the 1990 census.


N.F.L. May Slow Down
LEAD: Paul Tagliabue, the N.F.L. commissioner, said yesterday that the league was considering revising its new speed-up rules to get three or four plays back into the game.


Talking Deals;   'Paralyzed' Contel In GTE's Grasp
LEAD: THE Contel Corporation, which earlier this month signed a definitive agreement to be purchased by the GTE Corporation, provides another example of a company forced into a deal at least in part because of debt it took on to make acquisitions.


Jesse Jackson Arrives in Iraq
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson arrived in Baghdad today to interview the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, for a syndicated American television program.
The Iraqi press agency, monitored in Nicosia, said Mr.
Jackson was met at Baghdad airport by Foreign Ministry officials.
Mr.
Jackson has said that he is making the trip as a journalist and that he will not be involved in any diplomatic negotiations.


The Long Road Back
LEAD: Carlos Grosso, the Peronist Mayor of this sprawling and beautiful city, is embarking on the ''privatization'' of parking-law enforcement and the maintenance of a street system that includes some of the most impressive boulevards in the world.


Mariners Sign Griffey
LEAD: Ken Griffey was signed by the Seattle Mariners yesterday, joining Ken Jr. to become the first father and son to play on the same major league team.
Last year, the Griffeys became the first father and son to play in the major leagues at the same time.


Dickerson Suspended And Fined by Colts
LEAD: Eric Dickerson will miss the first six games of the National Football League season after the Indianapolis Colts placed him on one of the league's reserve lists yesterday.


A Challenge In Cambodia
LEAD: The agreement of the five permanent members of the United Nations on the essentials of a political settlement of the Cambodian conflict may finally force the warring Cambodian factions to negotiate seriously and confront the real risks of peace.


Oil Drilling Tests in Alaska Refuge Are Urged
LEAD: Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. said on Tuesday that the drilling of test wells in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge should be considered in response to the situation in the Middle East.


Personal Health
LEAD: If you frequent a health club, you probably don't expect to see an 80-year-old person pumping iron or working out on a nearby machine.
But based on the results of recent studies involving people up to the age of 96, strength training is likely to become increasingly popular among old and very old Americans.


Bank of New York Ratings Are Lowered
LEAD: The rating on $1.2 billion in long-term debt and commercial paper issued by the Bank of New York Company has been lowered, Moody's Investors Service announced yesterday.


Mattar, No. 66, Knocks Gomez Out of Open
LEAD: When 30-year-old Andres Gomez accepted his French Open trophy, his first memorable booty in more than a decade of Grand Slam endeavors, he likened the experience to watching his career ascend and explode like a sunrise.


Why the Tube Can Be Hussein's Worst Enemy
LEAD: Something there is that doesn't love a dictator - and that something may be television.


John J. O'Hara, 71, Retired Federal Agent
LEAD: John J. O'Hara, a former Internal Revenue Service intelligence agent and a member of the Justice Department's Organized Crime Strike Force, died on Tuesday at the Community Medical Center in Toms River, N.J.
He was 71 years old and lived in Berkeley Township, N.J.


New Starters Give Red Sox a Lift
LEAD: All winter and all spring, and part of the summer too, Lou Gorman looked for a starting pitcher.


Red Sox Stay Six Ahead With Sixth Victory in Row
LEAD: Dana Kiecker (6-6) shut out Cleveland on three hits for seven innings as the Boston Red Sox defeated the Indians, 7-1, tonight for their sixth consecutive victory on the road.


Sales of New Homes Fell 2.3% in July
LEAD: New-home sales fell 2.3 percent in July, the fifth drop in seven months, the Government said today, and industry observers predicted rising mortgage rates linked to the Middle East crisis would compound the decline in the months ahead.


Insider Charges Are Settled
LEAD: Three former employees of MAI Basic Four Inc. today settled Federal insider trading charges accusing them of buying Prime Computer Inc. securities after they learned that MAI Basic was planning to make a hostile bid for Prime in the fall of 1988.


Homeless Man Asleep on a Grate Dies as It Falls 30 Feet Into a Pit
LEAD: One of three homeless people sleeping on a sidewalk grate near Penn Station was killed last night when the grate gave way and plunged 30 feet into an empty vault, the police said.


First Hubble Findings Bring Delight
LEAD: In the first scientific results from the crippled Hubble Space Telescope, an unexpected concentration of stars, attracted by some mysterious force, has been discovered around what once appeared to be an ordinary galaxy, and a glowing ring of gaseous matter, equally surprising and puzzling, has been detected around the remnant of a star seen to explode three years ago.


John J. Snodgrass, 70; Began Radiology Unit
LEAD: John J. Snodgrass, founding director of the Division of Radiology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., died at the hospital on Monday.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhasset.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is unadulterated nonsense.
The Census Bureau itself admitted that its 1980 count missed some 450,000 New Yorkers.''
- Mayor David N. Dinkins, reacting to the latest census figures. [A1:1.]


No Planes, No Edberg, But About the Blimp . . .
LEAD: It's so quiet out there on the courts that Martina Navratilova hears every syllable the umpire utters, Monica Seles has felt it incumbent upon her to smother her grunts, and Goran Ivanisevic has discovered that it's the odor of the hamburgers and hot dogs sizzling atop the vendors' grills that really distracts him from playing his best tennis.


A Grand House Sticks Out Its Tongue
LEAD: RICHARD EKSTRACT has long had a passion for Italian food and wine, siestas, Palladian architecture and the Tuscan countryside.
He has studied Italian and thinks he was Italian in another life.


West German Inflation
LEAD: Soaring oil prices pushed West Germany's inflation higher in August, but economists said the rate for the year could still be kept near the 3 percent level.
The Federal Statistics Office said today that West Germany's cost of living rose four-tenths of 1 percent in August, for a rise of 2.9 percent over the last 12 months.


Robert H. Brooks; Theatrical Agent, 34
LEAD: Robert H. Brooks, a theatrical booking agent, died on Monday in a helicopter crash in East Troy, Wis., which killed the blues guitarist Stevie Ray Vaughn and three others.
He was 34 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


CLUES FOLLOWED ON FLORIDA KILLER
LEAD: The police said today that they believed a ''shrewd, methodical'' killer was behind a string of five slayings that has traumatized this university town.


Shoji Screens at Home in the West
LEAD: IN Japan, shoji screens are found in nearly every home, used instead of curtains to create privacy while letting in light.
But Westerners have devised less traditional uses for these elegant screens, originally formed from wood and rice paper, says Hisao Hanafusa, a partner in Miya Shoji, a Manhattan company that has made customized Japanese screens for more than 40 years.


Revenge Of the Dog Biscuits
LEAD: MARK SIMON and Michael McDonough have discovered that it takes more than ingenuity to build a structure sound enough to lead a dog's life.
Both architects designed doghouses made of dog biscuits for the Cooper-Hewitt Museum's ''Doghouse,'' exhibition, which runs through Oct. 14.
But their doghouses disintegrated, or almost.


Trump Crisis Approaching 2d Phase
LEAD: Donald J. Trump is about to enter Round 2 of his financial crisis, and the sale of the Plaza Hotel is likely to be part of it.


It Takes More Than Medication to Heal Minds;   Electroshock's Damage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Arab-Americans Faulting Bush on Hostility
LEAD: Leaders of the largest Arab-American civil rights group said today that President Bush and other members of the Administration had inadvertently fostered an atmosphere of animosity toward Americans of Arab descent by using heated oratory directed at President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


Phil Seelig's Wounded Pride
LEAD: Now more than ever, New York City's jails need well-motivated guards; as recent events demonstrate, a collapse of their morale could prove as dangerous to the public as a collapse of a jail's walls.
That's a point city officials easily overlook.
And it doesn't help when the head of the guards' union ignores it as well.


Israel Jittery Over Shekel
LEAD: Uneasy about the possibility of a new economic plan that could include a significant currency devaluation, Israelis rushed today to buy foreign currency.


Transit Agency Seeking To Buy Grand Central
LEAD: The Metropolitan Transportation Authority is trying to smooth the way for development of a huge office tower on Madison Avenue as a necessary first step in its efforts to buy Grand Central Terminal and begin a $400 million renovation of the mid-Manhattan landmark.


Cleanup Begins At Tornado Site Where 25 Died
LEAD: When the black wind stopped howling and the terrible roar faded, the first thing Bernice Lea noticed, as she huddled inside her bedroom, was the rain, cold and hard on her back.
She looked up and saw that the roof and most of the walls of her house were gone.


People
LEAD: *
Jeffrey Soinski has joined Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc., New York, as vice president and management supervisor.
Margot Pitlor has joined as an account executive.


Donnelley's Meredith Bid
LEAD: A Federal court has cleared the way for the Meredith Corporation to sell its printing business to the R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons Company for $568 million, but the Government has appealed the ruling on antitrust grounds.


F. Sanford Cutler; Episcopal Priest, 68
LEAD: The Rev.
F.
Sanford Cutler, an Episcopal priest who was active in the peace and women's rights movements died on Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Reporter Finally Flees Kuwait After Weeks of Eluding Iraqis
LEAD: Caryle Murphy, a reporter for The Washington Post who escaped from Kuwait on Monday after almost a month of eluding Iraqi troops, said today that she finally fled to Saudi Arabia because remaining seemed largely fruitless and increasingly dangerous.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD
British Record Set
Kriss Akabusi set a British record and posted the second-fastest time in the world this year when he won the men's 400-meter hurdles yesterday in 47.92 seconds at the European championships at Split, Yugoslavia.
Sven Nylander of Sweden clinched the silver medal with a time of 48.43 and a countryman, Niklas Wallenlind, was third in 48.52.


It Takes More Than Medication to Heal Minds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Refco Settles Federal Charge
LEAD: Refco Inc., a Chicago-based commodities broker, today settled Federal disciplinary charges that one of its floor brokers had aided a customer's violation of the speculative limits in pork belly futures for more than a year beginning in June 1988.


Panel Affirms Claims of Beatings at Rikers Island
LEAD: An investigation by the State Commission of Correction has concluded that correction officers on Rikers Island used excessive force during the Aug. 14 melee that left more than a hundred inmates and guards injured.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: The Oil Jolt


Litton Profits Decline by 2%
LEAD: Litton Industries' fourth-quarter earnings fell 2 percent despite higher sales, the company said today.


ESPN Chief Leaving To Head New Venture
LEAD: Roger L. Werner Jr., the president and chief executive of ESPN, is leaving the cable sports service to become the president and chief executive of Prime Ventures Inc., a new company being formed by Bill Daniels, a leading cable entrepreneur.


Chronicle
LEAD: A ceremony at Euston train station in London yesterday marked the official departure of the Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet Company from London and its reincarnation as the Birmingham Royal Ballet.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-17
OPEC agreed to increase production, authorizing its key producers to pump all the oil they can.
The decision - expected to add some 4 million barrels a day - averts a feared shortage that has sent prices surging on world markets.
Page A1


Mural of Christ Must Be Removed
LEAD: A painting of a crucifixion scene that has hung on the wall of a school auditorium in upstate New York for 25 years must be taken down, a Federal judge in Syracuse ruled today.


Federal Farm Credit Financing
LEAD: A four-part financing totaling more than $4.2 billion was priced yesterday by the Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation.


Calendar: Folk Art and Wearable Art
LEAD:
Long Island Show House, Lot 1, Redcoats Lane, North Haven Point off Sunset Beach Road, Sag Harbor; (212) 551-7028.


Cuomo Says State Will Buy 268 Alternative-Fuel Vehicles
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo drove to a news conference here today in a light blue, methanol-powered Ford and announced that the state would buy 268 cars and buses powered by alternative fuels in the next five years.


Chairs Just for Little Folks
LEAD: PARENTS, rejoice.
Manufacturers are making children's furniture fashionable again.
Just as in the 19th century, when miniature chairs were common, furniture makers are offering scaled-down versions of their designs.


Japan Lifts Discount Rate to 6%
LEAD: Despite denials just a day earlier, the Bank of Japan said this morning that it was raising its discount rate for the fifth time in a little more than a year.
The new rate is 6 percent, from 5.25 percent, effective today.


The Soot Is Gone, But What Is Lost?
LEAD: SOOT can be sublime.
Those who doubt it need travel no farther than Trinity Church, which looms at the foot of Wall Street in lower Manhattan.
For most of this century, the moody, pinnacled facade of the church, Richard Upjohn's 1846 Gothic Revival masterpiece, has been distinguished by a jet-black layer of grime.


Try to Tell a Widow That Life Goes On
LEAD: HOME is the two top floors of a condominium apartment building in Manhattan, near Central Park, which were demolished and rebuilt over the past year as a French palace.
It is a work in progress: a butler in a white jacket serves soft drinks in crystal goblets as workers on tall ladders adjust the wiring for a chandelier in the rotunda.


Canada Bank Cuts Rate
LEAD: The Bank of Montreal said today that it would cut its prime rate to 14 percent from 14.25 percent, effective on Thursday.
The bank is the first leading Canadian bank to cut its prime from the 14.25 percent level.


Autopsy Tests For AIDS Find 1 in 7 Infected
LEAD: Six months after it began conducting AIDS tests in all autopsies, the New York City Medical Examiner's office has found infection rates as high as 38 percent in some groups.


LeRoy Makepeace; Diplomat, 75
LEAD: LeRoy Makepeace, a career Foreign Service officer, died Friday at Martha's Vineyard Hospital in Massachusetts.
He was 75 years old and lived in Washington.


Metro Datelines;   Judge Dismisses Suit Against Helmsley
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday threw out a civil racketeering lawsuit that claimed that Leona Helmsley illegally took millions of dollars from her husband.


Sununu Tutors the Kremlin's Staff
LEAD: The Kremlin moved ever closer in spirit to the White House today as President Bush's chief of staff worked within on the Soviet ''paper flow,'' and a tent city of disgruntled citizens maintained its encampment in a park just across the way.


Aquino Says She Will Negotiate Cease-Fires
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino reversed a long-held policy today and said she was willing to negotiate cease-fires with Communist guerrillas and with rebel soldiers who have staged coup attempts against her.


Trees Need Work? Beware Low Bids
LEAD: Sometimes homeowners go through the prudent steps of obtaining three or four bids for pruning or cutting large trees and find that one estimate is significantly lower than the others.
It would seem sensible to accept the low bid, the National Arborist Association says, but only if the tree contractor can show proof of liability insurance.


Retrain New York Transit Officers to Use the Guns They Have;   Risk Is Far Too Great
LEAD: To the Editor:


It's Old, It's Ugly, and It Kills Tanks: It's Warthog
LEAD: In an age of Stealth fighters, the A-10 is among the least glamorous in the Pentagon's panoply of weapons.


Development Proposal Roils Oyster Bay
LEAD: As the other great harbors of Nassau County have succumbed to mistreatment and pollution, Oyster Bay Harbor has remained relatively untroubled: a home or rest stop for dozens of species of waterfowl and fish, a place where people can still swim, sail and harvest the oysters that flourish in its waters.


Yankees Capture Fourth Straight
LEAD: Their winning streaks have been so rare and so sporadic this summer that in times like these, when the Yankees are finally playing well in their tiresome season, they are enjoying the luxury of looking forward.


Review/Music;   More From The Mozart Catalogue
LEAD: There are certain pieces in the Mozart canon that make us wonder whether Mr.
Kochel's chronological catalogue may not have taken a wrong turn or two.
How, for instance, could so vast and operatic a piano concerto as the E-flat (K. 271) have appeared as early as Mozart's 22d year and how possibly could the great Sinfonia Concertante for Violin and


Review/Art;   U.S. Artist Has Whole French City as His Gallery
LEAD: Mark di Suvero's career has had its share of spectacular moments, but the American sculptor has never had an opportunity like the one he has been presented with this summer.
He has essentially been given a city in which to showcase all the facets of his art.


25 Dogs Seized in Brooklyn in Cruelty Case
LEAD: A Brooklyn woman who neighbors said walked the streets of Red Hook in search of the stray dogs and cats she kept in a nearby warehouse that was her home was charged yesterday with cruelty to animals.


F.D.I.C. Should Name Bank Board Trustees
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction Group Asks Ouster of Union Chief
LEAD: An organization of black New York City correction officers announced yesterday that it would begin a petition and picketing drive aimed at forcing Phil Seelig, the president of the officers' union, out of office.


Kansas Utility Bid May Be Sweetened
LEAD: The Kansas City Power and Light Company said in a letter to the chairman of the Kansas Gas and Electric Company that it would like to discuss its merger proposal and that it would be willing to consider adjustments to its offer.
On July 23, Kansas City Power began a tender offer worth $857 million in cash for all Kansas Gas shares at $27 a share.


Robert Phillips Dead; Photographer Was 64
LEAD: Robert H. Phillips, a photographer whose work has appeared in the nation's leading magazines and is in the photography collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art, died on Friday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 64 years old.


Peace Dividend: Casualty in the Gulf?
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis is giving members of Congress second thoughts about making major cuts in military spending for the next fiscal year and has muted but not silenced the hopeful talk of a peace dividend from the end of the cold war.


Capriati's Dashing
LEAD: Jennifer Capriati came out to play tennis Tuesday evening wearing a white shirt with polka dots as orange as pumpkins.
Her short tennis skirt was also white, and with three polka dots, all on the right side.
Her brown ponytail was caught up in a band, which was orange.
When she prepared to serve, in the course of her first-round match against Anke Huber of West Germany in the United States Open at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Capriati slid a second ball under her skirt at the left hip.


CBS Names Head for TV Stations
LEAD: CBS yesterday named Johnathan Rodgers president of its television stations division, replacing Eric W. Ober, who was named president of CBS News last week.


Consumer Confidence In Worrisome Drop
LEAD: Two major indexes of consumer confidence, which for many economists is the most sensitive measure of a nation's vulnerability to recession, plunged sharply in August, indicating that frightened Americans might finally be pushing the United States into a recession, after months of weak economic growth.


Australian Bid For Newmont Unit
LEAD: The Poseidon mining company of Australia spent $132 million this week to buy almost 20 percent of the Australian unit of the Newmont Mining Corporation of Denver, and on Tuesday it began a surprise 1-for-2 share offer for the rest of the unit.


Allegre Could Lose Job to a Rookie
LEAD: Every year, pro football teams generally bring two or more place-kickers to training camp.
And almost every year, the incumbent makes the team and the bright-eyed newcomers are cut loose and float in the huge pool of midseason emergency replacements.


Dallas Police Chief Charged With Perjury in Investigation
LEAD: The Chief of the Dallas police was charged with seven counts of perjury today over statements he made this month to a panel investigating the fatal shooting of a civilian by a police officer.


U.S. Forming a Central Data Bank to Identify Incompetent Doctors
LEAD: Beginning Saturday, for the first time the United States will have a single data base to identify incompetent doctors, dentists and other licensed health practitioners.


Ketchum Journal;   Real Life Intrudes On Reverie Of the Past
LEAD: Despite a preponderance of $4 million homes, espresso cafes and galleries run by people with European accents, this golden mountain community still prefers to think of itself as somewhat of an Old West geezer in need of a bath and a shot of bourbon.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Warner-Lambert Co., Morris Plains, N.J., to J. Walter Thompson, New York, for their new Medi-Flu flu reliever.
Billings were not disclosed.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Litton Industries Inc., Beverly Hills, Calif., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for the sale of liquid yield option notes due 2010.
The sale is expected to bring the company about $265 million in proceeds.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about financial disclosures by Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the independent candidate for governor in Connecticut, misidentified his grandfather.
The grandfather was not E. R. Squibb but Theodore Weicker, one of three partners who founded the Squibb Corporation.


3,000 Are Called to Jury Duty
LEAD: Three thousand people have been called as prospective jurors for the September trial of a man charged in the slayings of 11 women.
The man, Arthur J. Shawcross, 45 years old, will be tried in Monroe County in the murders of 10 of the women.
He faces a second trial in neighboring Wayne County in the 11th slaying.


Dollar Mostly Higher in U.S. After Ending Mixed Abroad
LEAD: The dollar moved mostly higher in United States trading yesterday after a mixed performance overseas as currency dealers began adjusting their holdings ahead of the long holiday weekend in the United States.


U.S. Inquiry of Dumping
LEAD: The Government decided on Wednesday to investigate whether some equipment made by Japanese electronics companies is imported at less than fair value into the United States, threatening the domestic industry.
The International Trade Commission ruled that there was reasonable indication that imports of some electronic display screens used in computers and their sub-assemblies materially injure the American industry.


DeWitt Stetten Is Dead at 81; Top Biochemist
LEAD: DeWitt Stetten Jr., a biochemist and former deputy director of the National Institutes of Health who in the 1970's headed a committee that drafted guidelines on genetic engineering, died Tuesday at the Fernwood Nursing Center in Bethesda, Md.
He was 81 years old.


Goodyear Layoffs
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said it was cutting production and laying off a total of about 800 workers at three North American plants.
The company attributed the moves to a sluggish market for cars and a desire for balanced inventory levels.
Goodyear said that its plants in Union City, Tenn., and Valleyfield, Quebec, would lay off 270 and 530 employees, respectively, and that production at its operation in Danville, Va., would be reduced for a week.


Service Unit For Microsoft
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation today formed a new consulting services business aimed at helping large corporate customers build complex computing systems using its products.
The new group, Information


Edmund H. North, 79, a Writer; He Shared an Oscar for 'Patton'
LEAD: Edmund H. North, a screenwriter who shared an Academy Award with Francis Ford Coppola in 1970 for their script for ''Patton,'' died Tuesday in St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 79 years old and lived in Brentwood, Calif.


Lisa Lieb Weds David Malamed
LEAD: Lisa Ellen Lieb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morrie Lieb of Cliffside Park, N.J., was married yesterday to David Neal Malamed, the son of Bernice Malamed of Lynbrook, L.I., and Paul Malamed of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Philmore Berger performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck in Kings Point, L.I.


Plaza Report Is Denied
LEAD: The Trump Organization denied yesterday that the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan was being looked at by prospective buyers and might be sold within several months.
But a person close to the organization repeated earlier statements that potential buyers had been shown the property.


Bargemusic: Brooklyn's Floating Concert Site
LEAD: ''Actually, we're practicing great economy of motion here,'' said Olga Bloom, the founder of Bargemusic Ltd.
Since 1977, Mrs.
Bloom has been presenting weekly concerts in the refurbished coffee barge that she transformed into a floating concert hall on the Brooklyn side of the East River, near the Brooklyn


Scientists Question Methods Used in Animal Cancer Tests
LEAD: A growing number of experts are questioning the usefulness of the animal tests used to decide whether chemicals cause cancer.
These animal tests, they say, can themselves cause conditions that give rise to malignancy.


Lack of Tornado Warning Prompts Assessment of Weather Service
LEAD: Tornadoes that killed dozens of people had already touched down in the Chicago area this week before the National Weather Service issued a warning.
Now, throughout the Middle West, where spring and summer mean the season of tornadoes, people are questioning the warning system's performance.


Critic's Choice
LEAD: Dennis O'Connor stood out in a company of fine dancers when he performed with the Merce Cunningham troupe in the late 1980's.
And gifts as a dancer are among the foremost delights of Mr.
O'Connor's ''Renaissance Solos,'' at the atmospheric little Gas Station theater tonight.
But in this promising first independent program as a choreographer, Mr.


A Gubernatorial Candidate Who Relies on Just the Facts
LEAD: William J. Cibes Jr., the challenger in the Democratic primary for governor, was about an hour into his interview with a group of local newspaper editors when the question came.
It was a long slow looper of a pitch that many politicians would have smacked clean over the fence: What was your childhood like, growing up in rural


Chronicle
LEAD: DIANA RIGG, the British actress who rose to stardom as the karate-chopping Emma Peal in the television series ''The Avengers,'' is seeking a divorce from Archie Stirling.
An Associated Press dispatch from London said her agent, Jean Diamond, declined to comment on the reasons for the decision.


A Stray Bullet Kills a Bronx Prosecutor
LEAD: A 30-year-old Bronx prosecutor was shot to death yesterday as he bent over to pick up a dozen doughnuts in a bodega near the county courthouse.


Giants Expect Bavaro To Be Set for Eagles
LEAD: When Mark Bavaro underwent reconstructive surgery on his left knee in January, the Giants hoped he would be ready for the season opener 10 nights from now against the Philadelphia Eagles.
At this stage, it appears the former All-Pro tight end will be ready, but perhaps not for a full game.


Moscow's Mutt &amp; Jeff
LEAD: After a five-hour session this week to paper over differences, Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin appeared for 15 minutes together on Soviet television.


Deloitte Said to Thin Ranks
LEAD: Deloitte &amp; Touche, the large accounting firm, has decided to thin its partnership ranks by as many as 100 people in the next few months, executive recruiters and others who specialize in the industry said yesterday.


Becker Dispatches Noah With Straight-Set Victory
LEAD: Yannick Noah left the stadium court at the United States Open yesterday with his head bowed, a meek position he has been assuming on a weekly basis this year not because he has become a devout churchgoer, but because he has become a dependable loser.


Drug Is Found to Delay Progression of AIDS
LEAD: New results from tests of an AIDS drug, DDI, show that it continues to protect some patients from progression to AIDS for 15 months or more, and that most of its toxic effects can be avoided, said a study released today.


Infant Mortality Rates in U.S. Fall to a Record Low in 1989
LEAD: The infant mortality rate in the United States reached the lowest level ever last year, but it remains higher than those in many industrialized nations, Federal health officials reported yesterday.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD
East German Woman Gets 2d Gold
Katrin Krabbe of East Germany sprinted to her second gold medal by winning the women's 200 meters in 21.95 seconds at the European championships yesterday at Split, Yugoslavia.
She won the 100-meter dash on Tuesday.
The holder of the world record in the pole vault, Sergei Bubka of the Soviet Union, lost his first major event in seven years when he failed to clear 19 feet 1/4 inch.


The Quarterback of the Future Is in Syracuse's Present
LEAD: The question was never whether Marvin Graves was going to be the starting quarterback at Syracuse University, not after his displays of arm strength on the practice field and his willingness to spend hours as a student of the game.
The only question was when.
And the bold answer is now.
Dick MacPherson, the coach of the Orangemen, selected Graves, a freshman in his second year with the Syracuse program, over Mark McDonald, a junior, as the starter against Southern California on Friday night.


Herbert Johnson, 81; Headed Gas Company
LEAD: Herbert C. Johnson, retired chairman and president of the Consolidated Natural Gas Company, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital on Staten Island.
He was 81 years old and lived in Dongan Hills, S.I.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE OIL JOLT
The Administration has a ''short-term strategy'' for stabilizing oil markets by raising domestic production and encouraging conservation, Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said.
It will not speed up a new national energy policy, he said. [Page A1.]
Wholesale gasoline prices surged, reflecting concerns about low supplies and strong demand.


Umpire Case Reviewed
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent is reviewing a complaint about the National League president Bill White's criticism of the umpire Joe West.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We're more than willing to bear our fair share of the burden, but we also expect others to bear their fair share.''
- President Bush.
[A1:6.]


Premiers of the Koreas Plan to Meet Tuesday
LEAD: North and South Korea agreed today on details for talks between their Prime Ministers next week, clearing the way for the highest-level contact between the two Governments since 1945, a South Korean spokesman said.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Shuttle Delayed Again
The space agency again delayed the launching of the space shuttle Columbia, this time so that technicians can repair a part on the observatory in the shuttle's payload bay.
Page A20.
Tornado Alert: An Inquiry
Deadly Illinois tornadoes had already struck before a warning was issued, prompting an inquiry into the effectiveness of the National Weather Service's alert system.


Tearful Ex-Irish Hostage Tells of Ordeal
LEAD: Brian Keenan, the Irish teacher who was released after four and a half years as a hostage in Lebanon, urged negotiations today for the release of remaining captives in Lebanon, with whom he formed an ''enduring and unbreakable bond'' during years in tiny basement cells.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: Monday is Labor Day. Here are holiday schedules:
NEW YORK
Parade: Begins at 11 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street and heads north to 72 Street.
Government offices: Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


Alleghany Raises Stake in Cyclops
LEAD: The Alleghany Corporation, the New York-based financial services concern, has raised its stake in Cyclops Industries, the Pittsburgh-based steel company, to 10.7 percent, from 8.4 percent.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Alleghany said it might acquire more Cyclops shares, depending upon market conditions, or it might seek to dispose of its stock.


Iraq and Jordan
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Publishing Corp., a subsidiary of American Express Co., appointed Tracey Crane-Hennessy manager of its Midwest office in Chicago.


Murder or an Act of War: Soldier on Trial
LEAD: An Army soldier who served in the United States invasion of Panama went on trial this week, charged with murdering a Panamanian, in a case that raises the question of what justifies the use of deadly force in combat.
It is the first such court-martial since the Vietnam War.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's use of state aircraft referred incorrectly to payment for trips that are partly political or unofficial.
During campaigns, his campaign committee or the State Democratic Party will pay at least half the cost on any day that involves such activity.


Latin Debt Grew in '89
LEAD: Latin America's foreign debt climbed last year despite efforts to curb it, according to a study that says the debtor nations failed to honor $18 billion in financial obligations.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Pentagon Briefing


At the Movies
LEAD:
Spies and Presidents From the Kremlin to the White House.


Lillian Pickard, Press Agent, 66
LEAD: Lillian Pickard, a theater and television press agent, died yesterday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center.
She was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   BUSH URGES ALLIES TO BEAR 'THEIR FAIR SHARE' OF COSTS OF MILITARY EFFORT IN GULF
LEAD: Asserting that the ''shape of the post-cold-war world'' was at issue in the Persian Gulf crisis, President Bush said today that he was asking other countries to help pay the multibillion-dollar cost of military operations and economic sanctions in the region.


Don't Send a Great American Art Collection Into Austrian Exile
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jazzmobile Season Ends Tonight
LEAD: Two exponents of hard bop, the tenor saxophonist Jimmy Heath and the trumpeter Donald Byrd, will perform in a free concert tonight closing Jazzmobile's 26th summer season of performances by outstanding jazz musicians in New York City streets.


Patz Suspect Arraigned In Pennsylvania Case
LEAD: A man considered by officials in the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan to be a prime suspect in the disappearance of Etan Patz, pleaded not guilty yesterday to two charges of child molestation in Pennsylvania.


Paul P. Casamassimo, Dentist, 77
LEAD: Dr.
Paul P. Casamassimo, a retired dentist who was on the staff of the North Central Bronx Hospital for almost 50 years, died on Monday at Waterbury (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 77 years old and lived in Southbury, Conn.


These Boycotts Are Racist, and Wrong
LEAD: When Mayor David Dinkins of New York appointed a commission in April to investigate a black boycott of two Korean grocery stores in Brooklyn's Flatbush section, cynics suggested the move was merely a device to diffuse responsibility for an intolerable display of racism.
The commission's report, issued yesterday, makes even the cynics look starry-eyed.


Romanian Leader Is Seeking Fall Visit With Bush
LEAD: Prime Minister Petre Roman wants very much to come to Washington this autumn and has let the Bush Administration know of this desire.
But so far, the Romanian official has received no positive response.


2 Films Share Prize At the Festival Latino
LEAD: ''No Futuro - Rodrigo D'' (''No Future - Rodrigo D''), a 1990 film by the Colombian director Victor Gaviria, and ''Papeles Secondarios'' (''Bit Parts''), a 1989 Cuban film directed by Orlando Rojas, shared the award for best feature film at the Festival Latino Film Awards, presented last night at the World Wide Plaza Cineplex Odeon Theater.


Our Towns;   Lobster Bargain Is No Bargain For Lobstermen
LEAD: Here on the fishing docks in this seaside village near the Rhode Island border, stacks of empty lobster traps bake like driftwood in the noonday sun. ''Must mean people are buying lobster, else they wouldn't be empty,'' said Arthur Medeiros, the captain of the Rosemary R., a 40-foot dragger that combs Fishers Island Sound and Little Narragansett Bay.


'Georgy Girl' Then and Now In Weight Watchers Spots
LEAD: WEIGHT WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL will start a yearlong national television campaign next week for its weight-loss programs, again using its pursuasive selling tool - Lynn Redgrave.


Clemens Captures 20th As Sox Score 7 in 9th
LEAD: Roger Clemens became a 20-game winner tonight for the third time as the Boston Red Sox scored seven runs in the ninth inning and beat the Cleveland Indians, 9-2, for their seventh consecutive victory.


Toyota to Increase Non-Auto Output
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation, Japan's largest automobile manufacturer, plans to triple the sales of its non-automotive divisions by 1994, Masami Iwasaki, an executive vice president, said.
He also said Toyota's consolidated profit had risen 27.4 percent in its latest fiscal year.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A2-14
The cost of the military operations in the Persian Gulf should be shared by other countries, including West Germany, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Japan and South Korea, President Bush said.
Page A1
Japan pledged $1 billion in aid to help pay for the military build up against Iraq.


Interest in Barfield, but Price Isn't Right
LEAD: The Yankees may have been at the center of trade rumors in recent weeks, but when August turns to September at midnight Friday, they will probably still not have made a deal.


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 520 money market mutual funds decreased $542.2 million, to $407.45 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 162 institutional funds decreased by $772.5 million, to $98.7 billion.
The assets of the 253 general-purpose funds were up by $931.9 million, to $143.38 billion.


New England Bank Stock Off
LEAD: The Bank of New England's stock tumbled today after a Congressional candidate said, and the Federal Government later denied, that regulators had recommended liquidating the struggling bank.


The Rich A's Get Even Richer
LEAD: It doesn't seem fair.


HORSE RACING: Notebook;   2 Out-of-Town Features at Belmont
LEAD: There are two major stakes races at Belmont Park this holiday weekend, and for the first time Belmont bettors will also be able to watch and play two other important out-of-town races.


2 Can Sue Over Something Horrible They Saw
LEAD: The California Supreme Court will allow two passengers who witnessed a fatal accident aboard a park tramway ride to bring a civil lawsuit because they say they suffered emotional trauma from what they saw.


As Part of a Liquidation, Morgan Sells 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: Morgan Stanley &amp; Company has been selling a large number of ''junk bonds'' as part of a liquidation of a portfolio of these high-yield, high-risk securities.
The selling has some traders worried that similar funds might also have to sell bonds.


Wholesale Gasoline Price Soars
LEAD: Wholesale gasoline prices surged yesterday, reflecting traders' concerns about low supplies and strong demand.
Crude oil prices also rose, with the contract for October delivery up 85 cents a barrel, or 3.3 percent, to $26.77 on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
HAVEL'S 'TEMPTATION'


Mohawk-Canada Accord Collapses
LEAD: An agreement between Mohawk Indians and the national and Quebec Governments to dismantle barricades across a main bridge in Montreal fell apart today as Indian leaders complained of continued harassment by the police.


Hynes Criticized in Report on Boycott
LEAD: A committee appointed by Mayor David N. Dinkins to investigate the bitter black-led boycott of two Korean-owned grocery stores in Brooklyn released its final report yesterday and criticized the Brooklyn District Attorney for moving too slowly in the emotionally charged case.


TV Weekend;   '20/20' Plumbs Depression's Depths
LEAD: Tonight's edition of ''20/20'' at 10 on ABC is given entirely to ''Depression: Beyond the Darkness,'' a report on a still mysterious illness that takes different forms and may affect 20 million Americans a year.
It's an informative hour.
Through interviews with sufferers and their doctors, the program describes the main forms of therapy now being used to control an often incapacitating affliction that sometimes ends in suicide.


Review/Art;   Was It a Love for TV? Or the TV Repairman?
LEAD: Since its infancy in the late 1960's, video art has had to contend with a contradiction.
As art, it aspires to be taken seriously, but as a relative of television it needs to entertain.
This may explain why some of the most memorable examples of early video art - William Wegman's tapes of his dog's deadpan performances, Vito Acconci's risque monologues - use humor as an esthetic device.


Healthiest S.&amp; L.'s Show Sharp Decline In Latest U.S. Data
LEAD: Providing troubling evidence that the savings and loan deterioration is worsening, the Government reported today that even the healthiest segment of the industry has sharply declined in the last three months.


Kodak Photo Plan
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company has scheduled news conferences for Sept. 18 in New York, Tokyo and London to introduce ''a new photographic system designed to increase the use and enjoyment of pictures.'' Kodak declined to provide details.
Analysts speculate Kodak may be introducing devices or methods to electronically manipulate conventional photographs.


Corrections
LEAD: An article and a map yesterday about the 1990 census referred incorrectly in some copies to the percentage increase in Texas' population.


Miss Muhlstock, Executive, Weds
LEAD: Sharon Bonnie Muhlstock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley I. Muhlstock of New York and Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday to Richard Neil Sheinker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Sheinker of Montville, N.J.
Rabbi Philmore Berger performed the ceremony at Temple Avodah in Oceanside, L.I.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   In Tallying Its Gulf Costs, U.S. Counts Impatience
LEAD: In drawing up the burden-sharing plan announced today by President Bush to help sustain United States forces in the Persian Gulf, the Administration was mindful that the American people and Congress might become impatient with a drawn-out crisis, State Department officials said.


Complaints About Census Mount As Many Areas See Low Counts
LEAD: The complaints of New York City about undercounting in the 1990 census figures grew to a chorus today as officials from cities and states across the country argued that they, too, were underrepresented in the preliminary data.


The Great Late Show
LEAD: It began like a paparazzi of angels popping flashbulbs in the sky: the electric storm that swept into New York City just after midnight Tuesday, one of the season's grandest shows.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Cyanamid Co., Wayne, N.J., a biotechnology company, said Pierre Cardin, the French designer, would reacquire the worldwide rights to his fragrance trademark and brands from the company.
No terms were disclosed.


Sri Lankans Airlift 40 Troops From Rebel-Besieged Camp
LEAD: Government troops evacuated more than 40 wounded soldiers from a camp beseiged by Tamil rebel forces, a top military official said today.


Bessie Awards to Proceed Despite Loss of a Co-Host
LEAD: Dance Theater Workshop announced yesterday that it would hold its seventh annual Bessie Awards ceremony as planned, despite the withdrawal of Karen Finley as a host.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   THATCHER WARNS EUROPE OVER GULF
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain said today that Europeans were in danger of losing the global military protection of the United States unless they took a broader view of their security interests than they have in the Persian Gulf crisis.


Grains and Soybeans Drop As Good Weather Persists
LEAD: Grain and soybean futures dropped yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.


NATO Can Get Back on the Right Track
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fairs and Festivals
LEAD:
TOMORROW
NEW YORK RENAISSANCE FESTIVAL, Sterling Forest, Tuxedo, N.Y.
Storytelling, puppet shows, rides, crafts demonstrations.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission, $12.50 ($10.50 for the elderly; $5 for those 6- to 12-year-olds; free for those under 6. Weekends through Sept. 16.


Confrontation in the Gulf: Man in the News;   Iraq's Best Face: Tariq Aziz
LEAD: If Iraq has a good face that it wants to show to the world, then Tariq Aziz is the man to do it.


South African Violence: The Limits of Leadership
LEAD: As the dead are buried after South Africa's newest convulsion of violence, the tallies of destruction have been complemented by another consideration: the fighting showed more the limits than the strengths of those contending for leadership in this country.
For Chief Mangosuthu


Year-End Oil Shortage Predicted
LEAD: Officials at the International Energy Agency, which represents 21 oil-consuming nations, predict that a substantial oil shortage will develop late this year.
At present, however, daily worldwide demand for oil is only slightly greater than supply, despite the embargo on Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude.


Robert Phillips Dead; Photographer Was 64
LEAD: Robert H. Phillips, a photographer whose work has appeared in the nation's leading magazines and is in the photography collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art, died last Friday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 64 years old.


The Talk of Flushing Meadows;   A Genteel U.S. Open? Here? Fuhgedaboudit!
LEAD: Ever since the U.S.
Open tennis tournament moved from the staid West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills to the bigger, brasher complex in Flushing Meadows 13 years ago, it has been difficult to balance the populism of the New York crowd with the gentle traditions of tennis.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraq Moves Some Captives to Hotel In Possible Step Toward Departure
LEAD: Iraq moved some of its hostage women and children from outlying areas where they had been placed at potential military targets into Baghdad today, apparently in preparation for their being allowed to leave the country.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Friday (until 8 P.M. on Tuesday) and 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on weekends; gift shop and cafeteria are open the same hours.
Admission: children under 3, free; ages 3 to 12, 25 cents; 65 and older, 50 cents; others, $1.
Information: 861-6030.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Soviets Issue Their First Criticism Of American Presence in the Gulf
LEAD: After three weeks of quietly tolerating the buildup of United States military forces in the Persian Gulf, Soviet officials sharply challenged the American presence today and questioned whether it might be intended as a permanent foothold in the region.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr.'s comments on the Church Universal and Triumphant referred incorrectly to its bomb shelters in a mountainside in Montana.
The shelters are not known to be stocked with automatic weapons.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.00
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.44
7.47
7.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.40
7.44
7.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.74
8.71
8.29
30-YR.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Shouting Threatens to Drown Racial Dialogue;   Fear Doesn't Go Away
LEAD: To the Editor:


Centel Plans to Sell Electricity Unit
LEAD: The Centel Corporation said it intended to sell its electricity operation, which provides service to more than 136,000 customers in Colorado and Kansas.
Centel said it expected to reach an agreement to sell the business before the end of the year.
The operations generated revenues of $165 million and earnings of $29 million last year.


California Measure For Earlier Primary Is Raising Questions
LEAD: A hitch has emerged that might derail plans for an early Presidential primary in California, despite the support of both national political parties and the agreement of California's legislative leadership and Gov.
George Deukmejian.


Afghan Leader Insists on Retaining Power in a Pact
LEAD: President Najibullah of Afghanistan made it clear here today that he did not see himself as a barrier to a political solution in Afghanistan and was not prepared to give up effective powers to a transitional government in Kabul.


Chronicle
LEAD: The New York Urban League's board has appointed DENNIS M. WALCOTT as its president and chief executive.
Mr.
Walcott had been executive director of Harlem Dowling-Westside Center for Children and Family Services, a voluntary welfare agency.
Before that he was associate director at the Greater New York Fund/United Way.


Dan Rooney Honored
LEAD: Dan Rooney, president of the Pittsburgh Steelers, was given the Pete Rozelle Award yesterday, the second annual presentation of an award in recognition of service to the N.F.L. (AP)


Gannett Names Head Of Merged Divisions
LEAD: Gary Watson was named yesterday as president of a newly consolidated newspaper group at the Gannett Company, effective Oct. 1.


Lag Found in Chemical Weapons Disposal
LEAD: The Army is behind schedule and over budget in its destruction of old chemical weapons, but Congress shares blame for some of the problems, the General Accounting Office says.


Books of The Times;   The Many Similarities At the Ends of Centuries
LEAD:
Sexual Anarchy
Gender and Culture at the Fin de Siecle
By Elaine Showalter
242 pages. Viking. $19.95.


One Wrong Dance Step, and It's Curtains
LEAD: To the Editor:


GIFTS FROM S.&amp; L. NOW SEEN AS CURSE
LEAD: In the heyday of the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association of Denver, its officials and major borrowers contributed more than $1 million to politicians in both parties.
Now officeholders and national Republican and Democratic officials are looking for a way to get rid of the money, which they regard as a curse.


Recovery Is Seen for Texas
LEAD: Economists are starting to see proof that the Texas economy is recovering from the deep slump caused by the collapse of oil prices in 1985, a Federal Reserve Bank official said today.


Judge Says Payola Prosecutors Broke Rules
LEAD: The Federal judge presiding over the payola and racketeering trial of the record promoter Joseph Isgro and two other defendants ruled today that the Federal prosecutors had violated rules of evidence in the case by withholding a key document from a grand jury and defense lawyers.


Norman DeHaan, 63, Architect and Designer
LEAD: Norman Richard DeHaan, a Chicago architect and interior designer, died at Passavant Hospital in Chicago on Aug. 24.
He was 63 years old.


Gorbachev Dismisses One of His Top Aides In Cigarette Shortage
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union dismissed one of his top officials today, blaming him for an acute shortage of cigarettes that has caused demonstrations in Moscow and other cities.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   More on the Gulf
LEAD: HOSTAGES LOSE JOBS: A Texas oil company has cut off pay to the families of six of its workers who are being held hostage in the Persian Gulf.
National news, page A18.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
J.
Walter Thompson's New York office has created a new campaign for the Council of Independent Colleges that promotes small colleges and focuses on minority students.


Brazil to Buy 2 Satellites
LEAD: Brazil's state telecommunications company Embratel said today that it had signed a contract to purchase two satellites made by the Hughes Aircraft Company, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, for a total of $175 million.
Embratel purchased the satellites from a consortium consisting of Hughes and the Brazilian company Promon Engenharia.


Rev. Allan J. Burry, Methodist Official, 56
LEAD: The Rev.
Allan J. Burry, a Methodist minister and an official with the campus ministry section of the United Methodist Church, died Tuesday at his home in Nashville, Tenn.
He was 56 years old.


People
LEAD: *
Leslie Beal has been promoted to assistant media planner at Martin Williams Advertising Inc., Minneapolis.


Sega Commercials Take On Nintendo
LEAD: Sega of America, a maker of video games, will begin a campaign next week that takes a hit at rival Nintendo of America.


A Critic's Eye: Choosing Favorites In Museum Collections
LEAD: FOR quite some weeks now, visitors to New York have been asking, ''What's new in the museums?'' And what have they heard, all too often, from host and hostess alike? ''Oh, nothing much.
Just the permanent collection.'' So they decide that it's quite all right to give the museums a miss.


Simmons Near Limit On Stake in Lockheed
LEAD: The Dallas investor Harold C. Simmons disclosed today that he had raised his stake in Lockheed Corporation to 19.8 percent, as high as he can without triggering the company's ''poison pill'' anti-takeover plan.


Alice Pentlarge Loeb Radio Producer, 95
LEAD: Alice Pentlarge Loeb, a writer and producer, died Friday at her home in Baltimore.
She was 95 years old.


Chile Is Planning Ceremony to Bury Allende
LEAD: Chile will formally bury former President Salvador Allende Gossens next week in a ceremony that has revived the controversies surrounding his Government and his death in a military coup nearly 17 years ago.


Shouting Threatens to Drown Racial Dialogue;   Spike Lee's Jews
LEAD: To the Editor:


Loss of Paychecks From Kuwait Makes Families Hostages of Crisis
LEAD: Saying the Persian Gulf conflict has eliminated its only source of income, a Texas company has cut off paychecks to the families of six oil workers who are hostages of the Iraqi Government.


Sutton Still Seeks Deal With DeSoto
LEAD: The Sutton Holding Corporation, a New York investment firm, said it was still interested in acquiring DeSoto Inc., even though the company was liquidating most of its assets and distributing the proceeds to shareholders.
Since July, DeSoto has sold its industrial coating and solvent business to a unit of the Union Carbide Corporation for $200 million and its consumer-paint business to the Sherwin-Williams Company for $80 million.


Topics of The Times;   T-Shirt Readings
LEAD: A New Yorker who begins her day with the astrology column and spends much of it knocking on wood went out looking for omens recently.
The weather was fine, too fine for anyone to be stuck in an office, and she was in search of something that would tell her to go home.
She found that something.
Thrice.


Washington Talk;   Fiscal Indecision Makes Retirement Look Better
LEAD: The Federal Government is an adroit procrastinator, ever ready to postpone such routine chores as balancing the budget.
If Uncle Sam saw a therapist, he would surely be told that the habit is self-destructive.


Rimington Waived
LEAD: The Philadelphia Eagles yesterday waived Dave Rimington, an eight-year center who was a two-time Outland Trophy winner at Nebraska and a first-round draft pick by the Bengals in 1983.
Cincinnati waived him during the 1988 preseason, after which he was signed by the Eagles.
He started every game in 1988, but he started just one regular-season game last season.


New York Fights Back With Computer's Help
LEAD: New York City bgan a statistical, legal and political counterattack to prove that there are more New Yorkers than the Census Bureau's figures indicates.


Gerald L. Norman, 78, Administrative Judge
LEAD: Gerald L. Norman, a retired administrative judge for the Workmen's Compensation Board, died on Sunday at Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 78 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of lung cancer, his sister, Winifred L. Norman, said.
Mr.
Norman served as a judge for the Workmen's Compensation Board for several years before he retired in 1980.


2 Advances Are Cited in Tracing Mystery Disorder
LEAD: Two advances in tracing the cause of a mysterious blood and muscle disorder linked to consumption of the food supplement L-tryptophan were reported yesterday by Federal health officials.


Beijing Journal;   The Tears of the Helmsman and Other Scuttlebutt
LEAD: Mao Zedong's image was one of half-emperor and half-god in the days when he presided as Great Helmsman of nearly one-quarter of humanity.
But now it turns out that his wife could reduce him to tears.


ARMENIA DISARMS A VIGILANTE GROUP
LEAD: The new Government of Soviet Armenia said today that it had faced down and disarmed the leaders and scores of guerrillas of a vigilante group that has alarmed the republic with factional violence.


SHUTTLE COLUMBIA IS DELAYED AGAIN
LEAD: The space agency late tonight delayed the launching of the space shuttle Columbia for at least four days to repair a broken part on its astronomical payload.


New Twist In Taylor Talks
LEAD: Negotiations over a contract extension for Lawrence Taylor stalled today, and Joe Courrege, Taylor's agent, said the Giants had given him permission to shop Taylor to other teams.


Why Open Can't Leave New York
LEAD: From the top row of the tennis stadium, you absolutely cannot tell how much topspin is on the ball.
But once the weather clears, you can surely see the New York skyline, shimmering a few miles to the west.


Japanese Markets Rally After Central Bank Raises Rate
LEAD: The financial markets here reacted positively to Thursday's increase in the Bank of Japan's discount rate, but a number of economists warned that it was unlikely to be the last such jump in Japanese interest rates because of growing inflationary pressures.


GERMAN VOWS LIMIT ON THE NEW FORCE
LEAD: In a ''binding declaration'' that will be recorded in the Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty, Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher of West Germany said today that a united Germany would limit its ground and air forces to 345,000.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Jesse Jackson Meets Hussein On Gulf Crisis, Iraq Reports
LEAD: Jesse Jackson met with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq today to discuss the Persian Gulf crisis, the official Iraqi News Agency reported.


Bulk of $94 Million in Special Interest Gifts Goes to Incumbents
LEAD: Always more inclined to spend money on the campaigns of proven winners than on risky newcomers, political action committees have donated 12 times as much to incumbents as to challengers in this year's Congressional elections, said a study made public today.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Opening With the Blues


Timing Adjusted
LEAD: The National Football League, upon determining that the changes made to shorten the length of games had gone too far, yesterday announced a modification of the timing procedure after kickoffs.


Shackleford Waived; He'll Play in Italy
LEAD: Charles Shackleford, who spent two troubled seasons with the Nets, was waived at his request yesterday and will play in the Italian League this season.


Police Cut Back Zodiac Search As Trail Cools
LEAD: After following more than 2,000 leads, interviewing dozens of suspects and consulting astrologers, the police are tempering their approach to tracking the so-called Zodiac gunman.


Some Possibilities for Playing on Labor Day Weekend
LEAD: Opportunities for creative non-labor in the three-state region this holiday weekend include gazing, giggling, browsing, buying, hurling, and making ice cream.


Perrier to Revise Its Label
LEAD: Perrier mineral water, having weathered a storm early this year about contamination of its water, now faces another blow: bowing to government pressure, it can no longer call its water ''naturally carbonated.''


Mullen Wins One, But Loses Another
LEAD: Mullen Advertising Inc., Wenham, Mass., scored a victory and a loss yesterday.


Stocks Fall As Trading Dries Up
LEAD: Stocks fell yesterday in the slowest trading in three months as many investors lightened their holdings before the Labor Day weekend.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   13 of 21 in Arab League Meet on Avoiding a War
LEAD: Representatives of 13 of the 21 Arab League members met here tonight to seek a way to avoid war with Iraq.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
Dizzy Gillespie's Be-Bop


Dr. John K. Frost, 68, Researcher in Lung Cancer
LEAD: Dr.
John K. Frost, a physician and researcher who specialized in early detection and diagnosis of lung cancer, died on Wednesday at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 68 years old and lived in Brooklandville, Md.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


All-Stravinsky Concert
LEAD: Paul Zukofsky will conduct musicians from the Juilliard School in Stravinsky's ''Fanfare for a New Theater'' (1964), ''Epitaphium'' (1959), ''Orpheus'' (1948) and Symphony in C (1940) at the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art, 14 West 54th Street, tonight at 7:30.
The program will be repeated tomorrow evening at 7:30.


Short-Term Treasuries Advance
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in light trading yesterday.
An 85-cent rise in oil prices, to $26.77 a barrel, helped persuade bond traders to sell securities, but anticipation that the Federal Reserve Board might be on the verge of easing monetary policy helped push up prices of shorter-term notes and bills.


Ex-State Senator Beatty Slain in Storefront Office in Brooklyn
LEAD: Vander L. Beatty, a flamboyant former State Senator who was convicted of vote fraud after he ran for Congress in 1982, was shot and killed yesterday in his storefront campaign headquarters in Brooklyn.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about Donald J. Trump misstated the portion of a $65 million bank loan package that was for interest payments on one of his casino bonds.


Dollar Posts Broad Gains; Gold Prices Mostly Higher
LEAD: The dollar gained against all major foreign currencies in domestic trading yesterday, even against the Japanese yen, despite the Bank of Japan's decision to raise its discount rate.


California Firm on Internments
LEAD: An effort to revise what California schoolchildren are taught about the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II was soundly defeated Tuesday by the State Legislature.


Chronicle
LEAD: SERGEI N. KHRUSHCHEV, son of the deposed Soviet leader, is to spend a month this fall at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University in Boston.
Theresa Donovan, a spokeswoman for the school, said Mr.
Khrushchev, a 55-year-old engineer, would use the libraries and talk to the faculty while conducting research for his second book, the theme of which has not been disclosed.


Explosions at Lebanese Barracks Kill 10 Soldiers
LEAD: Two powerful explosions ripped through an army barracks belonging to Gen.
Michel Aoun east of here overnight, killing 10 soldiers and wounding 30 others, as warring Christian factions battled with mortar guns and tanks, shattering a three-month cease-fire, security officials said.


Emmet V. Murray, Lawyer, 64
LEAD: Emmet V. Murray, a lawyer who had retired from the Caltex Petroleum Company, died yesterday at his home in Quogue, L.I.
He was 64 years old and also lived in Gulf Stream, Fla.


Irwin A. Lewis, 68, A Pioneer in Polling At the Voting Booth
LEAD: I. A. Lewis, who in the late 1960's was one of the first poll takers to predict election results by surveying voters leaving polling places, died Aug. 18 at the Glendale Adventist Medical Center in California.
He was 68 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


Williams Is Bitter
LEAD: Doug Williams, the only black quarterback to start in the Super Bowl, says that racism is still common in the National Football League.


Police Kill Suspect in a West Side Subway
LEAD: One of three armed men who led the police on a car chase through the Upper West Side of Manhattan was shot and killed last night by officers while trying to flee into a subway tunnel, the police said.


Airline Group Assails Long Customs Delays
LEAD: International passengers at 15 airports in the United States routinely waited two hours or more to clear customs this summer, the president of an airline trade association says, calling for action by the Government to correct the problem.


Factory Orders Up 1.6% in July
LEAD: Orders to factories for manufactured goods grew 1.6 percent in July, the Government reported today.
But analysts said the fluctuating performance so far this year suggested an anemic industrial economy even before the Persian Gulf crisis.


Luigi Beccali, 83, Olympic Champion
LEAD: Luigi Beccali, a prominent and popular long-distance runner in the 1930's and the gold medalist in the 1,500-meter run at the 1932 Olympic Games in Los Angeles, died of natural causes Tuesday in Rafaello, Italy.
He was 83 years old.


Shouting Threatens to Drown Racial Dialogue;   'We Were Humiliated'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraqis Playing Waiting Game, U.S. Officers in Region Say
LEAD: Iraq has been avoiding military actions that could provide the United States with the justification for a strike at Iraqi forces, senior American military officials say.
They say that Baghdad instead appears to be trying to turn the crisis here into an endurance contest.


It's Carnival Time As New York Turns Caribbean to Dance The Weekend Away
LEAD: EVERY Labor Day weekend, geography warps to place New York City unmistakably in the Caribbean.
This weekend brings a West Indian carnival tonight through Monday in Brooklyn, featuring calypso, steel-band and reggae music; a major salsa concert on Sunday at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., and a marathon of Dominican merengue tonight at Roseland in Manhattan.


Wayne Newton's Libel Award Against NBC Is Overturned
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today overturned a $5.2 million libel award to the singer Wayne Newton against the National Broadcasting Company, ruling that the network's news reports suggesting links between Mr.
Newton and organized crime had not been shown to be deliberately or recklessly false.


Auctions
LEAD: When office workers dunk a lonely tea bag in a paper cup or a ceramic mug of hot water, they are participating in a tradition that modern life has reduced to the barest essentials.
In the good old days, especially in 18th- and 19th-century England at the high end of the social scale, afternoon tea was a ritual of considerable substance and extensive accessories.


U.S. ENERGY POLICY TO STRESS OUTPUT AND CONSERVATION
LEAD: Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said today that the Bush Administration was responding to the Persian Gulf crisis with a ''short-term strategy'' for stabilizing oil markets by raising domestic production and encouraging conservation.
It will not speed up a new national energy policy now being developed, he said.


Loss on Campeau Loan
LEAD: The National Bank of Canada said today that it had written off an $80 million loan to Robert Campeau's private company, with the provision for the loss split equally between the bank's third and fourth quarters.


B.P.'s Outlook on Oil Prices
LEAD: The deputy chairman of the British Petroleum Company said today that he expected the new OPEC production agreement to keep oil prices in the mid-$20's.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From President's News Conference on Gulf Crisis
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference in Washington today, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
OPENING STATEMENT


Accounts
LEAD: * Canadian Airlines to Chiat/Day/ Mojo, Toronto, with a budget of $25 million.


Rather Was Awakened For Midnight Interview
LEAD: Dan Rather, the CBS News anchor, said yesterday that several weeks of dogged contact with Iraqi officials paid off on Wednesday night in Baghdad when an armed Iraqi soldier awakened him in his hotel room and escorted him to the presidential palace, where he interviewed President Saddam Hussein.
It was the President's first interview by an American jounralist since the invasion of Kuwait on Aug.


McDonald's Opens a Diner
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation opened a diner-style restaurant here last week that is in sharp contrast to its fast-food outlets.


Excerpts From Interview With Hussein on Crisis in Gulf
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an interview with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, conducted Wednesday in Baghdad by Dan Rather of CBS News, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:


Japan's Price Tag on Gulf Aid Bears U.S. Imprint
LEAD: A decision by Japan to pledge $1 billion in aid for the military buildup against Iraq came after United States officials expressed unhappiness over the original package announced by Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu, American and Japanese officials said today.


Restaurants
LEAD: On a tropical Monday evening in late August, when many restaurants in town are so quiet they could double as library annexes, Lola on West 22d Street resembles a Club Med social.
To the background of a blues pianist, the buoyant, well-dressed crowd gets louder in direct proportion to the wine and tropical cocktails consumed.


Review/Cabaret;   Barbara Lea, in the Lee Wiley Mode
LEAD: Among New York's veteran cabaret performers, Barbara Lea is the only one of note who continues to carry on a sultry Southern-flavored pop-jazz tradition popularized by Ethel Waters and embellished by Mildred Bailey, Connee Boswell and Lee Wiley.
Like her forerunners, Miss Lea is understated when it comes to dramatizing song lyrics.


Shouting Threatens to Drown Racial Dialogue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lawyers On Call For Duty In the Gulf


Economic Scene;   Thai Stock Boom Grinds to a Halt
LEAD: BRASH and booming Thailand, which has been enjoying some of the world's highest growth rates in the last few years, has suffered something of a nervous breakdown this month, as the shock waves set off by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq have ricocheted around the world.


Topics of The Times;   A Shield Against Thieves
LEAD: Last year Americans reported 1.5 million cars stolen, a startling 42 percent increase since 1985.
An expanding anti-theft program, pioneered in New York City, now offers car owners inexpensive protection against this epidemic.


Brazil Stops Debt Interest
LEAD: The president of Brazil's central bank announced today that the country would not make any payment this year on overdue interest owed on its $114 billion foreign debt, the largest in the developing world.


Allison K. Sands Weds J. E. Tamis
LEAD: Allison Kendall Sands, a daughter of Adrienne Sands of New York and Bruce A. Sands of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Evan Tamis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford H. Tamis of Bedford, N.Y.
Rabbi Alvin Wainhouse performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Lunch Afloat


A Brash Deal Maker And Its Uncertain Bets
LEAD: Picture a company with a patchwork of ownership interests in assets collectively worth $20 billion, assets that range from unglamorous textile and paper mills to trophy holdings like the Seattle Mariners major league baseball team.
Just when some of those investments are due to be turned into cash, unrest in the Middle East sends oil prices soaring and threatens to usher in a recession.


Market Place;   Fund Investors Remain Steadfast
LEAD: THE Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, and the subsequent plunge in stock market prices, drew a surprisingly muted reaction from mutual fund investors, several mutual fund companies said yesterday.
Some managers said investors even stepped up their purchases of stock funds.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Friday about the National Endowment for the Arts misstated the origin of an anti-obscenity pledge required by the agency from grant recipients.
John E. Frohnmayer, the endowment chairman, instituted it last year after Congress amended the endowment's appropriation to prohibit Federal support for art considered obscene.


Larry Jackson, Pitcher, 59
LEAD: Larry Jackson, who pitched for three National League teams and was named to three All-Star teams, died of cancer Tuesday.
He was 59 years old.


Comprehensive Care Appoints a President
LEAD: The newly elected board of the Comprehensive Care Corporation yesterday appointed James Carmany as president and chief executive of the St.
Louis-based provider of programs to treat chemical dependency.


In the Nightlife Of Houston Street, Some New Kids On the Block
LEAD: WITH the East Village to the north and SoHo to the south, Houston Street is downtown's great divide.
As wide as a river, it has sprawling four-way intersections that dwarf the twinkling traffic lights above.
The most interesting storefront is actually a lot stocked with funky secondhand furniture.


Tokyo's Share of World Leadership
LEAD: Faced with Washington's wrath, Japan stopped some of its hemming and hawing yesterday and pledged at least $1 billion for the multilateral effort in the Persian Gulf.
But regrettably, Tokyo remains vague about its promises to help beleaguered front-line gulf states.


Paper Exceeds Goal
LEAD: The European, a weekly newspaper begun in May, exceeded the circulation guaranteed to advertisers in June and July, its publisher, Robert Maxwell, said this week.
Mr.
Maxwell said weekly sales were estimated to be 360,000 in June and 340,000 in July.
Advertisers had been guaranteed circulation of 225,000, Mr.


On Stage
LEAD:
In the Footsteps of 'Sarafina!'


600 Resign at Saudi Aramco
LEAD: Amid fear that war could break out in the Persian Gulf, about 600 foreign workers have resigned from Saudi Aramco, and many more are expected to leave, a Saudi executive of the company said today.


Susan B. Rauch, Executive, Weds
LEAD: Susan Buchner Rauch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert L. Rauch of Hewlett, L.I., was married yesterday to Steven Howard Epstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse Epstein of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Mark Wittstein and Cantor Howard Stahl officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.


Florio Chooses Close Adviser as New Chief of Staff
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio has chosen a longtime friend and his closest political adviser for 16 years, Joseph C. Salema, as his new chief of staff, according to members of the Legislature who have been informed of the Governor's decision.


Mets Scramble to Assemble Contender
LEAD: Mel Stottlemyre, uncomfortable in trying to be both diplomatic and enthusiastic, stood on the steps of the dugout at Shea Stadium yesterday and answered one awkward question after another.


Father Watches Capriati Ascend
LEAD: For all the coaches, trainers, physiotherapists, psychotherapists and other experts who travel the world in care of this tennis player or that one, few members of the entourage ever attain the profile of the dad whose offspring has suddenly exploded into the public consciousness.


Newmont to Offer Stock; Hanson Seeks to Cut Stake
LEAD: In a move to take advantage of the current boom in the gold industry, the Newmont Mining Corporation, the large gold mining concern that is 49 percent owned by Hanson P.L.C. of Britain, said yesterday that it plans to sell 3.6 million new common shares in a public offering.


Who Stands to Lose? Political Figuring Starts
LEAD: Because political power drains from places where population has been lost, New York City and western New York may bear the worst political consequences of the 1990 census of New York State.


LAW: At the Bar;   The short life and long legacy of an unsung, underpaid defender of New York's have-nots.
LEAD: To some, the measure of a man's life is the length of his obituary.
By that standard, Jack Lipson's legacy, like his life, was short.
When he died of a heart attack last November at 45 years old, he rated only a few column inches of print.


LaPoint Throws Away Streak
LEAD: Things had gone so well for the Yankees that they almost could not have expected this: a rough night, an end to their winning streak, two errant throws by Dave LaPoint and a sudden lack of offense.


Suburbs Lead in New Jersey Census
LEAD: Preliminary census figures show Essex County, where the population of Newark and East Orange dropped sharply, being surpassed as the state's most populous county by suburban Bergen County.


Reduction In Gains Tax Is Questioned
LEAD: A reduction in the Federal capital gains tax ''could not be counted on'' to increase American economic growth significantly, the Congressional Budget Office said today.


Fernandez Powers Mets Over Giants
LEAD: An instant after it's unleashed, the curveball looks like it's headed for the dugout instead of the plate.
An instant after that, it's over the plate and the batter is ducking for the dugout.
Sid Fernandez, the pitcher for the Mets who is equipped with one of the game's most deceptive and disabling fastballs, last night had that curveball magic.


With Figures and Lawsuits, New York Attacks Census
LEAD: New York City began a statistical, legal and political counterattack yesterday in an effort to prove that it is much bigger than preliminary figures from the Census Bureau show.


Thomas Scores a Touchdown But Jets Lose to Buccaneers
LEAD: Bruce Coslet, the Jets' rookie head coach, went into tonight's final preseason game against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers with some answers that needed to be questioned before putting his new team in the jeopardy of the regular season.


Hewlett to Drop Design Operation DTL
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company said its engineering applications group would phase out of the business of developing electronic design automation software, which allows the computerized design of chips and circuit boards.
The group will now concentrate on developing mechanical engineering and data-management software.


