'A HACK OF GENIUS'
LEAD:
BEN HECHT
The Man Behind the Legend.
By William MacAdams.
366 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $24.95.


Lori Schwartz, Buyer, Wed To Kirk Palmer, Recruiter
LEAD: The Harvard Club in New York was the setting yesterday evening for the wedding of Lori Ann Schwartz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Schwartz of Manhasset, L.I., to Kirk Palmer, a son of Muriel Yarger of Orange, Calif. and Joseph Palmer of Lawton, Okla.
Rabbi Charles Lippman and the Rev.
Kenneth Jones, a


HARNONCOURT'S MOZART SHOWS STEADY GROWTH
LEAD: Ordinarily, American music lovers are able to keep abreast of successful European performers through their recordings, even if American opera companies and orchestras are slow to engage them.
In the case of Nikolaus Harnoncourt's conducting of Mozart operas, that familiarity has been impeded by recent distribution problems of his record company.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Nantucket Island, which is renowned for the exploits of its whaling fleet, gave rise to a curious ivory medal in its early days.
The medal is called a Nantucket mortgage button and commemorates not valor, but thrift.


Innovative Food in Coliseum's Shadow
LEAD: VISUALIZE Cody's American Restaurant &amp; Bar, across the street from the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale.
Do you see a boisterous crowd of hockey fans downing hardy burgers and brew after an Islanders' game?


Snipers in Honduras Wound 6 U.S. Troops
LEAD: Snipers opened fire on United States Air Force personnel in Honduras today, wounding at least six, officials said.


Rostenkowski's Critics Are Wrong
LEAD: Representative Dan Rostenkowski's plan for cutting the deficit has been attacked by nearly everyone except the White House.
Critics charge that it contains too much deficit reduction, is unfair and would be bad politics for the Democrats.
They're wrong on all counts.


Narrative Emphasized In 'Tale of Two Cities'
LEAD: IF only for the sake of perpetuating a classic, one hopes that ''A Tale of Two Cities'' is faring better in classrooms than in the McCarter Theater's deadening and provincial production, which runs through next Sunday.


Panama and U.S. Strive To Settle on Death Toll
LEAD: Nearly three months after American troops invaded Panama, the Panamanian and American Governments, as well as human rights groups in both countries, are still struggling to compile a definitive tally of how many Panamanians were killed and wounded in the overthrow of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.
The uncertainty has allowed critics of the intervention and of Panama's new civilian Government to offer much higher body counts and to charge, in the words of former Attorney General Ramsey Clark, a ''conspiracy of silence'' to hide the real death toll.


Why Wall Street Likes Scientific-Atlanta's Mr. Fixit
LEAD: The major reason Wall Street likes Scientific-Atlanta Inc. may be that it loves William E. Johnson, the former consultant who became the company's chief executive in 1987.
Mr.
Johnson, previously unknown outside the the major multinational companies that had sought his advice, is credited with executing Scientific


Laura Ioachim To Wed in July
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Harry L. Ioachim of Teaneck, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Ioachim to Dr.
Martin Reichel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Reichel of New York.
A July wedding is planned.


On Second Thought
LEAD: After admitting that he spied for Israel in 1986 and being sentenced to life imprisonment, Jonathan Jay Pollard has changed his mind.
The former intelligence analyst for the Navy has asked to withdraw his guilty plea and stand trial, said one of his lawyers, Alan M. Dershowitz.
Mr.
Dershowitz asserted that Federal prosecutors had made false promises of leniency to persuade Mr.


Heather B. Smith To Marry in June
LEAD: The Rev. and Mrs.
Leslie C. Smith of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Heather Bishop Smith to John Millard Kreitler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hobart C. Kreitler of Southport, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Smith, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont and expects to receive a master's degree in social work from Columbia University next year.


Long-Forgotten Mine Shafts Come Back to Haunt Borough
LEAD: ONE day last November, Pat Acocella, a cabinetmaker, went through a routine he has followed for years.
He rose early, made himself breakfast, which he ate in the dining-room area overlooking the backyard, and went off to work.


HAVEL'S CHOICE
LEAD: ONLY THREE WEEKS INTO HER UNCONVENTIONAL ambassadorship, Rita Klimova has high technology on her plate.
Just back from New York in her chauffeured Lincoln Continental, she is having a small dinner at her official residence on the edge of Rock Creek Park in Washington.
The principal guest, the publisher of an international videotex service, is explaining how he will install his system in Czechoslovakia with


Campus Life: Kansas;   Tenured Professor Is Dismissed On Ethics Charges
LEAD: For the first time in its 123-year history, the University of Kansas has discharged a tenured faculty member.


Train vs. Car: Ending a Deadly Hazard
LEAD: THE morning of Jan. 16 broke cold and gray.
Jacalyn Kahn left her home in Ronkonkoma by 7 A.M. to catch the 7:22 express to Manhattan.
She did not want to be late on her very first day at a new job.


All About/Hypermarkets;   Will American Shoppers Think Bigger Is Really Better?
LEAD: Somehow the usual comparison - more than five football fields, end zones included - fails to convey the huge expanse of the Carrefour store in Philadelphia.
Transplanted to Manhattan, it would cover nearly two city blocks; transplanted to Egypt, Carrefour and a bit of its parking lot would cover the same area as the Great Pyramid of


Letters;   REAP WHAT YOU SEW
LEAD: I am amazed at the subtext in the Hers column, ''Reap What You Sew,'' by Barbara Crafton (March 11). ''Feminine'' activities like loving, sewing, or even pulling up maple saplings (or do only husbands do that?) are entirely compatible with thinking, leading and doing.
The seemingly necessary polarization of these in Ms.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If the voice of reason is not heeded now, developments could have grave consequences for all of us.''
- President
Mikhail S. Gorbachev,
addressing the people
of Lithuania.
[16:5.]


Sarah B. Schwab, Student, Is Wed
LEAD: Sarah Baldwin Schwab, the daughter of Julia Edge Bowers of Cambridge, Mass., and Walter P. B. Schwab of Providence, R.I., and Quechee, Vt., was married yesterday to Roger Raymond Ambrogi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond R. Ambrogi of Corning, N. Y. The Rev.
James A. Newman performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Redondo Beach, Calif.


Fewer New York Teen-Agers Have Their First Job
LEAD: Only one in four of New York City's older teen-agers is in the labor force, less than half the rate in the nation as a whole and lower than that of other big cities, Federal statistics show.


World Markets;   Assessing the Damage to Gold Markets
LEAD: Last week's gold plunge did more than knock the bulls out of the market.
The sudden, wrenching $23-an-ounce drop may also have driven away many investors and potential investors for some time.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
&gt;Karaoke Crooning


NO SHELTER IN THE HACIENDA
LEAD:
PARADISE
By Elena Castedo.
328 pp. New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $19.95.


Nothing Wrong With Women in Jackets;   Not There Yet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Katherine M. Blakeley Wed to Mark D. Teich
LEAD: Katherine Marion Blakeley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher P. Blakeley of Ambler, Pa., was married last evening to Mark Douglas Teich, the son of Helen C. Teich of Floral Park, L.I., and Hollywood, Fla., and the late David Teich.
Rabbi Norman Kahan officiated at the Pierre in New York.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: In a year of stunning headlines capturing the tumult in Eastern Europe, the one three weeks ago in The New York Times was among the more arresting: ''Parliament in Lithuania, 124-0, Declares Nation Independent.''


Central Europe's Grimy Coal Belt: Progress, Yes, but at What Cost?
LEAD: Most, Czechoslovakia - On the edge of an open-pit mine in the mountains of Bohemia stands a small cluster of medieval buildings, the last reminder of a town that survives only in the minds of its former inhabitants.


Correction
LEAD: The Pop View column in the Arts and Leisure section today misidentifies a trade association of recording retailers. (The error also appeared on Thursday in an article about warning labels for certain lyrics.) The group is the National Association of Recording Merchandisers, not the National Association of Record Manufacturers.


Oriental Outlook
LEAD: A former minor league pitcher of no great distinction is about to make a mark as the first Japanese manager of an American baseball team.
His name is Hide Koga and he is the new skipper of the Salinas Spurs of the Class A California League, a team that will have at least a dozen Japanese players on its roster when it plays the season opener Friday against the Modesto


Miss Hirschhorn Planning to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Carolyn Joy Hirschhorn to Curtis Joseph Schenker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Schenker of New York, has been announced by the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Hirschhorn of Longmeadow, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.


Moments From a Season Of New Heights for Huskies


Surprising Auburn Going After Title
LEAD: Carolyn Jones, the 5-foot-6-inch all-America junior, is the only returning starter from last year's Auburn team, which was runner-up in the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.


Review/Music;   Morton Feldman's Trancelike Tribute to Christian Wolff
LEAD: At the beginning of Morton Feldman's ''For Christian Wolff'' at the Alternative Museum last Sunday afternoon, Nils Vigeland - who played the piano and celesta to Eberhard Blum's flute - invited listeners with other engagements or expired patience to leave at will.


Question Of the Week;   Should Basketball Use Instant Replay?
LEAD: Unlike football, which grinds to a built-in stop after every play, basketball is designed to keep moving.
What with fouls and television timeouts, there are already too many stops and starts, and probably one-fourth to one-half of all the plays are disputed, even if only half-heartedly.
Once you start giving them an official method of protesting, the games will never end.


Cruises
LEAD: To the Editor: I appreciated some of the barbs in the article ''Down to the Sea With Aunt Dorothy'' (Travel, Feb. 4), but I have to take exception to one remark by the author, Toni Schlesinger, expressing her hope that on a next cruise ''there is more to do in the evening than play trivia with Jamie,''


Nepal Closes Some Schools In Effort to Curb Protesters
LEAD: The Government closed all high schools in the capital and two suburbs today to try to curb student demonstrators demanding multiparty politics, the state-owned radio reported.


U.S. Fears Baltic Crisis Will Hurt Moscow Ties
LEAD: Even before Mikhail S. Gorbachev's latest attempt today to halt Lithuanian secession, Administration and Congressional officials were expressing concern that the Baltic crisis was disrupting efforts to bring the United States military budget, arms control and the entire tone of Soviet-American relations into a new era.


From Beyond the Grace Commission
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL ;
'The Legend of Sviatoslav Richter,' Vol. 1


WHAT'S DOING ON: The Eastern Shore
LEAD: Maryland's Eastern Shore stretches some 150 miles from the upper tidewaters of Chesapeake Bay to the sand dunes at Assateague where the Free State meets Virginia on the Atlantic.
For generations the peninsula - which includes nine of Maryland's counties - was as insular as any island, removed from the mainland, remote, rural, primarily agricultural.


Going South
LEAD: He starred at cornerback and as a kick returner in the Canadian Football League the last three seasons but next season Stanley Blair will be performing for the Phoenix Cardinals of the N.F.L., with whom he signed a contract yesterday.
Blair, 28, played for the Edmonton Eskimos and was the C.F.L. rookie of the year in 1987.


THERE'S GOLD IN THEM THAR DIAMONDS
LEAD:
THE BASEBALL BUSINESS
Pursuing Pennants and Profits in Baltimore.
By James Edward Miller.
Illustrated. 382 pp. Chapel Hill:
The University of North Carolina Press. $24.95.


Wendy Goldberg, Student, to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William Goldberg of Swampscott, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Heather Goldberg to Charles Samuel de Gunzburg, a son of Baron Alain de Gunzburg of Paris and the late Minda Bronfman de Gunzburg.
A September wedding is planned.


The Ritual of Spring Changes for Guidry
LEAD: When he played, Ron Guidry sat in the same locker every spring, the one next to the showers and the whirlpool, near the coffee machine and Coke dispenser and about as close to the center of the Yankee clubhouse as you could get.


IN SHORT
LEAD: PLAYING FOR KEEPS: A History of Early Baseball.
By Warren Goldstein. (Cornell University, $21.95.) Rich in delicious information, ''Playing for Keeps'' argues that the first years of ''base ball,'' as the sport was known in the 1850's and 60's, established patterns of double thinking that still govern the complaints and yearnings of fans.


Campus Life: St. Lawrence;   A Gift of Books To Replace Those Lost in Romania
LEAD: As the Romanian Government fell last December, so did the Central University Library in Bucharest, burned to the ground by Nicolae Ceausescu's personal army.


DANCE VIEW
LEAD: What is a National Ballet company?
The San Francisco Ballet, which has just staged its first full-length - and lavish - production of ''The Sleeping Beauty,'' may provide an unexpected answer.


&gt;Act Now to Ward Off Summer Weeds
LEAD: EVEN though the forsythia has burst forth with its yellow bells, there is still time to get rid of summer nuisances before they appear.
But these deeds of eradication must be done promptly, because spring is here, and the blooms are advancing.


Disney World
LEAD: To the Editor: I noted with great interest that at Roger Rabbit's Hollywood, to be built by Disney-MGM Studios in Florida in the mid-1990's (Travel Advisory, Feb. 11), visitors will, among other activities, ''careen in an overaged Baby Herman's baby buggy through a Toontown hospital.''


Workers Rejoice at End Of 4-Year Strike at Colt
LEAD: THE first wave of union workers, suddenly the proud owners of the country's oldest handgun maker, triumphantly marched into the Colt's Manufacturing Company in Hartford last week to end the longest strike in Connecticut history.


Quick Ways to Turn Out Spicy Shrimp Dishes
LEAD: WHEN I'm in New York City on weekends, I often go down to Chinatown for a dim sum lunch.
On the way back, I cannot resist the Chinese fish markets, with their enticing piles of shrimp.
They are about as fresh as any I've found in the city, and come in all sizes, heads on or off, and are much cheaper than fish markets further uptown.


Smoking Aloft
LEAD: To the Editor: Even though the ban on smoking on almost all domestic airline flights has gone into effect, I feel obliged to state my objections.
I am a travel agent and a smoker, and although most of my clients request nonsmoking seats, there are many who insist on having a smoking seat.
I do not believe that an entire aircraft can be smoke polluted from a small smoking section, and I know that many like myself will now fly only to Hawaii or to foreign destinations.


U.S. Debates Aiding Burmese in Drug Fight
LEAD: With nearly half the world's opium now being grown in Myanmar, formerly Burma, and increasing amounts of Southeast Asian heroin going to the United States, a squabble has broken out between the State Department and the Drug Enforcement Administration over whether to renew ties and financing to the Burmese military Government, Western diplomats and law-enforcement authorities say.


IN SHORT
LEAD: NOW PITCHING BOB FELLER.
By Bob Feller with Bill Gilbert. (Birch Lane/Carol Publishing, $18.95.) Freckle-faced boys in short pants routinely came up after games to ask Bob Feller, ''What's it like to be a real baseball player?'' Mr.
Feller, now 71 years old and still a spring training coach for the Cleveland Indians and a player in old-timers' games, answers for all baseball buffs.


Old Enough to Kill?
LEAD: Later this year, when the forsythia on the mountain slopes here has turned from yellow to green, Cameron Kocher will stand trial for killing Jessica Carr.
Late May or early June, his lawyer says, unless there is some kind of plea bargain.
The timing is fortunate; the defendant will not miss much of fifth grade.


A Role for Records? Purists Say: 'Yes. Just Listen.'
LEAD: Michael Heth says customers walking into his hi-fi store in this affluent San Francisco suburb are often shocked.


Leaping Into the Unknown
LEAD: THE metal apparatus joining my bound ankles to the thin cord hangs off the edge of the bridge.
It feels heavy enough to pull me over.
Without my glasses everything is blurry.
I look out, as instructed, to the trees on a faraway ridge, to the distant bridge that the cars cross over. ''Throw yourself at that bridge,'' the man says.


APRIL FOOLS' DAY, INTEL-STYLE
LEAD: FOR THE 22,000 EMPLOYEES OF the Intel Corporation, the hottest item on their cafeteria newsstands this week will be an eight-page magazine with a strong resemblance to the National Enquirer.
The subject matter is close to home: the workers and operations of Intel, the world's largest manufacturer of microprocessors, based in Santa Clara, Calif.


Young Americans Fill the Schedule
LEAD: YOUNG American artists set the concert pace this week, starting today at 3 P.M., when the clarinetist Daniel McKelway, a 1989 winner of the Avery Fisher Career Grant Award, closes the ''Castle Concerts'' series at Manhattanville College in Purchase.


Where the Real Nations Are in the Center of Europe
LEAD: AS Communism recedes, longstanding ethnic rivalries remain to haunt Eastern Europe.
The region is dotted with minorities, from the tiny population of Sorbs, a Slavic people, in East Germany to the Turks who make up 10 percent of the population of Bulgaria.
Old hostilities are still being played out, like the rivalry of Hungarians and Romanians for ownership of Transylvania.


Driving Abroad
LEAD: To the Editor: My husband and I are shipping our camper to Europe for a trip around the world.
Having traveled by camper for a year through the Middle East and Asia, we are aware that a carnet de passage, a passport for the vehicle and a guarantee that it will not be sold or otherwise abandoned, is required by many countries.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Saco, Me.;   Project Goes To Creditor
LEAD: A $40 MILLION project to convert a dilapidated textile mill into an upscale complex with homes, offices and a hotel has failed, and the developer has turned the property over to a creditor.


BONN'S NEW PLAN FOR SINGLE MARK SETS OFF A FUROR
LEAD: A heated political debate broke out today as the West German Government confirmed a report that it was considering a plan for German monetary union under terms far less favorable to East Germans than those originally discussed by Bonn.


THE FLOOPY PLAYS IN AGAIN, SANS SAM
LEAD: Electric music makers like the radio and phonograph have pushed the piano out of the parlor.
But now electronics is pushing the piano right back into the living room.
Several new high-tech versions of the old player piano offer cases in point.


Review/Recital;   Siegfried Jerusalem, Tenor, In Beethoven and Schubert
LEAD: The German tenor Siegfried Jerusalem has been singing at the Metropolitan Opera for a decade but gave his first New York City recital only last Sunday afternoon.
For his debut, at the Frick Collection, he sang Beethoven's ''An die Ferne Geliebte,'' Schumann's ''Dichterliebe'' and selections from Schubert's ''Schwanengesang.


Audubon Theater
LEAD: To the Editor:


7 Flee Jail; Two Recaptured
LEAD: Two jail escapees, one a former death row inmate, were captured today, but five other escapees from Yellowstone County jail were still at large.
Bernard Fitzpatrick, a convicted murderer, was among seven prisoners who scaled a wall of a recreation yard Friday night and cut through a chain-link screen.


New Zealand's Inventive Ceramics
LEAD: THERE are many reasons for visiting Nelson, a city at the top of the South Island of New Zealand.
Nelson, the province as well as the city, attracts visitors from all over the world, who go to hike and kayak in Abel Tasman National Park, and is a favorite vacation spot for New Zealanders, who like the clear water and miles of golden beaches.


FOR A TAX BREAK, GIFTS IN KIND
LEAD: WHEN ASHTON-TATE'S SOFTWARE sales turn soft, or woolens begin piling up in Lane Bryant's warehouse, the companies often donate some portion of their bloated inventories to charity - and reap a substantial tax write-off.
Helping them give, and get, is a small but growing band of nonprofit companies that serve as middlemen, channeling hundreds of millions of dollars in gifts in kind from manufacturer to needy recipient.


Jordan 1990: New Politics, Islam's Way
LEAD: The young woman in a dark veil had a problem: how, she asked the legislator, could she switch colleges?
The legislator scribbled a supportive note to a college director he knew.
The woman left.
The man sighed.
Only recently, said Abdel Latif Arrabiyat, a legislator from the Muslim Brotherhood, a man had asked him to adjudicate marital strife.


America, Doubled
LEAD: Today is Census Day but that's not what startled him.
Yes, he said to himself, the decennial census is important because, like taxes, voting and jury duty, it applies to everyone.
Yes, it's the basis for reapportioning the 435 seats in the House and reallocating $50 billion in Federal funds.
Yes, it's a fountain of


Design Preview;   Playing It Safe
LEAD: Showrooms at the Southern Furniture Market in High Point, N.C., reflect the season's business climate.
When sales are strong, manufacturers take an optimistic outlook, presenting new lines and fresh designs.
When sales are slow, however, there are fewer introductions and new pieces tend to have a conservative look.


Review/Theater;   A Winner's Lot After the Lottery, in English and Spanish
LEAD: This appears to be the silly season for the Puerto Rican Traveling Theater, which has put at the top of its 1990 roster Fred Valle's new play, ''I Am a Winner.'' In performance this farce gives the impression of an improvisation by actors who occasionally forget to stay in character as they develop the wholly unbelievable story.


Georgia A-Plant Accident Getting Sharp U.S. Scrutiny
LEAD: An accident that occurred at a Georgia nuclear power plant on March 21 is focusing renewed attention on one of the most worrisome potential problems at nuclear plants: the loss of electrical power to run the plant and cool its reactor fuel.


Fashion;   Shaping the Look of Things to Come
LEAD: The fall collections in New York got off to a rollicking start Thursday evening when eight young designers offered a sneak preview of their lines at the Martha International shop, 473 Park Avenue (58th Street).


Verdi's 'Traviata' and Requiem
LEAD: VERDI is the composer of vocal choice this week, with both ''La Traviata'' and the Requiem on the calendar in Connecticut.


'Damn Yankees': An Explanation
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


&gt;Act Now to Ward Off Summer Weeds
LEAD: EVEN though the forsythia has burst forth with its yellow bells, there is still time to get rid of summer nuisances before they appear.
But these deeds of eradication must be done promptly, because spring is here, and the blooms are advancing.


Style Makers;   Roger Gorman, Album Designer
LEAD: Roger Gorman, a Manhattan-based art director, won the Grammy Award for Best Album Design this year with his innovative boxed presentation of David Bowie's ''Sound+Vision.''


Question Of the Week;   Should Basketball Use Instant Replay?
LEAD: No, no, no, no.
The refs are not perfect but neither are the players.
Will there be a replay after every call that Bill Laimbeer doesn't like?
It would take five hours to play each half.
Leave the replay for the news at 11.
PETER McINTYRE
Matawan, N.J.


Too Many Starting Pitchers Can Bring a Mound of Problems
LEAD: The Mets are not the only team that has the highly unusual problem of having too many starting pitchers.
Some problem.


Let's Hear One Last 'Allagaroo' for City College
LEAD:
Allagaroo
Garoo
Gara
Allagaroo
Gara. . . .


Style;   VREELAND'S TOUCHES
LEAD: If, as the art historian Mario Praz wrote, ''the surroundings become a museum of the soul,'' then a glimpse at Diana Vreeland's Park Avenue apartment is a reflection of the style and personality of one of this century's legendary taste makers.
It wasn't a big apartment - life centered on a well-proportioned living room and small dining area - but it exuded bigness.


Overachievers Stay on Track And in the Swim
LEAD: IN A DRY, CRISP SATURDAY in December, just before dawn in the brown foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains, east of Los Angeles, some 350 men and women gathered in a parking lot at Chaffey College for the sheer joy, as one put it, of ''utterly exhausting'' themselves.


Robert Leonard And Miss Saliba To Marry in July
LEAD: The engagement of Wendy Jane Saliba to Robert Andrew Leonard, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Charles Leonard of Merrick, L.I., has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Catherine Saliba of East Brunswick, N.J., and John Saliba of Keene, N.H.
A July wedding is planned.


Pipeline Leak Imperils Water for Thousands
LEAD: A petroleum pipeline damaged by a landslide sent an eight-mile slick down the Allegheny River today, threatening the water supplies of more than 100,000 people, the authorities said.


Lorna Wilkerson, Student, Is Wed
LEAD: Lorna Anne Wilkerson and Michael Edwin Mushlitz were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York by the Rev.
Martin C. Avila.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold G. Wilkerson of South Ozone Park, Queens.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Mushlitz of Evansville,


'The Aftermath': A Film's Real-Life Lesson on Drunken Driving
LEAD: FRAYDUN MANOCHERIAN cannot forget two of his White Plains High School classmates who were killed by a drunk driver nearly four decades ago.
The driver received a mere ''slap on the wrist'' as punishment, said Mr.
Manocherian, a real estate entrepreneur and the president and founder of the New York Health and Racquet Club of


Managing;   The Dark Side of Charisma
LEAD: Good managers are easy to spot. ''Besides intelligence and a knack for strategic planning, they have enormous charm and energy,'' said Robert Hogan, a psychologist at the Tulsa Institute of Behavioral Sciences, who has studied thousands of managers. ''They have charisma.''


PANDEMONIUM IN PINSTRIPES
LEAD:
DAMNED YANKEES
A No-Holds-Barred Account of Life
With ''Boss'' Steinbrenner.
By Bill Madden and Moss Klein.
Illustrated by Ed Murawinski.
292 pp. New York:
Warner Books. $19.95.


Catholic Schools Faulted on Plan
LEAD: I read with special interest the article by Bea Tusiani, ''Local Catholic Schools Closing'' (March 4).
My two children attend one of the schools scheduled to close this June (St. Boniface Martyr, in Sea Cliff).
I have been in St.
Boniface Parish for nine years and active in school and parish activities since my oldest child began attending school five years ago.


Dinkins Wanted An Unusual Group To Run His City, And Here It Is
LEAD: IF mayors are known by the company they keep, David N. Dinkins bids fair to be remembered for surrounding himself with the most diverse administration in New York City's history.
But he has taken his time to do it, and now must blend the eclectic group to make it all work.


A Private Couple, A Private Family
LEAD: Regarding the Feb. 24 article on Pat LaFontaine, I was wondering, at first, why you didn't publish a photo of Pat, his wife and possibly their dogs.
Then I thought could it be that this private couple really does want to remain private?


In the Saddest Way, New York Learns About Hondurans
LEAD: IN the crude fashion that such tragedies favor, the arson that killed 87 people last week at an illegal social club in the Bronx opened a window on some of New York's better-hidden immigrants.


IN THE REGION: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Lynbrook
$185,000
43 Lowell Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old Dutch colonial; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,900.
Malverne
$156,500
32 School Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 57-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.


POSTINGS: Clinton Hill Renovation;   8 Duplex Condos
LEAD: A turn-of-the-century terra cotta-and-brick apartment house in the Clinton Hill Historic District of Brooklyn has undergone a total renovation into eight modern duplex condominium apartments.
The project, at 201 St.
James Place between Gates Avenue and Fulton Street, is in an area noted for its architecturally distinctive neo-Renaissance rowhouses.


Tristesse, Again
LEAD: Francoise Sagan was only a teen-ager when she became a literary smash with her portrayals of hedonistic French youth on the French Riviera.
Then, in a long, slow decline, she became one of her own jaded, Bohemian characters.
Last week, in the latest sad chapter, the 54-year-old author was found guilty of drug use and possession.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International/3-19


Suzanne Coyle Weds
LEAD: Suzanne Elizabeth Coyle, a daughter of Lieut.
Col.
Thomas J. Coyle, U.S.M.C., retired, and Mrs.
Coyle of Great Falls, Va., was married there yesterday at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church to C. Stephen Bigler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarke A. Bigler of Reading, Pa.
The Rev.
Jerome Fasano officiated.


Lifestyle;   If This Is Friday and That's a Beer, We Must Be in the Love Transporter
LEAD: Getting into a nightclub used to be the important thing.
But the era of the velvet rope is over.
Now real status isn't a matter of what club you go to, but what night you go.


Black Women Confer on Health
LEAD: MORE than 100 women took part in the second annual conference sponsored by the Westchester chapter of the National Black Women's Health Project last weekend at the Grace Baptist Church here.


GOOD BOOKS ABUT BEING SICK
LEAD: I was reading Shirley Hazzard's novel ''The Transit of Venus.'' Though I had admired her other books, I'd always resisted this one.
It struck me as too pure somehow, too heroic, larger or finer than life and therefore unreal.
But now I read it with an almost indescribable pleasure.
There were sentences that brought tears of gratification to my eyes and raised the hairs on the nape of my neck.


Duke to Meet U.N.L.V. in N.C.A.A. Final;   Final Flourish Hurts Arkansas
LEAD: We have been told that this collection of Duke University Blue Devils, a combination of athletes who have endured bitter disappointments in the semifinals of the national collegiate tournament and those who are here for the first time, is to be judged on its merits, unrelated to any emotional baggage from the past.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Mandela Pulls Out of Talks


Audubon Theater
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nancy Gardner To Wed in May
LEAD: The engagement of Nancy T. Gardner to Dr.
Benjamin I. Rubin, the son of Dr.
Lucille Munion Rubin and Sidney Rubin of Hempstead, L.I., has been announced by her parents, Dr.
Lee R. Gardner of Tenafly, N.J., and Dr.
Richard A. Gardner, also of Tenafly.
A May wedding is planned.


A Birthday Party For Cold Fusion
LEAD: COLD fusion, or whatever it is, is now one year old, and still no one can say for certain whether or not it is real.
Last week, a conference in Salt Lake City marked the anniversary of the announcement that Drs.
B.
Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann had generated cheap, potentially limitless energy in a laboratory beaker.


Felice A. Einhorn, Lawyer, Weds D. J. Javit, Physician
LEAD: Felice Amy Einhorn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Einhorn of Hewlett Bay Park, L.I., was married last evening at the Metropolitan Club in New York to Dr.
Daniel Joel Javit, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Javit of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Gilbert Klaperman officiated.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   For Country or Organic, Or for People-Watching
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have ratings.
Prices are current.
Barrow Street Bistro


Ryder Sollman Wed to M. C. Ziebarth
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in Manhattan, Anne Wyatt Ryder Sollman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Ekko Sollman of Redding, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Charles Ziebarth, the son of Mr. and of Mrs.
Jack Alvin Ziebarth of Basking Ridge, N.J.
Canon John T. Morrow of St.


WILL THE REAL SAN FRANCISCO PLEASE STAND UP?
LEAD: The serious esthetes in San Francisco don't much like it, and nothing upsets them more than to be told that it's almost all right.
But the glitzy new San Francisco Marriott, which the locals have sneeringly called everything from the Wurlitzer to a mutant from Las Vegas, is actually the most alluring addition to this city's skyline in years.


Indians Stand Off Troopers After Copter Is Hit by Shots
LEAD: Mohawk Indians living on land where the authorities believe shots were fired at a military helicopter stood off state troopers today who attempted to enter the territory to investigate.


'A COMMUNIST TO THE MARROW OF MY BONES'
LEAD:
MEMOIRS
By Andrei Gromyko.
Translated by Harold Shukman.
Foreword by Henry A. Kissinger.
Illustrated. 414 pp. New York:
Doubleday. $24.95.


Rebels Show Strength In 2d Half
LEAD: The Runnin' Rebels of Nevada-Las Vegas, a team that has scuffled and scrambled all season long, won a war of attrition this evening and in the process punctured Georgia Tech's lofty dreams of a national championship.


Team Approach To a Garden
LEAD: To the Editor:


Consumer Affairs Unit Toughening Up
LEAD: AFTER years of accusations that it was more interested in quieting consumers than in protecting them, the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs appears to be responding more forcefully to complaints about businesses - and about itself.


Contractors Top State Complaint List
LEAD: FOR the third year in a row, the State Department of Consumer Protection received more complaints last year about home-improvement contractors than about any other business.


&gt;Act Now to Ward Off Summer Weeds
LEAD: EVEN though the forsythia has burst forth with its yellow bells, there is still time to get rid of summer nuisances before they appear.
But these deeds of eradication must be done promptly, because spring is here, and the blooms are advancing.


Cycling in Italy
LEAD: To the Editor: Bicyclist Margaret Logan's paean to car-free cities in Italy's Padana district (Travel, Feb. 4) was overdue.
Associations to people and places, which, after all, are what travel is about, are so much more meaningful from the vantage point and speed of a bicycle.


Coalition Rule Seems a Safe Guess in Bulgaria
LEAD: Ten weeks before this country holds its first free elections in more than four decades, the outcome is a tossup.
But whichever party comes out on top, Bulgaria's next government will be formed by a coalition.


'The Journalist and the Murderer'
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Charity Case
LEAD: When I was a boy in my teens, I spent several months in a New York City hospital as a charity case.


William Van Orden, Statue's Protector, 67
LEAD: William Van Orden, a part-time sculptor who devoted the last part of his life to the defense and restoration of a statue of the actress Myrna Loy, died of cancer on March 18 at the Country Villa Westwood nursing home in West Los Angeles.
He was 67 years old and lived in Venice, Calif.


Smoking Law Now in Effect For Workplaces in New York
LEAD: The second phase of New York State's comprehensive smoking law takes effect Sunday with the aim of insuring that nonsmokers can work in smoke-free environments.


IN SHORT
LEAD: BIG STICKS: The Batting Revolution of the Twenties.
By William Curran. (Morrow, $18.95.) William Curran, the author of ''Mitts,'' gives us a detailed and lively history of baseball in the 1920's, with chapters on Babe Ruth, Rogers Hornsby, John J. McGraw, Ty Cobb, the Chicago Cubs and the 1927 Yankees' ''Murderers' Row.


Campus Life: Chicago;   A Professor Whose Father Helped Shape Soviet History
LEAD: In Sergo Mikoyan's Soviet history classes, which began at the University of Chicago last week, the history being taught is in many ways a personal one.
The professor is the son of Anastas I. Mikoyan, the close associate of Stalin and Khrushchev and member of the Politburo during events from the purges of the 1930's to the


Buzzer Beaters and Big Business
LEAD: DENVER


&gt;Act Now to Ward Off Summer Weeds
LEAD: EVEN though the forsythia has burst forth with its yellow bells, there is still time to get rid of summer nuisances before they appear.
But these deeds of eradication must be done promptly, because spring is here, and the blooms are advancing.


Homing In on Pigeon Towers
LEAD: ON the door of the pigeon tower that dominates the front lawn at the Chateau de Vascoeuil in Normandy, there is a sign: ''Please close the door carefully. (Pigeons.)'' This warning is not intended to keep the pigeons inside the pigeon house, but to keep them out.
The chateau's small, ornamental flock of white pigeons is confined to the attic, and the main part of the pigeonnier, once a honeycomb of pigeonholes, has been turned into a museum.


Emigration of Soviet Jews to Israel Is Found to Dip
LEAD: Amid confusion about the status of the air routes by which most Soviet Jewish emigrants get to Israel, a senior Israeli immigration official says the number of arrivals has shown ''a slight decrease'' for the first time since the latest wave of emigration began last year.


Ohio Valley of Tears Is Facing More
LEAD: Fifteen years ago more than 60,000 people worked in the coal mines and the steel, glass, pottery and paper plants that lined the banks of the Ohio River just south of Wheeling, W.Va.
Today fewer than 30,000 are employed there.


A Bank Too Big to Fail
LEAD: To the Editor:


She's a Beginner, but What Connections
LEAD: I'd like to begin this interview with the film producer Julian Schlossberg by saying that it was undertaken without any thought of publication and no money up front.


Silent Forests, Lonely Shores in Maine
LEAD: THE name Acadia National Park summons up images of silent spruce forests as cool and dim as Gothic churches, stark white lighthouses clinging to granite headlands and blue vistas out to chill, island-studded bays - a rockbound, Northern antidote to sweltering summers.
Unfortunately, many of the 4.5 million visitors who made the trip Down East last year remember a different


Rams Sign Warner
LEAD: Hoping that other teams would be discouraged by his $1.1 million contract and his falloff in production last season, the Seattle Seahawks did not place Curt Warner on their 37-man protected list.


I HEAR AMERICA SWINGING
LEAD:
BASEBALL
The People's Game.
By Harold Seymour.
Illustrated. 672 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Marcy Sandler Plans to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Sandler of Boston have announced the engagement of their daughter Marcy Ann Sandler to James Troy Janover, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan van S. Janover of New York.
A September wedding is planned.


A Reminder
LEAD: Daylight saving time resumed at 2 A.M. today. Clocks were set ahead one hour.


Miss Lawrence To Wed in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Lawrence Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., have made known October wedding plans for their daughter Angela Helene Lawrence and James Ewers Lineberger Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lineberger of New Canaan, Conn.


The View From: Old Lyme;   Sewer System Plan Raises Fears About Pollution of River
LEAD: MERVIN F. ROBERTS, chairman of the Old Lyme Shellfish Commission and a member of the town's Board of Selectmen, is proud of the progress that has been made to clean up the Connecticut River over the last two decades.


For the Relief Workers, a Psychic Toll
LEAD: The worst thing about the Bronx soial club fire was that there were so few survivors and so many families devastated, Laura Aiello, a Red Cross disaster relief worker, reflected Friday night. ''It left a terrible emptiness,'' she said.


Review/Music;   A Programmatic Score Rooted in Myth
LEAD: For some years, Denman Maroney has been providing music for dance troupes and contributing to the experimental-music scene in lower Manhattan, often playing digital sampling keyboards in collaboration with Joseph Paul Taylor.
On Thursday night at Roulette, the two men presented an hourlong work of Mr.


Eiko and Koma: Life in the Slow Lane
LEAD: Slow, very slow - that's the first quality almost everyone notices about the collaboratively choreographed works of Eiko and Koma.
Audiences have found their unruffled pacing both strange and eloquent ever since the Japanese-born dancers made their New York debut 14 years ago.


Luggage Codes
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding the list of airport and luggage codes (Travel Advisory, Jan. 28): Although the codes listed are technically correct, many passengers may not see the codes you suggest.


BUSINESS DIARY
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Round and Round, and Yet Another Round, at Lockheed
First, Harold C. Simmons bought nearly 19 percent of the Lockheed Corporation's shares.
Then he called in the image doctors.
Out came a videotape portraying him as a steady, hard-working industrialist.
And on Thursday, Lockheed executives who had denounced him as a hungry corporate raider went through their own transformation, emerging as advocates of shareholder rights.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
SKATING EXHIBITION


TERRORIST ON THE MOUND
LEAD: ''Any baseball is beautiful. . . .
It is a perfect object for a man's hand,'' Roger Angell wrote.
Don Drysdale, who pitched baseballs with fearsome efficiency for 14 years for the Brooklyn and Los Angeles Dodgers, would agree, judging by his autobiography, ONCE A BUM, ALWAYS A DODGER (St. Martin's, $18.95).


The Term 'Nonwhite' Has Racist Overtones
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nina Fastenberg, A Student, Weds
LEAD: The Park East Synagogue in Manhattan was the setting last evening for the marriage of Nina Fastenberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William Fastenberg of New York, to Mitchell Evan Auerbach, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey Auerbach of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier officiated.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Did a tornado strike?
Is it extreme sloppiness or a temper tantrum?
None of the above, you say.
Perhaps a trip is in the offing.
Not that either?
Then what accounts for this pitiful sight - the open closet door, the dresser drawers pulled out, dresses and suits on bed and chairs, hangers scattered hither and yon?


BLACK STUDIES' NEW STAR: Henry Louis Gates Jr.
LEAD: IN 1981, WHEN THE MACARTHUR FOUNDATION ANNOUNCED that it would pay out generous stipends to 21 ''exceptionally talented individuals'' (the first crop of instant ''geniuses''), Henry Louis Gates Jr. was an unknown 30-year-old assistant professor at Yale University.
A man called on the telephone and started talking about giving him something like $30,000 a year for five years, no strings attached.


East Bloc Change May Sway Greek Vote, Too
LEAD: The main election poster of Greece's conservative party depicts a crumbling Berlin wall, while that of the Socialists and Communists emphasizes modest change instead of the militant leftist measures advocated in the past.
When Greece, a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, holds its third elections in 10 months on April 8, the outcome is likely to be influenced largely by events in Eastern Europe.


Helping Black Artists Start Their Careers
LEAD: NOW in its last two weeks, the exhibition ''Against the Odds'' has successfully inaugurated the ''new'' Newark Museum and at the same time celebrated black art in an unusual way.
The first must have been the easier task, since the museum can make anything look good now that Michael Graves has transformed it from an old lady down on her luck into a ''dish.


'Super' Support For Arizona Site
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Flying Unscreened
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wilson's 'Burn This' in Island Premiere
LEAD: A PLAY can open on Broadway with a perfect cast, a director tuned to the script's most subtle nuances and technical and design elements that are the best money can buy.


Mutual Funds;   Betting on the 'Green' Group
LEAD: Spinning gold from garbage is the alchemy of the 1990's.
That's the clear message from money managers, who are beginning to bet heavily on the environmental services sector. ''Cleaning up our polluted planet will be the growth industry of the 90's,'' said Donavon McKerchar, portfolio manager of Oppenheimer's Global Environmental


Style;   Dining with Mrs. V
LEAD: After all the time I dined or lunched in that banquetted corner of Mrs.
Vreeland's apartment, I cannot recall a single thing we ate.
But the dialogue, the anecdotes, the wild flights of conversation still reverberate in my mind.
This is what dining with D.V. was all about - food for the mind and senses.


Buffalo Shuts Down Its Buses and Subways
LEAD: Buffalo's financially strapped bus and subway system was shut down tonight, despite pleas from community leaders and protests from outraged riders.


A Summer Bridal For Nancy Curry
LEAD: Bernard F. Curry Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Sun Valley, Idaho, and Mrs.
Claude Harmon of Quail Ridge, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Curry to William O'Shaughnessy, a son of Mrs.
Catherine Tucker O'Shaughnessy of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and the late William Mac O'Shaughnessy.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Keeping Up the Fight For Clean Air
LEAD: AS a new Governor in Trenton, I find that the ongoing debate in Washington over the Clean Air Act is even more disheartening than a similar debate I took part in as a young Congressman in 1976 and 1977.


3 Parties in Romania Joining To Oppose Governing Group
LEAD: Romania's three oldest parties said today that they were forming an alliance to fight the National Salvation Front in the country's first free elections in more than 50 years.


Technology;   The Software With Good Sense
LEAD: Water flows downhill.
A person can't be in two places at once.
All animals live, die and stay dead.
Such common-sense statements about the world are so basic that no encyclopedia bothers to include them.


Melissa Seide Is Wed To Andrew K. Rubin
LEAD: Melissa Anne Seide, the daughter of Lewis Seide of Rye Brook, N.Y., and Illona Saudi of Flushing, Queens, was married last evening to Andrew Kevin Rubin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie Rubin of Trumbull, Conn.
Rabbi Jerome Wallin performed the ceremony at Temple Agudath Shalom in Stamford, Conn.


A Lisztian Treasure Comes Into Its Own
LEAD: The great composers of Italy honored their poetical classics - Dante, Ariosto, Petrarch, Tasso - but tended not to set their words to music.
They must all have known Petrarch's sonnets to Laura from childhood, but it was Franz Liszt who made three of them into magnificent songs.
He set them in 1839, shortly before making some tours with the tenor Giovanni


Mary Mower Weds Timothy Mitchell
LEAD: Mary Kennard Mower and Timothy Papin Mitchell were married yesterday in New York in the garden of the bride's home by the Rev.
John Ivey Jessup 3d.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.
Robert T. Hensley Jr. of St.
Louis and Edward Baldridge Mower Jr., also of St.
Louis.
The bridegroom is a son of the late Mr.


FOR SUCCESS, AIM LOW
LEAD:
COMPETENCE CONSIDERED
Edited by Robert J. Sternberg and John Kolligian Jr.
420 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
$35.


Jonna Godley to Wed Keith E. Scharf in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Godley Jr. of Frenchtown, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jonna L. Godley to Keith Elliot Scharf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank D. Scharf of Guilford, Conn., and New York.
A May wedding is planned.


THE TIME AND THE PLACE FOR VELAZQUEZ
LEAD: Nothing very special had been expected in Madrid of the Velazquez exhibition that opened at the Prado on Jan. 23 and came to an end last night.
Velazquez is not, after all, an unknown quantity in Madrid.
Many of the paintings in the show had been in the Prado since the museum first opened in 1819.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Napoleon's indispensable foreign minister, Bishop Talleyrand, once asked a young man whether he played whist.
When the answer was negative, the Bishop offered a warning: ''What a dull old age you are saving up for yourself.''


Environment Issue Stalls a Mansion
LEAD: THE construction of a 1,600-square-foot ultra-contemporary mansion on six acres along Kentuck Pond, in the North Shore village of Mill Neck, has become the center of a dispute between the property owners and the original architect.


52 Killed as Lebanese Rivals Resume Full Warfare
LEAD: Rival Christian forces pounded East Beirut with artillery fire today after a night of house-to-house fighting under parachute flares for control of Lebanon's Christian enclave.


Nothing Wrong With Women in Jackets
LEAD: To the Editor:


Douglas Ostrover Wed to Julia Jordan
LEAD: Julia Hughes Jordan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Miles Jordan Jr. of Charleston, S.C., and Douglas Irving Ostrover, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian Ostrover of Stamford, Conn., were married yesterday at the Summerall Chapel at the Citadel in Charleston.
Canon Samuel Chew Williams Fleming, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Milton


SWORDS WITH THE SPIRIT OF THE SAMURAI
LEAD: Gleaming swords austerely displayed as functional sculpture in ''Court and Samurai in an Age of Transition,'' at Japan Society Gallery, 333 East 47th Street, may summon in viewers complex feelings of admiration for their beauty and repugnance for their bloody 700-year history.
The 23 medieval blades, on loan from the Gotoh Museum of Tokyo through next


Faltering Knicks Drop Another
LEAD: It's getting so that expansion teams and those in desperate need of a victory need only play the Knicks.


THERE IS A BROTHERHOOD OF BOYS
LEAD:
THE BOY-MAN
The Life of Lord Baden-Powell.
By Tim Jeal.
Illustrated.
670 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company.
$24.95.


Duke and Las Vegas Gain N.C.A.A. Final
LEAD: Duke defeated Arkansas, 97-83, and Nevada-Las Vegas beat Georgia Tech, 90-81, to advance to the championship game of the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament tomorrow night.


BEST SELLERS: April 1, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum. ((Random House,
$21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to inflitrate the ruthless Medusa
Bridage as part of a plot to trap his archenemy, Carlos the
Jackal.
2
2
6
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO!


Balloons' Effect On the Environment
LEAD: In response to the recent letter to the New Jersey editor by Erwin Lewis, I am writing to pour cold water on his arguments that balloon releases are safe.
There have been several other letters that say balloons are not safe, but the debate still rages.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Rowing
Oxford Beats Cambridge Again: The heavyweights from Oxford took an early lead and stayed in command to beat Cambridge yesterday and maintain their recent domination of the traditional University Boat Race.
With the heaviest crew and the heaviest crewman in the event's 136 races, the Dark Blues were ahead by a length just over a mile from the start and won by 2 1/4 lengths.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Maplewood
$270,000
24 Brook Lane
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 44-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, patio; taxes $4,395.
Millburn
$171,000
19 Milton Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 42-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, porch, fireplace; taxes $2,539.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Clinton South;   New Dimensions for a Low-Density Neighborhood
LEAD: WAY out west where the sky almost meets the horizon - between Ninth and 12th Avenues - millions of square feet of new development are being planned that would, if constructed, radically change the character of this midtown Manhattan neighborhood.


Amy R. Waugh To Wed in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Goodrich Waugh of Southport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Randall Waugh to Philip Joseph Curry 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curry Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Waugh, a graduate of Trinity College in Hartford, is the direct-response representative at Victoria Magazine in New York.


Airplane Seats
LEAD: To the Editor: ''You Can't Be Too Thin in Economy Class'' reminded me of my Tower Air charter flight from New York to Athens last August.
Like the plane seats described in the article, ours created extremely cramped conditions.
A woman's complaint that when the man in front of her leaned back in his seat, his seat was practically in her face, turned into a very loud argument that attracted the attention of many passengers.


Peter Clare, Banker, Weds Teresa McEnroe, a Nurse
LEAD: Teresa Marie McEnroe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. McEnroe of Towson, Md., was married there yesterday at the Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church to Peter John Clare, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Clare 3d of Manhasset, L.I.
The Rev.
J.
Bruce Jarboe officiated.


Lifestyle;   Art Imitates Life: Auditioning for 'Bonfire'
LEAD: Clearly, the place to have been this week past was the TriBeCa Film Center.
There Brian De Palma was holding by-invitation-only auditions for socialites to portray socialites in the film version of Tom Wolfe's ''Bonfire of the Vanities.'' The movie will star Tom Hanks, Melanie Griffith and Bruce Willis; this time the search was on for bit players and walk-ons.


Racing Speed Boats Shatter the Calm
LEAD: With the arrival of spring one begins to think of warmer days.
For those of us fortunate enough to live close to Long Island Sound, that should include hours of quiet enjoyment on the local beaches.


Four Seasons Chef Steps Aside
LEAD: Joseph (Seppi) Renggli, for 17 years the executive chef of the Four Seasons, the landmark restaurant in Manhattan, has left the helm of the kitchen.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bronxville, N.Y.
$985,000
6 Plateau Circle West
5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 80-year-old English stucco; sun room, library, 3 fireplaces, solarium, butler's pantry, deck; taxes $11,519.
Scarsdale, N.Y.
$1.18 million
163 Fox Meadow Road
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; flagstone terrace, Jacuzzi, skylights, slate roof, 2-car garage; taxes not yet assessed.


POSTINGS: Repairing a Landmark;   Church to Study Water Damage
LEAD: The 160-foot-high granite tower of the First Church of Christ, Scientist, which has been a fixture at the northwest corner of Central Park West and West 96th Street since the turn of the century, has been extensively damaged by water leaks in recent years and is in need of repair.
To help, the New York Landmarks Conservancy has awarded the church an $8,000 grant from its Sacred Sites and Properties Fund for a study to determine the extent of the damage and recommend repairs.


All Soccer's Roads Lead To Rome
LEAD: THE Eldorado for all soccer fans will stretch from the Italian Alps to Sicily from June 8 to July 8, so those who don't care for the world's most popular spectator sport might prefer to choose some other time to make that long-planned trip to Italy.
The monthlong competition for the World Cup will involve teams from 24 countries, including a poor-relations squad from the United States.


Court Said to Take California Death Case
LEAD: The state official leading the fight to carry out California's first execution in 23 years said today the Supreme Court had agreed to consider an appeal of a ruling that blocked the death sentence.


Randi Hutter Weds Stuart Epstein in New Jersey
LEAD: The Loews Glenpointe Hotel in Teaneck, N.J., was the setting last evening for the marriage of Randi Hutter, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert V. P. Hutter of Livingston, N.J., and Stuart Joel Epstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin E. Epstein of Kings Point, L.I.
Rabbi Azriel C. Fellner and Cantor Henry Butensky officiated.


The U.S. Stake in Reunification
LEAD: The coming unification of Germany - a virtual certainty in the aftermath of last month's first free Parliamentary election in East Germany - provides the United States with a major opportunity to take commercial advantage of Central Europe's sudden opening to the West.


A New Critique Of Homeless Policy
LEAD: AS the County Board of Legislators moves to end a three-year debate by approving a 108-unit project for the homeless, a report to be released this week strongly criticizes the county's response to its homeless population.


Recording Enters a New Era, And You Can't Find It on LP
LEAD: The record, which in its various forms has captured the musical passage of the nation from ragtime to rap, appears to have entered a death spiral.


MALLING THE NORTHEAST
LEAD: MANY MALL DEVELOPERS VIEW NEW ENGLAND as overly regulated and environmentally troublesome.
But the partners of the Pyramid Companies, the largest shopping-mall developer in the Northeast, see only untapped potential.
No site is too complicated, no downtown too powerful, no citizen opposition too strong, no environmentally sensitive area too sensitive to deter


Who Needs Them?
LEAD: To the Editor:


PERSPECTIVES: Office Construction;   As Building Slows, So Will Tax Growth
LEAD: LOOKING east and looking west in Manhattan, it is hard to find new office projects starting.
That foreshadows low figures for completions in 1992 and 1993.
For New York City, this is one sign of the impending slowdown in the remarkable rate of growth in tax revenues from Manhattan office buildings - sobering news for fiscal managers.


Sister Thea Bowman, 52, Worker For Catholic Sharing With Blacks
LEAD: Sister Thea Bowman, a nationally active black educator who with song, prayer and persistent exhortation urged the Roman Catholic Church to embrace the culture of African Americans, died of cancer on Friday at her home in Canton, Miss.
She was 52 years old.


'The Journalist and the Murderer'
LEAD: To the Editor:


REAP WHAT YOU SEW
LEAD: I was in a circle of young mothers who worked part-time.
We baby-sat for each other, never exchanging money, and helped each other to sew work clothes that we couldn't afford to buy.


Jill Cuty Engaged to Stephen Griswold
LEAD: The engagement of Jill Ann Cuty to Stephen Merrill Griswold, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Parkman Griswold of Irvington, N.Y., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Peter Cuty of West Islip, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.


DATA UPDATE: April 1, 1990
LEAD:
*2*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Jan. 90
Dec. 89
Jan. 90
New York
2,272
2,318
3,172
New Jersey
2,658
2,896
2,399
Connecticut
874
737
828
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


POSTINGS: Freddie Mac Rules;   From 28 to 33%
LEAD: Home buyers in four cities may benefit from an easing of rules on the underwriting of loans by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac.
And if you live in the New York metropolitan area, which is not covered by the rules change, the advice for applicants is ''bargain.'' Freddie Mac, the


RUNNING A PIGEON UP THE FLAGPOLE
LEAD: IN A FORTHCOMING MEMOIR about his 37 years in advertising, David Herzbrun, a former executive vice president with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Compton Inc., tells the following story:


Airplane Seats
LEAD: To the Editor: Thanks to Betsy Wade for warning us sardines who fly economy class that seating will be even more cramped than before.
This is a special problem for me, because I am 6 feet 4 and and long legged.


Recycle These Empties
LEAD: THE downtown areas of many older cities in Westchester seem to have a lot of empty space in commercial buildings.
Even when the first floor is used, there is often empty space on the floors above.
Some of this space appears to have been empty for years.
It is unlikely that much of it will ever be rented for commercial use, as many stores and offices have relocated from the old downtown areas to new shopping centers or office parks.


Drinking Water Is Focus of Concern
LEAD: AS millions of pounds of industrially produced chemicals pass through publicly owned sewage treatment plants, environmentalists say, irreparable damage is being done to both the surface and ground-water supplies that provide drinking water for the state's nearly eight million residents.


At 64, a Composer-Lyricist Nurtures Young Talent
LEAD: ''I WRITE nonsense songs, too,'' Francis (Ranny) Reeve said, looking up from his host's piano after playing two operas of his that might have bewildered an audience that hadn't spent 49 years trying to play the piano only properly.


W. D. Lese Wed to Ms. Harding-Jones
LEAD: Serena Barbara Harding-Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Harding-Jones of Miami, was married yesterday to William Douglas Lese, a son of Ruth E. Lese of New York and William M. Lese of New York and London.
The Rev.
Robert J. Aufieri, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Burt A. Siegel performed the ceremony at St.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
Warning on Soviet Crime


Gorbachev, at a Dizzying Height, Prepares to Kick Away the Ladder
LEAD: WHILE all eyes have been on rebellious Lithuania in these days of imperial stress, Mikhail S. Gorbachev has entered a critical and precarious stage in the realization of his grand design for the Soviet Union.


Teacher Ignites Lifetime Love for Words
LEAD: JUDITH DOBBROW'S first graders at Head O'Meadow Elementary School in Newtown have no reading textbooks, no reading workbooks, no practice sheets on skills like sounding out letters.
Nonetheless, the children read and write with enthusiasm and score well on standardized tests, their teacher says.


With Movies Like These, One Never Knows
LEAD: The only easily predictable virtue of the annual New Directors/New Films Festival is that, unless one is some kind of a movie nut with pen pals around the world, one comes upon the film makers and their films in a state of blissful, naked ignorance.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 1, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
103
THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berleley, $4.50
.) A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the
United States.
2
6
STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95) The crossed paths
of a man and a woman destined for stardom.


4 Years in Drowning of Baby
LEAD: A woman suffering from a personality disorder will spend at least four years in prison for letting her newborn daughter drown moments after her birth.
Kimberly L. Harvey, 25 years old, of Vestal, was sentenced on Friday to four to 12 years in prison by a state Supreme Court judge here.
The baby's father, James J.


University Presses: Where the Books Are
LEAD: THESE are turbulent times in book publishing, as longstanding imprints merge or are bought by larger companies.
But Cambridge University Press and Columbia University Press, whose distribution operations are in Westchester, continue to produce books under their own imprints, as they have for centuries.


Tina's World: In Search of the Honest Moment
LEAD: One of the dozen pictures in the current Museum of Modern Art exhibition of Tina Barney's photographs shows a backyard barbecue in progress.
Two tanned and handsome college-age boys, wearing shorts and holding drinks, flank an outdoor grill.
Between them is a thin, attractive woman in her 40's who is addressing them with one hand while squeezing a rubber bulb with the other.


Beyond the Strike Zone
LEAD: Perhaps all too soon for some in this besmirched baseball season, George Steinbrenner is again in a legal rhubarb.
The Yankees' owner has admitted paying $40,000 to Howard Spira, a former radio reporter and self-described gambler, for giving him information in his dispute last year with the outfielder Dave Winfield over the player's foundation for children.


Correction
LEAD: A report in the Headliners column on March 4 about the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's decision against running for mayor of Washington misstated the year of Walter F. Mondale's Democratic candidacy for President and the length of time since the Democrats last won the Presidency.
Mr.
Mondale ran in 1984, not 1980; the Democrats won 14 years ago, not 20.


Data Bank/April 1, 1990
LEAD:
$
Corporate After-Tax Profits
IV Q'89
III Q'89
Year Ago
Percent change
2.8
-5.4
2.8
Personal Income
Feb.
Jan.
Year Ago
Monthly percent change
0.9
0.8
1.0
New Home Sales
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
Monthly percent change
3.1
-6.8
-8.0
Factory Orders
Feb.


Proposals on Fighting Drugs and Alcohol
LEAD: The article entitled ''The Best Ways to Fight Drug and Alcohol Abuse'' (Opinion Page, March 11) prompts these thoughts.


ONE MAN'S HERO
LEAD:
GORDON LIDDY IS MY MUSE BY TOMMY ''TIP'' PAINE
By John Calvin Batchelor.
303 pp. New York:
Linden Press/Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


BOOKSHELF
LEAD: Additional titles of interest.


Review/Dance;   Energy And Power Of Sports
LEAD: Two years ago the New Jersey Center Dance Collective made a fine impression in New York with a tribute to some of the pioneers of modern dance.
On Thursday night at the Nikolais/Louis Choreospace, these dancers from Somerville, N.J., looked equally good in contemporary works.


Spain's Savory Suckling Pig
LEAD: WHEN Don Quixote and Sancho Panza come upon a wedding feast in the Castilian countryside, the first thing they see is a huge steer on a spit, stuffed with ''twelve little suckling pigs embowelled, to give it the more savory taste.'' Today, roast suckling pig - cochinillo asado - plays as prominent a role in Castilian Spanish cuisine as it did in


The High Cost of Selling Art
LEAD: For as long as they have bought works of art, American museums have also sold them.
The practice, known as deaccessioning, is hardly new.
Neither is the debate it provokes, a debate invigorated by a spate of sales in the last few years of works by artists from Delacroix to Picasso, Boucher to Church.


THE CITY THAT DISAPPEARED TWICE
LEAD:
TOKYO RISING
The City Since the Great Earthquake.
By Edward Seidensticker.
Illustrated.
362 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Stunt Kite Flying: Dancing in the Air
LEAD: ON a recent Sunday afternoon, Brian Vanderslice went ''flying,'' as he puts it.
During the week he fixes fax machines, typewriters and copiers, but on weekends he flies stunt kites.


TOO MANY, TOO RICH, TOO WASTEFUL
LEAD:
THE POPULATION EXPLOSION
By Paul R. Ehrlich and Anne H. Ehrlich.
320 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Question Of the Week;   Should Basketball Use Instant Replay?
LEAD: They should have instant replay in the N.B.A. because it will help out a lot on the close calls.
But the N.C.A.A shouldn't have it because of the great expense.
The schools can do more for the teams with that money.
RICARDO F. LINDO
Queens Village


Occupational Hazard
LEAD: To the Editor:


Debbie Reynolds Re-Creates 'Molly'
LEAD: JUST before the final curtain of ''The Unsinkable Molly Brown,'' at the Shubert Performing Arts Center in New Haven, Debbie Reynolds, as a high society dropout returning to her ragamuffin's roots in the Rocky Mountains, wistfully sings a reprise of ''My Own Brass Bed.'' Her steady, pure sound, uncluttered by show business hard sell, is true to character and situation.


Ultimatum On Injuries
LEAD: A baseball career can create a fantasylike effect on a man's life, but reality has intruded on Keith Hernandez's.
One more disabling injury, he said, and his career is over.


A New Attraction in South Norwalk
LEAD: SOUTH NORWALK'S restaurant row, in the area known as SoNo - Washington Street between Main and Water Streets - has gained a new attraction.
It is the Old Rialto, formerly the Atlantic Club, which changed its chef and menu as well as its name.
The fin de siecle building was once a theater, but the Old Rialto decor is more high seas than high C's.


TALKING: Estate Taxes;   Putting The House In Order
LEAD: A FAMILY'S home is often its most substantial asset.
That necessarily makes the home property a central element in estate planning, especially now that even modest homes have high values.


Laurie Hodges Wed in Capital
LEAD: Laurie Hodges, the daughter of Mrs.
Walter James Hodges of Washington and the late Mr.
Hodges, was married yesterday to Pierre Fernand Lapeyre Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lapeyre of New Orleans.
The Rev.
John F. Myslinski performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Annunciation in Washington.


New Rules Set for Sponsor Disclosures
LEAD: WITH financial troubles deepening at some of New York City's residential cooperatives, Attorney General Robert Abrams has sent a new set of requirements for financial disclosure to the sponsors of more than 2,000 co-op buildings across the city.


Carolyn J. Grant Weds J. R. Pardy
LEAD: Carolyn Jaimie Grant, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene M. Grant of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married last evening at her parents' home to J. Rodney Pardy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James V. Pardy of Boulder, Colo.


Cuban-American Takes Aim at Castro, on TV
LEAD: Using the infant medium of television to stunning political effect, a young Fidel Castro dominated the airwaves in 1960 seeking to rally supporters to his new rule.


The 51st and 52d States;   Let Puerto Ricans Decide Their Fate, but Fairly
LEAD: Puerto Rico is not America's Lithuania, but it is unhappy with its status as a highly dependent commonwealth.
An overwhelming majority of 3.3 million islanders are agreed that they want change.
But as Congress is learning, agreement stops there.
What adds to the perplexity is a parallel but unrelated campaign to grant statehood to the District of


Fire Victims Returned to Honduras


Question Of the Week;   Should Basketball Use Instant Replay?
LEAD: Never.
Too many replays slow down the play of the game and take the fun out of it.
Let the refs call them as they see them; it all equals out by the end of the season.
PETER A. CURTAIN
Peekskill, N.Y.


Deborah Kroll Is Married To George Henry Weltman
LEAD: The Garden City (L.I.) Hotel was the setting last evening for the marriage of Deborah Jayne Kroll, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome I. Kroll of Manhasset, L.I., to George Henry Weltman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Weltman of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Charles G. Agin and Cantor Steven Pearlston officiated.


'The Journalist and the Murderer'
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Environment: A Time to Act
LEAD: Upon reading the Westchester Weekly of March 4, I did not fail to notice the conflict of interests expressed by two articles, ''Who Oversees the County's Environment'' and ''Responding to New Office-Space Needs.''


Devils Continue Surge by Winning 5th in a Row
LEAD: The Devils will be going into the last game of the regular season Sunday without any worries.
They are playing their best hockey of the season and have clinched second place in the Patrick Division and the home advantage in the first round of the playoffs next week.


Sarah Smith to Wed William R. Klein
LEAD: Mrs.
Blake Edward Vance of San Diego and Colin Eggleston Smith of Berkeley, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Wheelwright Smith, to William Renn Klein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Thompson Klein of Locust Valley, L.I.
A July wedding is planned.


Correction
LEAD: The National League schedules in SportsMonday March 26 contained some incorrect information.
The Chicag Cubs' home series July 16-18 is against San Diego; The Phillies' series against St.
Louis April 13-15 is at home, not on the road; The Dodgers' series April 13-15 is on the road against the Astros, and they play a home series April 19-22 against the Astros.


Ann Lamborghini to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Lamborghini of Stonington, Conn., have made known August wedding plans for their daughter Ann Louise Lamborghini and Lieut.
Michael Douglas Lane of the Navy Medical Corps, who is the son of Margaret L. Lane of Oceanside, Calif., and Bobby Lane of San Marcos, Calif.
Miss Lamborghini, 31 years old, is a project manager at Gunther International Ltd., a manufacturer of business-automation systems in Mystic, Conn.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
LOST IN TRANSLATION: A Life in a New Language, by Eva Hoffman. (Penguin, $7.95.) Forced to leave Poland for Vancouver, British Columbia, in 1959, Eva Hoffman learned what it was like to carve out a space inside a new linguistic universe.
This memoir ''tells the story of how one more immigrant came to love her adoptive country (and its slangy, elastic, exuberant language),'' Peter Conrad said here last year.


Opposites Share a Final Goal
LEAD: Colgate and Wisconsin, whose teams will play for the national championship on Sunday, represent opposite poles in the major league of college hockey, Division I of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.


Criticism Distorts Nudist Lifestyle
LEAD: The accusations against nude sunbathers made by Oscar W. Ruiz in his letter of Feb. 4 unfairly characterize nudists as a group and serve to distort public perception of the nudist lifestyle.


IN SPRING, THOUGHTS OF FALL
LEAD: It's a long, long way from now to September, but I cannot put thoughts of fall fishing in the Roach River out of my mind.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Leaner Burgers, Stronger Seasonings
LEAD: What makes these burgers better is the ingredients that make them taste like meatloaf.
To make them as lean as possible, it is better to grind the turkey and beef at home, using the white meat of the turkey breast and a very lean cut of beef such as eye round.
You do not miss the fat because the seasonings make up for it.


The Invisible Man
LEAD: I CONFESS TO BEING ONE OF THE fortunate - suburban childhood, Ivy League college, graduate school, 15 years of steady promotions in international banking.
Not that all this matters much as I sit in my small weekend house with the walls closing in on me.
I am unemployed.


Currency;   All Eyes on the Group of 7
LEAD: Foreign exchange traders will be focusing this week on the meeting of the United States and its economic allies in the Group of Seven next Saturday in Paris.
The traders will be closely following the official comments during the week of the finance ministers of the seven members - the others are Japan, West Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada - to see whether the group is likely to make a coordinated effort to rescue the beleaguered yen.


Ship in Oil Spill Recovering Where She Was Born
LEAD: A year after she was involved in the worst oil spill in American history, the Exxon Valdez is 70 percent repaired and four months from being sent back to sea.


Off the Street
LEAD: For the past 20 years, James Graseck has played classical violin in the oddest yet, for New Yorkers, most familiar places: the city's streets and subways.
Then last week he performed solo at Alice Tully Hall, renting it for $5,000, and the 1,000-seat house was nearly sold out at $16 a head.
The evening of Paganini, Schubert and Bach was ''a dream come true,'' Mr.


Understanding de Klerk, Party Man With a Twist
LEAD: Before F. W. de Klerk was chosen to succeed P. W. Botha as President, he was asked if he would be the Mikhail S. Gorbachev of South Africa, a loyal party man who overturns much that the party once held inviolable.
Mr. de Klerk had a quick reply: ''The only thing Gorbachev and I have in common is this!


No to a Germany With a Foot in Each Camp
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S.-Japan Talks on Satellites Recess Over 'Technical Issue'
LEAD: The United States and Japan today recessed talks aimed at opening the Japanese market to foreign satellite makers.
Officials said that negotiators needed more instructions from their governments on what was described as a technical matter, and that the talks would resume on Monday.


'Junk Bond' Dealers Are Betting on a New, Slimmer Market
LEAD: Despite the painful dismantling of the ''junk bond'' market once ruled by Michael R. Milken, some dealers are betting that they can profit from a new, smaller one that is emerging.
One month after the parent of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. filed for bankruptcy protection, firms like Salomon Brothers, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, Jefferies &amp; Company, and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.


Time to Care for Outdoor Decks
LEAD: OUTDOOR decks are built to withstand exposure.
Nevertheless, to look their best and remain sturdy, they should be cared for when necessary and inspected in the spring and fall.


Quick Ways to Turn Out Spicy Shrimp Dishes
LEAD: WHEN I'm in New York City on weekends, I often go down to Chinatown for a dim sum lunch.
On the way back, I cannot resist the Chinese fish markets, with their enticing piles of shrimp.
They are about as fresh as any I've found in the city, and come in all sizes, heads on or off, and are much cheaper than fish markets further uptown.


Japan
LEAD: To the Editor: We are planning a trip to Japan and want to stay at Tokyo's Palace Hotel.
The price for the cheapest room for two published by the Japan National Tourist Organization is $153 (figured at 154 yen to $1).
The Palace Hotel is represented by both Utell International and Loew's Representation International, and both have 800 numbers.


MANDELA'S GROUP CALLS OFF TALKS
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk's plans for negotiations with South Africa's black majority suffered a setback today when the African National Congress announced that it was suspending plans to attend talks with the Government scheduled for April 11.


Janet M. Novotny Married To Donald Latham King Jr.
LEAD: Janet Marie Novotny, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Novotny of Cleveland, was married yesterday to Donald Latham King Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
King of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Frederick Tuttle Bender performed the ceremony at Saint Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien.


The Executive Computer;   Dull at First Glance, I.B.M.'s Latest Have a Surprise Inside
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation recently brought forth some new members of its Personal System/2 computer family, and analysts as usual quickly dismissed the machines, saying they were about as exciting as yesterday's oatmeal.
But lurking within those computers were new disk-drive technologies that are likely to be increasing important as companies move from big, centralized computer systems toward small clusters of personal computers connected by a network.


Howard's 14th President Facing Stormy Waters
LEAD: Thirty-three years after he began college here, poor and unprepared, Franklyn Green Jenifer takes office April 1 as the 14th president of Howard University.


Colombia's Elections Are A Study in 'Violentology'
LEAD: THE man on the telephone took credit for murdering one presidential candidate, but his message was addressed to a second, Cesar Gaviria.
The leader in Colombia's four-way race for president, Mr.
Gaviria advocates the toughest line against cocaine traffickers. ''He can walk around with 100 bodyguards,'' the voice snarled into the spinning reels of a radio station tape recorder.


Rangers Survive a Crazy Division
LEAD: ''The Patrick Division is completely nuts, and it has been all season,'' Roger Neilson, the coach of the Rangers, said last Tuesday night in the hours after he and his team had clinched first place and thus been granted the freedom to watch the madness safely work its way to a conclusion.


Czechs' Strategy Helps U.S.
LEAD: An unexpected decision today by the coach of the Czechoslovak team helped put the United States within a victory of advancing to the semifinals of the Davis Cup tournament against Austria in September.


Evening Hours;   In a Mansion And on a Stage, Charity Dining
LEAD: A hundred guests were invited to a dinner last Monday in the salons of the turn-of-the-century Burden mansion on East 90th Street.
Each guest was asked to contribute ''as much as you feel you can'' to the Love to Learn Scholarship, for four students in the visual and culinary arts.
The winners, Luahn and Curtis Smith of the Culinary Institute of America and Amy Freeth and Robert Padro of Parsons School of Design, stood on the receiving line with the four hosts, Bill Blass, Pat Buckley, Wolfgang Flottl and Aileen Mehle .


Review/Opera;   A Mozart Tenor, Stepping Forward
LEAD: Except for Kurt Moll's sonorous but bland Osmin and Nico Castel's noble Pasha Selim, the cast for the Metropolitan Opera's performance of Mozart's ''Entfuhrung aus dem Serail'' on Tuesday night was entirely different from earlier this season.
Yet the sense of ensemble and shared musical accomplishment was, if anything, greater than before.


Israeli Infighting Pre-empts English TV News
LEAD: More than 100,000 native English speakers living here and thousands of tourists who visit regularly were delighted last spring when the Israel Broadcasting Authority announced plans to introduce an evening newscast in English.


'GET IT BACK TO THE INFIELD, WILLIE'
LEAD:
NINE SIDES OF THE DIAMOND
Baseball's Great Glove Men on the Fine Art of Defense.
By David Falkner.
Illustrated. 372 pp. New York:
Times Books/Random House. $18.95.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:
HORRORS


Vietnamese Communists Purge an In-House Critic
LEAD: Vietnam's Communist Party says it has purged a senior member of the Politburo who spoke of the need for faster political change in the wake of liberalization in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.


Discovering A Neighborhood I Never Knew
LEAD: IT'S raining today, and most of the snow that covered the grass and roads has melted.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   What Is Wrong With the Knicks?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


JUNGLE IS WINNING THE COCAINE WAR
LEAD: In the article by Michael Massing, ''In the Cocaine War, the Jungle is Winning,'' (March 4), there are several insinuations of corruption under my command.
Without wishing to enter into a debate, I must clarify certain points.
I have always denied, and continue to do so, any allegations of personal corruption.


Getting Close to Nature in Montana
LEAD: ACCORDING to a treasured adage in the American West, Montana is what America was.
And nowhere does that natural beauty and spirit better exist than in Glacier National Park, a one-million-acre pocket of purity tucked into the northwest corner hard by Canada.
Glacier's awe-inspiring alpine vistas are easy to get to but hard to forget.


Distilling 25 Years' 'Adventure'
LEAD: ABE AJAY is at the Aldrich Museum in Ridgefield, with the past 25 years of his life summed up by some 50 works, most of them relief constructions, and a video and a biography, written by the critic Lee Hall, that reads like an autobiography.
It is a smooth package, but something must surely have been left out.


Question Of the Week;   Should Basketball Use Instant Replay?
LEAD: Basketball thrives on its quickness and constant excitement, and using the instant replay would only be unwelcome interruption.
N.B.A. games are already too long now.
Basketball should trust its referees and let them make the final call.
Save the replay for football.
GABE JACOBSON
Hartsdale, N.Y.


'Leaders Meetings' Proliferate As Albany Budget Work Lags
LEAD: Some participants compare the Albany institution known as leaders' meetings to the United Nations Security Council, a mechanism through which the diplomats of state government can negotiate behind closed doors rather than wage a war of rhetoric in the press.


The Fine Facades Of a Yugoslav City
LEAD: MORNINGS in the old part of the Yugoslav city of Ljubljana evoke a blank canvas.
Not until 9:30 does the fog begin to dissolve.
The outlines of steep roofs, spires, leaden domes, statues and poplars emerge like an artist's first, quick strokes.
In the beginning it is a pen-and-ink with charcoal.
Only around 10 come the richer hues of the palette: orange and yellow ochers, pinks, sandy reds and dazzling greens.


AS THE VOLUME RISES IN THE LABELING DEBATE, DISTORTION RULES
LEAD: It's time for a reality check.
In a matter of months, rhetoric about the content and purported dangers of popular music has escalated beyond all reasonable bounds, as distortion feeds sensationalism that feeds real parental concerns about children.


IF YOU SAY SO, SYD
LEAD:
THE GAME ACCORDING TO SYD
The Theories and Teachings of Baseball's Leading Innovator.
By Syd Thrift and Barry Shapiro.
304 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Pitcher Gallery
LEAD: Despite the coffeetable contours of THE ART OF BASEBALL: The Great American Game in Painting, Sculpture, and Folk Art (Harmony Books, $40), the beverage of choice for its audience is more likely to be the fan's warm beer than the connoisseur's spritzer.
Readers familiar with the histories of both American art and baseball will not find much that is new in Shelly Mehlman Dinhofer's text, but there is no dishonor in a book of pictures as carefully chosen, wide-ranging and handsomely reproduced as these.


Having Babies: Another Viewpoint
LEAD: Regarding Elizabeth G. Wardell's essay, ''Whose Baby Is It Anyway?'' (Opinion page, March 4): I did not read the article to which she was responding, but I deduce that the parents in question have children of childbearing age and are itching for that hypothetical child to be borne.


Tina Rosenbaum Weds
LEAD: Tina Rosenbaum, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Erich Rosenbaum of Dallas, was married there last evening to Neal Kurzner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
R.
Raymond Kurzner of New York.
Rabbis Sheldon Zimmerman and Gerald Klein officiated at Temple Emanu-El.
Mrs.
Kurzner is a summa cum laude graduate of the University of Texas.


Rise in Migratory Seals Poses Safety Concerns
LEAD: AN increase in migratory seals along the state's coastline, from Raritan Bay to Atlantic City, is posing a problem: where can the creatures find a safe haven in a heavily populated and developed region?


Q and A
LEAD:
Co-op Assessments


BUFFET TAKES STOCK
LEAD: HE ALWAYS EXPECTED THAT HE would one day be rich, Warren E. Buffett says, although it is doubtful that the man now known as the Oracle of Omaha had any inkling of just how rich he would actually become.
Last year, Forbes Magazine estimated his personal fortune to be in excess of $4 billion.
With Berkshire Hathaway, a one-time textile manufacturer, as his vehicle, Buffett at age 59 has achieved an enviable standing in the world of finance.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our teak furniture has an oiled finish that has become quite dark over the years.
When new, the furniture was rubbed with linseed oil several times, and I have since been told that was a mistake, that I should have used mineral oil.
I think the furniture needs to be cleaned, but am not sure how to do so.


The New Wave Directors
LEAD: ELLEN R. MARRAM, PRESIDENT AND C.E.O. of the Nabisco Biscuit Company, drives to her office in East Hanover, N.J., from her apartment on Manhattan's Upper West Side in a 1990 Lincoln Continental.
One of the perks of being a director of the Ford Motor Company - Marram is the only woman on the Ford board - is having the use of late-model cars to evaluate each year.


STREETSCAPES: Flushing's RKO Keith's;   A Magnificent, but Mutilated, Palatial Landmark
LEAD: A DESIGNATED landmark that is one of the few surviving palatial theater interiors in New York City has been mutilated.
Can the Landmarks Preservation Commission (a) order that the work be restored; (b) fine the owner repeatedly until the damage is undone or (c) do nothing except wait until the owner requests a permit for unrelated work?


Nicklaus Powers Himself Into Lead
LEAD: Jack Nicklaus rose to the occasion of his much-awaited first senior tournament today by becoming the conquering power golfer of his youth.
Against a field of more than 50 golfers, it was no contest.


TROUBLE IN DAMASCUS
LEAD: SYRIA'S NORTH-SOUTH HIGHWAY SLIDES by the town of Hama as if skirting a guilty secret.
Yet according to the man who runs the Ministry of Tourism office, there is much to see there.
He has marked out the points of interest on a small photocopied map: the old wooden water wheels and the citadel, the museum and restaurants on the banks of the Orontes


Johnny-Come-Latelies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Better Students: Parents at Fault Too
LEAD: In reference to Professor Power's article [''Remedial School: Paying the Piper,'' Opinion, March 11] , I have to agree that some students are ill prepared for college work.
But as Professor Powers points to the school districts as culprits, I would go one step further.


TAKING THE MEASURE OF THE NEW TEAM AT THE MET
LEAD: In 1987, James Levine, the artistic director of the Metropolitan Opera, sent out strong signals that he wished to lighten his administrative and artistic load with the company, to concentrate on his conducting at the Met and elsewhere.


Miss Mathieson Planning to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew W. Mathieson of Pittsburgh and Holderness, N.H., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Margaret Adele Mathieson, to David Wayne Conver, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil L. Conver of Lansdale, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.


Signs of Spring in China, and New Discontent
LEAD: In the first sign that Chinese dissidents are planning protests this spring, students said illegal posters were put up today at two or more universities, calling for peaceful demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in the coming week.


Review/Jazz;   An Evening Devoted to Vocalese
LEAD: Vocalese - the reproduction of jazz instrumental arrangements with voices - has become a flourishing jazz style thanks largely to Jon Hendricks, the youthful-looking 68-year-old singer and lyricist who on Thursday evening was the host of a Carnegie Hall concert devoted to the genre.


Ernest DeMaio, 81, Electric Union Official
LEAD: Ernest DeMaio, a union organizer and former official of the United Electrical and Radio Workers Union, died of brain cancer on Thursday at Norwalk Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 81 years old and lived in Norwalk.


Whitey Herzog Is Plotting 'Something'
LEAD: Over in Port St.
Lucie, the Mets manager, Davey Johnson, has another week to decide whether Dave Magadan or Mike Marshall will be playing first base on opening day.
But over here, hundreds of orange groves away from Johnson's furrowed brow, Whitey Herzog has already decided.


Knight Criticism Is Not Justified
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


An Angler's View of Shenandoah
LEAD: HOURS before the churchgoers began to stir, we set out on a valley road still fragrant with the smell of cut hay and last night's rain.
We drove past fields of ponderous Herefords, past roadside stores that sold mountain honey and Elvis rugs.
We followed Quaker Run until the blacktop turned to gravel, and we bounced over Chapman


Democrats, Sick of Being 'Responsible,' Let Loose
LEAD: THERE are Democrats who sincerely believe that their party will not take back the White House until it loses control of Congress.
Obviously, that is not a program that any Democrat in the House or Senate will volunteer for.


Spira Persistent, Puzzling
LEAD: It takes a while for his favorite high school teacher to come up with the exact adjective to describe her former student. ''I'm a math teacher,'' she explains, ''and I like to be precise.'' Finally it comes to her: ''Tenacious.''


Judging Design By Little Things
LEAD: For years now, I have thought that cars ought to be rated on the basis of their ashtrays.


Rita Chabot Weds
LEAD: Rita Jayne Elizabeth Chabot, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond J. Chabot of Danielson, Conn., was married yesterday to Alan David Maude, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David L. Maude of Johnstown and Eagle Bay, N.Y.
The Rev.
Harris Riordan performed the ceremony at the First Unitarian Church in Brooklyn.
The bride, 29 years old, will keep her name.


Workers of the World, Innovate!
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
PASSION FOR GARDENING


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   A Hunt-Set Playground With Easygoing Style
LEAD: The pastoral pleasures in and around the village of Millbrook are low key: walks on the trails of the Cary Arboretum, a visit to a delightful small zoo, a drive along back roads past horse and cattle farms, parking on uncrowded streets without meters and Sunday brunch with a Bloody Mary for $4.95.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: If there's a typical letter from readers of this column, it's something like this one I recently received from a New York City resident:


The 51st and 52d States;   Mr. Bush: Principled, but Mistaken, on the District
LEAD: President Bush supports statehood for Puerto Rico but not for the 625,000 residents of Washington, D.C.
For this, he is being politically thwacked, especially for saying that the District of Columbia's funds ''come almost exclusively from the Federal Government.''


Michael and Hope and Julian And Francesco
LEAD: For art critics, mainstream television used to be a place to get away from it all, take a break and put the mind on automatic pilot.
But these days, art, artists and even art critics are popping up in all kinds of unexpected time slots.
The collaborative painter Tim Rollins and the art critic Hilton Kramer discuss Robert Mapplethorpe's photographs on ''The Phil Donahue Show.


The Negotiations With Japan Get Personal
LEAD: LIKE squabbling marriage partners, Japan and the United States have tried one idea after another to overcome their differences, falling each time into a new round of recrimination.
This year it finally seemed that they had decided to get some meaningful therapy.
The trouble is that each country has hired the other to do the psychoanalyzing.


Airplane Seats
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding the article ''You Can't Be Too Thin in Economy Class'' (Practical Traveler, March 4), I'd like you to know that relief is in sight.
As of May 15, Virgin Atlantic is converting all its 747's on the Atlantic to new, specially contoured seats that will give at least seven inches more legroom than on British Airways.


Cruises
LEAD: To the Editor: Your special cruise issue on Feb. 4 brought back memories of voyages spanning 47 years.
It seems that old ships, like old soldiers, never die, but merely fade away (some no longer in service, others refurbished and renamed).


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our teak furniture has an oiled finish that has become quite dark over the years.
When new, the furniture was rubbed with linseed oil several times, and I have since been told that was a mistake, that I should have used mineral oil.
I think the furniture needs to be cleaned, but am not sure how to do so.


The Latest Penny-Stock Shuffle
LEAD: Aviation Education Systems of Melville, L.I., sells preparatory courses to would-be air traffic controllers.
The Southnet Corporation of Tampa, Fla., is asking hotels to use its telephone operator assistance services.
Exten Ventures of San Diego calls itself a merchant banker and collects fees for helping tiny companies become publicly traded.


Time to Care for Outdoor Decks
LEAD: OUTDOOR decks are built to withstand exposure.
Nevertheless, to look their best and remain sturdy, they should be cared for when necessary and inspected in the spring and fall.


Wall Street;   Riding Out the End-Quarter Calm
LEAD: A sense of listlessness descended over Wall Street this past week as trading volumes sagged.
The quiet dismayed brokers.
And the low volumes made it harder for pundits to reach meaningful conclusions about gains and losses in various indexes.
But a quick look at trading patterns over the past five quarters shows that the swoon is no cause for alarm.


For Contras, It's a Long Way Home
LEAD: In the lush valleys north of this regional capital, the life of a contra rebel has become one of long-practiced routine.


Talks on Hungary Coalition Shaken by Party Infighting
LEAD: The party likely to hold the balance of power in Hungary's next government was torn by infighting today after saying it had made a deal with two other conservative parties for a second round of elections on April 8.


Dodgers Put Gibson on Disabled List
LEAD: As if spring training wasn't short enough this year, rainstorms fell on the Mets and Los Angeles Dodgers today, wiping out their final meeting of the spring and tightening their countdown to opening day, one week from Monday.


About Men;   A Whole New Ball Game
LEAD: MAKING IT ONTO the second-string varsity high-school football team by my junior year meant that I had measured up to my dreams.
Next year I would play on the starting team.
Thinking about that junior year still stirs my competitive juices.
Us against them.
Me against the world.
Thirty-seven years later the competitive drive still propels me.


Miss Lassen Wed To W. J. Cortazzi
LEAD: Anne Carter Lassen, a daughter of Jacqueline C. Lassen of Rosemont, Pa., and Charles W. Lassen of Mount Laurel and Barnegat Light, N.J., was married yesterday to William Julian Cortazzi, the son of Sir Hugh and Lady Cortazzi of London and Vines Cross, East Sussex, England.
The Rev.
Dr.
Eugene C. Bay performed the ceremony at the Bryn Mawr (Pa.) Presbyterian Church.


Giving Life To a Plot Device
LEAD: To the Editor:


POSTINGS: Saint Laurent Consolidation;   Smell of Success
LEAD: The Yves Saint Laurent Parfums Corporation, which has undergone several administrative mutations in the last decade, will move many of its production and office operations to an $11 million facility under construction in Orangeburg, N.Y.
The move will consolidate operations now scattered in Manhattan, Mount Pocono, Pa., and France.


In Working for Mideast Peace, Fairness Is Vital
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beauty;   STAYING FIRM
LEAD: THEY DEFY GRAVITY.
THEY ENCROACH on plastic surgeons.
They bring muscle beach to the boudoir.
Firming creams are the latest lure from the cosmetics industry, and their range is ambitious.
They promise to transform eyelids, throat, bust, thighs and buttocks into expanses as bright and resilient as a trampoline.


2 Officers Wounded and a Suspect Is Killed After a Bronx Robbery
LEAD: Two New York City police officers were wounded and a robbery suspect was killed in a shootout yesterday morning after a car chase that led them from the Bronx into Westchester County, the police said.


Summer Squall Wins Beam
LEAD: Summer Squall established himself as the leading Eastern prospect for the Kentucky Derby by winning the $500,000 Jim Beam Stakes yesterday at Turfway Park in Kentucky.


Richard M. Delaney Weds Miss Williams
LEAD: The wedding of Marina Musa Williams, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George L. Williams of Port Washington, L.I., and Richard Michael Delaney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Delaney of Hawley, Pa., took place yesterday at the United Church of Christ in Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Neill Richards officiated.


Correction
LEAD: A review of Frank Freidel's ''Franklin D. Roosevelt: A Rendezvous With Destiny'' on March 4 referred incorrectly to Roosevelt's first political office.
He began as a member of the New York State Senate, not the Assembly.


IN SHORT
LEAD: COMEBACK.
By Dave Dravecky with Tim Stafford. (Zondervan/Harper &amp; Row, $17.95.) Dave Dravecky was young, popular, celebrated and at the height of his powers when life threw him a curveball he never could have imagined.
Mr.
Dravecky, then a pitcher for the San Francisco Giants, was diagnosed in the fall of 1988 as having a desmoid tumor in his left arm - his pitching arm.


Question Of the Week;   Should Basketball Use Instant Replay?
LEAD: There is no need for the use of replay in basketball.
In the N.F.L. when a play is reviewed, more often than not it remains unchanged, regardless of accuracy.
The officials in both the college and the pro games do an outstanding job on the whole, and replay is unnecessary.
PETER SMOLOWITZ
Longmeadow, Mass.


Miss Thomas to Marry Chip Houghton
LEAD: John C. Thomas Jr. of New York and Locust Valley, L.I., has announced the engagement of his daughter Suzanne Elizabeth Thomas to Francis Joseph Houghton 3d, a son of Margot Dooling Houghton and Mr.
Houghton Jr., both of New York.
A September wedding is planned.


Psychologist Charts Hidden Attitudes
LEAD: EVEN people who do not think they are sexists may unconsciously display a preference for males, says Dr.
Mahzarin Banaji, an assistant professor of psychology at Yale University.
A study by Dr.
Banaji and Dr.
Anthony Greenwald of the University of Washington also found that people who openly disagree about sexual equality may agree about the issue on an unconscious level.


Fashion: On the Street;   Buttons and Bows And a Lot of Heart
LEAD: More than 500 guests dressed in their best Patrick Kelly style on Wednesday to attend a twilight memorial service for Mr.
Kelly at the Fashion Institute of Technology.
They pinned on all their whimsical Kelly buttons, bows, hearts, lips and black baby dolls to celebrate the Mississippi-born designer's life in the world of fashion.


Pilot Failed Drug Test, but Was Kept on Job
LEAD: A flight engineer who was dismissed by Eastern Airlines this month after being charged with buying crack had shown evidence of cocaine use when tested last July but kept flying for the airline.


On Weekend for Counting, Census Itself Is Under Scrutiny as Never Before
LEAD: As census forms are filled out in households around the country this weekend, the nation's residents are writing an end to a decennial demographic contest that has more winners and losers than ever before.


Driving Abroad
LEAD: To the Editor: Having shipped a car from the United States to Antwerp, I know that if you arrive carrying only a USA sticker and an international driver's license, as suggested in the Q &amp; A column on March 4, the car will remain impounded.
You omitted that most important of documents, both at ports of entry and at border crossings: the green card carried by all European drivers, as proof of insurance coverage.


New Tax Spawns Intense Violence in Britain


King Widens Lead to 5 Shots
LEAD: After a three-under-par 69 in the third round today, Betsy King widened her lead to five shots in the Nabisco Dinah Shore.


Mugabe Is Re-elected President of Zimbabwe
LEAD: President Robert Mugabe easily won re-election today, but a low turnout dashed his hopes of a large popular mandate for turning Zimbabwe into a one-party state.


Tech Notes;   Scanning for Better Light
LEAD: A research team headed by John C. Gustafson, manager of light source technology, at GTE Laboratories Inc. in Waltham, Mass., has used computer-aided-tomography, known as CAT scanning, to design more efficient lighting products.
The team uses a CAT scanner to map the processes occurring within high-intensity-discharge lamps.


Round 1: Islanders-Rangers
LEAD: Word crept into the Rangers' locker room, then swept through it.
The Penguins had lost; the Islanders had won and qualified for the playoffs.
New York hockey madness was suddenly five days away and counting.


The High-Octane Ethanol Lobby
LEAD: WHEN WORD OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE Service decision came to Thomas Daschle's Capitol Hill office the Friday afternoon before Thanksgiving, the South Dakota Democrat was deep in debate on the Senate floor, and the celebration had to begin without him.
On returning to his office, with its rustic decor of buffalo hides and


Everyone Gives, Everyone Benefits
LEAD: IN THE EYES OF MANY AMERICANS, THE nation's economic prospects look grim.
Foreign competitors are clobbering us now, and paving the way toward future dominance.
Trade friction with Japan is heating up.


IN SHORT
LEAD: TWO SPECTACULAR SEASONS. 1930: The Year the Hitters Ran Wild; 1968: The Year the Pitchers Took Revenge.
By William B. Mead. (Macmillan, $18.95.) This is a genial, well-researched barroom argument - or, rather, discussion - about hitting versus pitching, old-timers versus new(er)-timers.
The ''Two Spectacular Seasons'' in question are 1930, the best hitters' year in major league history, and 1968, when pitchers like Bob Gibson, Don Drysdale and Juan Marichal forced baseball to make drastic changes (such as lowering the pitcher's mound) to keep the .300 hitter from going the way of the dodo.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our teak furniture has an oiled finish that has become quite dark over the years.
When new, the furniture was rubbed with linseed oil several times, and I have since been told that was a mistake, that I should have used mineral oil.
I think the furniture needs to be cleaned, but am not sure how to do so.


Forces Behind the Golf Swing: Teachers Find a Niche
LEAD: When Ben Hogan built what is generally considered the most reliable swing in history by thickening his callouses every day in a divot-filled cocoon, he influenced a generation of golfers to trust that the things we know best are the things that are learned, not taught.


HERE'S LOOKING AT YOU, BILLY THE KID
LEAD:
SILVER LIGHT
By David Thomson.
333 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: The late Tigran Petrosian was a great believer in the old adage, ''Give him enough rope and he'll hang himself.'' The world champion from 1966 to 1969 believed that extending oneself to find forcing moves to put the opponent under pressure was a great waste of talent.
And what was worse, as he saw it, was that this kind of high-pressure play put the opponent on his guard and drove him to find the right moves.


Review/Opera;   New Principals Join 'La Boheme' at the Met
LEAD: Brian Schexnayder, who sings Marcello in ''La Boheme'' at the Metropolitan Opera, has kept his place in Franco Zeffirelli's garret.
But he had different friends and roommates on Wednesday evening, when new singers joined the cast in the other principal roles.


A 'Liquidator' Shares Secrets of His Trade
LEAD: Lawrence Garfinkle, aka ''Larry the Liquidator,'' is about to make his big speech.
It's the one in which the take-no-prisoners takeover artist of Jerry Sterner's hit Wall Street drama, ''Other People's Money,'' reveals his motive: This obese, chain-smoking, doughnut-addicted arbitrageur does what he does not because he loves money, ''and do I love money,'' but because money is one of the few things that gives him ''unconditional acceptance.


Zydeco at Tramps
LEAD: Rockin' Dopsie and the Zydeco Twisters will play zydeco music tonight at Tramps, 45 West 21st Street (727-7788).
Sets are at 8:30 and 11 P.M. and 12:30 A.M. tonight; admission is $15.


Campus Life: Princeton;   Exam Period: A Time to Kill Or Be Killed
LEAD: In a game of skill and chance that can either relieve exam-period tensions or aggravate them, depending on one's level of paranoia, 30 or so Princeton University undergraduates stalked one another for the last month in the ''assassin game.''


Risk Seen in Use Of Caller ID Service
LEAD: I am compelled to write regarding my professional and personal concerns surrounding the use of Caller ID service in New Jersey (''Caller ID Stirs Debate on Phone Privacy,'' Feb. 11).
There is no doubt in my mind that my staff and volunteers are placed at personal risk by the widespread use of such a service.


Fiftysomething
LEAD: THE helium-filled balloons are always there at the birthday celebration, sometimes saying ''There Is Life After Fifty'' or, even more hopefully, ''Welcome to the Fifties.''


Scholarship Yields A New Caligula, Who Is Merely Obnoxious
LEAD: IN the popular imagination, Caligula is the Roman emperor people love to hate.
In works as ancient as the historian Suetonius's biography of the tyrant, which dates to the early second century A.D., and as recent as the lurid 1980 movie, ''Caligula,'' the emperor has been used to epitomize depravity and cruelty in


THE DRINK OF MILLIONS
LEAD: In the article ''The Drink of Millions,'' by Elizabeth Kolbert (March 4), the statement attributed to me requires some clarification.


Steering the Right Course in a Rental Car in Europe
LEAD: AMERICANS planning to rent a car in Europe this summer should remember that automatic transmissions are hard to get there, that written confirmation of reservations specifying automatic shift are essential and that some travel agents began reserving automatics for their clients last fall for this summer.


Question Of the Week;   Should Basketball Use Instant Replay?
LEAD: Basketball should have instant replay because the referees are only human and the machines capture more than what the eye can see.
A lot of times the wrong calls by referees cause the wrong outcome of a game.
ANTOINE BROWN
Brooklyn


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Trees Full of Bachelors


Volunteers Get a Look Inside Prison
LEAD: THE speaker was describing the moment of imprisonment. ''Your whole life changes,'' he said.


Rock at the Wop-Boppa-Lu-Bop Crossroads
LEAD: ''Keep the spirit, but don't go to such extremes,'' Little Richard was told by his producers during a mid-50's recording session.
That advice had the effect of goading the singer into the frenzied performance of ''Good Golly Miss Molly'' that was released as a single and became one of his biggest hits.


Miss Lentz Engaged to Glenn Worgan
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Rowe Lentz of Ambler, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin M. Lentz to Glenn Simpson Worgan, a son of Joan B. Worgan of Erdenheim, Pa., and John N. Worgan of Philadelphia.
A July wedding is planned.


Receiving a Kidney, a Gift of Life
LEAD: I AM a recent kidney-transplant recipient.
I am also a physician.
At the end of 1988, I developed end-stage renal disease and shortly thereafter required hemodialysis three times a week.
Each dialysis session lasted about three hours.


A Father-Son Conflict in 'Stone Carver'
LEAD: SOMETIMES the readiness of a play may not depend on the honing of a playwright's craft as much as on the delicate resolution of the rocky relationship that may have inspired the play in the first place.


Social Events
LEAD:
Remembering Willi Smith


Kathryn E. Clow Weds C. C. Eddy
LEAD: Kathryn Elizabeth Clow, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley H. Clow of Mendham, N.J., was married yesterday in St.
Louis to Christopher Clifford Eddy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene W. Eddy of Angola, N.Y.
The Rev.
William K. Christian 3d performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Michael and St.


Grow Up and Tell All
LEAD:
ONCE THERE WAS A FARM . . .
A Country Childhood Remembered.
By Virginia Bell Dabney.
273 pp. New York:
Random House. $17.95.
TO SCHOOL THROUGH THE FIELDS
An Irish Country Childhood.
By Alice Taylor.
151 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $14.95.
THE DANCING CLOCK
And Other Childhood Memories.


The Grip Of the Liquid Diet: A special report:   Dieters, Craving Balance, Are Battling Fears of Food
LEAD: Joy Segal's desk on the second floor of Zabar's was a fortress of envelopes full of chocolate-flavored formula diet powder.
The aroma of bread and pastries rose from the store below, but Mrs.
Segal was immune to its temptation.
She smiled triumphantly.


Time to Care for Outdoor Decks
LEAD: OUTDOOR decks are built to withstand exposure.
Nevertheless, to look their best and remain sturdy, they should be cared for when necessary and inspected in the spring and fall.


Blue Devils Stifle Razorbacks' Talk
LEAD: We are from the Atlantic Coast Conference.
We play basketball banking on brains as much as on brawn.
We deserved to be in the Final Four for a fourth time in five years.
We're Duke.
Thanks, Arkansas.


TEACHING STEELCASE TO DANCE
LEAD: PREFACED BY CRASHING CYMBALS, Steve Martin breaks into song and tap dance atop a collection of desks, shelves and storage cabinets.
Life-size on a video screen, the movie superstar looms over the entrance to the Steelcase showroom at the National Exhibition of Contract Interior Furnishings (NEOCON), mecca of the $8 billion domestic office-furniture industry.


Review/Dance;   Fleeting Action in a Victorian Parlor
LEAD: Danial Shapiro and Joanie Smith took five giant, dowdy footstools, placed them strategically about the stage and built an exuberant and surprisingly poignant dance around them in ''Rhapsody,'' a new work presented by the Second Avenue Dance Company/90 on Thursday at the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University.


LEARNING JAPANESE THE SONY WAY
LEAD: THE SONY CORPORATION learned the hard way with Betamax, its ground-breaking videocassette recorder that was ultimately knocked out of the market by the rival VHS technology.
The lesson: when you bring out the hardware, make sure the software comes right along with it.
Consider Sony's Repeat Learning System, a package of foreign-language audio aids developed for Japanese traveling in the United States.


Boning Up For the Next Battle Over Deregulation
LEAD: AIRLINE deregulation has produced, besides much else, a steady stream of studies.
More than a dozen institutes and Government agencies have churned out piles of papers since Congress decided 12 years ago to allow the airlines to fly when and where they want and to charge whatever passengers were willing to pay.


Somber Subject, Somber Style
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York's Public Hospitals Seek More Fiscal Autonomy From City
LEAD: New York City's financially strained public hospital system is pressing to gain more fiscal autonomy from the city government, and officials of the Dinkins administration say they are reviewing the idea with an open mind.


THE WORLD: A Voice From Latin America;   Some Lessons In Democracy - For the U.S.
LEAD: IN the United States there has been much talk about increasing credits, investment and aid to Eastern Europe at the expense of money destined for Latin America.
The aim is to help emerging capitalism and democracy where socialism has failed.
But from a cynical Latin perspective, this South-to-East shift constitutes a transfer of resources from where capitalism has failed to where socialism has failed.


BRADY SPEAKS UP FOR SAVINGS CHOICE
LEAD: The Bush Administration moved aggressively today to reaffirm support for T. Timothy Ryan Jr. as the nation's top savings and loan regulator after the disclosure that Mr.
Ryan used marijuana and cocaine in the early 1970's.


IN SHORT
LEAD: PROPHET OF THE SANDLOTS: Journeys With a Major League Scout.
By Mark Winegardner. (Atlantic Monthly, $18.95.) It's easy to spot a superstar after he has become one.
The trick is to see the makings of a Mike Schmidt or a Ferguson Jenkins in an unformed adolescent.
The baseball scout Tony Lucadello had just such a gift, signing 49 future big leaguers in the course of his 50-year career with the Chicago Cubs and the Philadelphia Phillies.


Tolkien's Heroes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mozart at St. George's
LEAD: Kenneth Dake will conduct the St.
George's Choral Society and Orchestra in Mozart's Grand Mass in C minor (K. 427) at St.
George's Church on Stuyvesant Square, 16th Street east of Third Avenue, at 4 P.M. today.
The program also includes Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 15 (K. 450), with Angela Laba as the soloist.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Donald J. Trump's Taj Mahal casino and hotel are scheduled to open in Atlantic City.
TUESDAY: Leading economic indicators for February are released.
The first natural gas futures contracts is to be traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
WEDNESDAY: Figures for March auto sales are out.


AT THE BASTILLE OPERA, A NEW TRADITION RISES
LEAD: The opening the other day of the $400 million Bastille Opera in Paris aroused feelings of deja vu in a visitor from New York.
It was as if the French were moving in a time warp, recapitulating the Metropolitan Opera's experiences of a quarter-century ago.
Even in purely technical matters, parallels were uncanny: before opening night in 1966, the Met discovered that its main stage turntable would not turn; the Bastille Opera found that its stage elevator would not elevate.


Where Are the Practical Taxis of Yesteryear?
LEAD: To the Editor:


TV Cash Can Give Colleges High Marks
LEAD: The business of televised sports has undergone dramatic changes over the last two decades and will continue to evolve as we look ahead into the 1990's.
What was once a stable, structured and predictable marketplace is now one of unparalleled growth and transition, resulting in a far more complex and uncertain economic environment.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Even though spring is here, the ground is still too cold to do any major planting; peas, spinach, lettuce and other hardy vegetables can go into the ground, if it is dry and workable.
Apply fertilizer to lawns and lime, if soil test shows its need.
Scrape off egg cases of gypsy moth into a paper bag and toss into the fireplace or wood stove.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Montvale
LEAD: JUST a quarter of a century ago, the tiny Borough of Montvale was famous for its plump strawberries and sweet corn, its grist mills and fox-hunting.


Laudner Out
LEAD: The Minnesota Twins will be without their regular catcher, Tim Laudner, for a while.
Laudner said he might seek treatment for what he has called an emotional problem, The Star Tribune of Minneapolis reported yesterday.


What Opera and Musicals Share: Not Much, William Bolcom Finds
LEAD: William Bolcom is hardly the first major American composer to write both musical comedy and traditional opera.
Gershwin managed that trick, of course; and so has Leonard Bernstein.
But Mr.
Bolcom may be the first to attempt both simultaneously.
Next Sunday, the American Music Theater Festival will open its seventh season in Philadelphia with the premiere of ''Casino Paradise,'' a new work in the tradition of the modern Broadway musical, with music by Mr.


Catholic Women Air Views on Abortion
LEAD: Roman Catholic women in Wisconsin gave Archbishop Rembert G. Weakland of Milwaukee an earful of contending views last week in sessions he convened to explore women's attitudes on the church's opposition to abortion.


Fiscal Woes Force Schools To Anticipate Faculty Cuts
LEAD: TRYING to juggle the rising costs of running their schools with the memory of last spring's battles with the voters, school administrators around the state are planning to cut their budgets by cutting their teaching staffs.
As a result, ''hundreds of teachers throughout the state could be laid off this year,'' said Thomas Murphy, assistant executive director of the Connecticut Association of Boards of Education.


Fashion;   Bedazzlements for Street and Beach
LEAD: Sequins are turning up on more than evening wear this spring.
Designers have seized on their reflective shimmer to embellish daytime fabrics.


Penn Varsity Holds Off Yale in Blackwell Cup
LEAD: The Pennsylvania varsity crew withstood a closing sprint by Yale and won the Blackwell Cup today for the fourth year in a row.


Katherine L. Kavetas and Adam Rothschild Wed
LEAD: Katherine Louise Kavetas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry L. Kavetas of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday at the Congregational Church to Adam Rothschild, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Rothschild of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Charles Crawford Smith officiated.


PAPA GETS THE BLAME
LEAD:
A HISTORY OF PRIVATE LIFE
Volume Four: From the Fires of Revolution to the Great War.
Edited by Michelle Perrot.
Translated by Arthur Goldhammer.
Illustrated. 713 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
The Belknap Press/Harvard University Press.
$39.95.


Lola L. Szladits, 20-Year Curator At New York's Library, Dies at 67
LEAD: Lola L. Szladits, the renowned curator of the New York Public Library's Berg Collection of English and American Literature, who expanded the collection to include original manuscripts that ranged from W. B. Yeats to S. J. Perelman and Saul Bellow, died of cancer Friday night at her home in Manhattan.


Federally Subsidized Housing at Risk
LEAD: AT a time when homelessness and the shortage of affordable housing are high on the nation's political agenda, lawmakers and housing officials are grappling with the problem of how to prevent steep losses in the federally subsidized apartments built during the 60's and 70's.


In This Corner. . .
LEAD: MY husband laughs to see me, yellow pad and pencil in hand, sitting in my favorite Boston rocker in the corner of the living room.
He reminds me that little of worth is accomplished at ease.
But I still gravitate to this post when the mood to write occurs.


The Hutch That Is And Used to Be
LEAD: The former beautiful Hutchinson River Parkway ride through Westchester is now just another memory, replaced by so-called necessary expansion that turns out to be not so expansive after all.
For the most part, most of the new multimillion-dollar ''expansion'' is still two-lane and if you're not extra careful, particularly around the Eastchester area, you're liable to think that which looks like a third lane is not really a third lane at all and you'll have a difficult and dangerous time getting back where you belong.


Tax Protesters Battle Police in London
LEAD: A huge rally protesting a new tax turned into a riot in central London tonight as demonstrators battled the mounted police with rocks, bottles and stones.


New Beginnings, Second Quarter And Fiscal Year
LEAD: Traders are hoping that the arrival of the year's second quarter today will enliven the market, after last week's various departures - one clumsy, one graceful, the rest routine - gave Wall Street the meandering air of a mid-afternoon train station.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our teak furniture has an oiled finish that has become quite dark over the years.
When new, the furniture was rubbed with linseed oil several times, and I have since been told that was a mistake, that I should have used mineral oil.
I think the furniture needs to be cleaned, but am not sure how to do so.


Dr. Johnson
LEAD: To the Editor: Elizabeth Riely (''British Mania: Meat Pudding,'' Travel, Feb. 11), can't really be faulted for telling us that ''Dr.
Johnson met with Boswell and Goldsmith'' at the Cheshire Cheese on Fleet Street.
This myth is promoted by the pub and has appeared in uncounted London guidebooks.


New York Is Top Social Club Landlord
LEAD: The city notice posted on the door of the Manhattan storefront said, ''Vacate.'' Still, a sign promised ''good times'' inside the Wanda Social Club, and through the windows, tables and chairs and a bar seemed to await a crowd.


Q and A
LEAD:
Insuring Free Rental Cars


On Language;   The German Answer
LEAD: THE GERMAN QUEStion - in German, die deutsche Frage - is again in the world news.
The question itself is widely understood to be ''What is to be done about Germany?'' The underlying question, however, of far greater historical linguistic import, is: Who coined the phrase?
Did it enter the geopolitical arena in the 1930's with the rise of


Residential Resales
LEAD:
Closings in the week ended March 17
MANHATTAN
East Midtown
$230,000
301 East 48th Street
(Marlo Towers)
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, terrace; maintenance $830, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Minskoff Brokerage)


BRINGING THE BEST OF THE EAST WEST
LEAD: WHILE AMERICAN COMPANIES have been rushing to set up shop behind the Iron Curtain, bringing car phones to Budapest and Big Macs to Moscow, John W. Kiser 3d has been running in the opposite direction.


The Burmese Are Going to Vote; the Army Tells Them To
LEAD: THEY'RE going to hold an election in Myanmar, formerly Burma, but the guest list is a short one.
Even some of the candidates aren't invited.


Works in Progress;   Fill'er Up
LEAD: IF THE HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE spread on the floor of Bee Canyon in Orange County, Calif., creates the impression of an enormous trash can, appearances are, in this case, not misleading.
The Bee Canyon Landfill, opened for commercial use last month, is now accepting 3,000 tons of solid refuse daily on 50 acres of canyon land prepared thus far. ''It's a box canyon; the deepest portion will be about 400 feet,'' says Frank Bowerman, director of the county's waste-management program.


Dr. Rona L. Stein To Marry in June
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Herman B. Stein of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Rona Lynn Stein to Stephen Henry Kaufman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Kaufman of Henrietta, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.


Quick Ways to Turn Out Spicy Shrimp Dishes
LEAD: WHEN I'm in New York City on weekends, I often go down to Chinatown for a dim sum lunch.
On the way back, I cannot resist the Chinese fish markets, with their enticing piles of shrimp.
They are about as fresh as any I've found in the city, and come in all sizes, heads on or off, and are much cheaper than fish markets further uptown.


MINNEAPOLIS: NO MORE MR. NICE GUY
LEAD: THE HEADHUNTERS SAY that nobody ever wants to come to Minneapolis, and that once here, nobody ever wants to leave.
It's inarguably cold, this distant outpost - a remote corner of flyover land in the heart of the heart of the country.
But Minneapolitans do not merely endure this American Siberia, they thrive in it.


Special Today: The Business World/Magazine Pt.2
LEAD:
Warren Buffett, America's premier investor, tells how he does it.


MOMA's BOY
LEAD: As a 44-year-old downtown ''old guard'' (new category?) visitor to MOMA, I too am dismayed by the ''mallization'' of the museum (''MOMA's Boy,'' by William Grimes, March 11), but my concern is exacerbated when I read of Mr.
Varnedoe's intentions for the Brancusi sculptures.
In trying to establish his middle ground on culture, he is going to destroy the essential element of quiet space around the sculptures.


Shuttle Launching Moved Up
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration today advanced the launching date for the shuttle Discovery and its payload, the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope, by two days to April 10.


Time to Care for Outdoor Decks
LEAD: OUTDOOR decks are built to withstand exposure.
Nevertheless, to look their best and remain sturdy, they should be cared for when necessary and inspected in the spring and fall.


Quick Ways to Turn Out Spicy Shrimp Dishes
LEAD: WHEN I'm in New York City on weekends, I often go down to Chinatown for a dim sum lunch.
On the way back, I cannot resist the Chinese fish markets, with their enticing piles of shrimp.
They are about as fresh as any I've found in the city, and come in all sizes, heads on or off, and are much cheaper than fish markets further uptown.


Dream Town, Short on Land and People, Finds Time Fleeting, Too
LEAD: Welcome to Islandia, South Florida's ultimate dream city: no street crime, no drugs, no pollution, no traffic.


Suzanne Pearl Marries Kenneth Bakst
LEAD: The Union League Club in New York was the setting last evening for the marriage of Suzanne Pearl, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Erwin Pearl of New York, and Kenneth Bakst, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alvin A. Bakst of Rancho Mirage, Calif.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated.


Nuclear Plant Recycled
LEAD: To the Editor:


GORBACHEV OFFERS CONDITIONAL TALKS WITH LITHUANIANS
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev offered to open a discussion with Lithuanian leaders tonight if they repealed their declaration of independence, and he warned the Lithuanian people that failure to comply with his request ''could have grave consequences for all of us.''


Texts of Gorbachev's Statements to Lithuanians
LEAD: Following are the texts of statements made yesterday by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union to the Lithuanian people and to the Lithuanian Parliament.
The statements, as distributed in translation by Tass, the official Soviet press agency, were read by announcers on Radio Moscow and on the Soviet television.


Bankruptcy Bar: Never So Solvent
LEAD: YOU CAN'T JUST SAY YOU have the financing,'' Harvey R. Miller says decisively. ''You've got to have it all lined up and ready to go.
A lot of these deals founder on being conditional.'' Miller is lecturing one of his colleagues, Ira M. Millstein, who is scribbling notes on a yellow pad perched awkwardly on his lap.


ISLANDERS CLINCH THE LAST BERTH IN PLAYOFFS
LEAD: The Islanders concluded their regular season with a rousing 6-2 victory over the Philadelphia Flyers, at joyous Nassau Colisum tonight, and qualified for the Stanley Cup playoffs when the Penguins lost to the Buffalo Sabres, 3-2, in overtime in Pittsburgh.


Sara Anne Keating and Neil W. Flanagan Wed
LEAD: Sara Anne Keating, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Freeland Keating of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday at St.
Aloysius Roman Catholic Church to Neil William Flanagan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick Lawrence Flanagan of Ridgefield, Conn.
The Rev.
Henry Zenorini performed the ceremony.


Wall Street;   Those Newly Cash-Rich Insurers
LEAD: A few months ago, two law professors started a stir in the insurance industry with a study that showed that defendants have been faring better in product liability cases.
The widely reported findings, by James A. Henderson Jr. and Theodore Eisenberg, both of the Cornell Law School, suggested to some analysts that big liability insurers might soon be able to move unneeded reserves back into profits.


Party in Guatemala Names Its Candidate for President
LEAD: The governing Guatemalan Christian Democrat Party today named former Foreign Minister Alfonso Cabrera Hidalgo its presidential candidate in elections to be held in November.


To a Fading U.S. Bugle, Rhineland Sings a Dirge
LEAD: At 5 P.M. each day, life at the United States 8th Infantry Division headquarters comes to a brief standstill as the American flag is lowered for the night.


Children's Books On the Holocaust
LEAD: As a children's librarian and an individual drawn to stories and books on the Holocaust, I am pleased that David A. Adler has written a new book on the subject [''For Youth, Memories of the Holocaust,'' Jan. 28] .
His work, both fiction and nonfiction, is regularly added to our collections in the Queens Library system, and


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
A VISIT TO SLEEP'S HOUSE
By Mary Pope Osborne.
Illustrated by Melissa Bay Mathis.
Unpaged. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
$11.95. (Ages 2 to 5)
THE MOON COMES HOME
By Mary Jo Salter.
Illustrated by Stacey Schuett.
Unpaged. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
$12.95. (Ages 5 to 9)
ADELAIDE AND THE NIGHT TRAIN
By Liz Rosenberg.


Style Makers;   Renate Burstein, Wedding Newsletter Publisher
LEAD: Renate Burstein is the publisher of some of the world's smallest-circulation newspapers.
Ms.
Burstein uses a desktop computer to produce two to eight pages of news about brides and grooms on their wedding day.
The special-edition newspapers include articles about how they met, baby pictures, the menu, the guest list and a family tree.


Food;   ALL THE WAY HOME
LEAD: I WAS QUITE POSSIBLY THE FIRST GIRL IN my high school to serve fondue.
I pushed quiche on skeptical college beaus and blackened fish on a recalcitrant husband.
My experiments in sushi and sashimi failed, but my tapas were a hit.
And I have spent hours driving through the snow in search of quinoa, jicama and chanterelles at local markets.


Campus Life: Miami of Ohio;   Plagiarism Is Rampant, A Survey Finds
LEAD: Students submit plagirized work as their own far more often than might have been suspected, a survey of students here has found.


Mariquita Patterson to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Albert A. Patterson of Port Washington, L.I., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Mariquita Patterson, and J. Michael Gordon, the son of Mrs.
Donald J. Lawlor of Timonium, Md., and the late Albert G. Gordon of Baltimore.
Ms.
Patterson, 26 years old, is an environmental engineer at Texas Instruments in Dallas, where her fiance, 33, is a project manager.


The Man Will Eat Literally Anything
LEAD: The wind howled and the rain poured on a freezing night outside Elstree Studios.
On the set, a stylized neon sign flashed above the entrance to Le Hollandais, a smart restaurant.
Suddenly a white Jaguar pulled up and the actor Michael Gambon, cast as Albert, a bullying thief, jumped out, barking orders at his henchmen.


Question Of the Week;   Should Basketball Use Instant Replay?
LEAD: Are you kidding?
Not if I have to view, once again, the woeful March that my beloved Knicks just put me through.
PETER C. THOMAS
North Berwick, Mass.


October Wedding For Miss Acheson
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick B. V. M. Acheson of Waterford, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Caroline Mary Patricia Acheson to David L'Estrange Seward, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter L'Estrange Seward of Ottawa.
An October wedding is planned.


Cathy Gottlieb to Wed
LEAD: May wedding plans for Cathy F. Gottlieb and Mark S. Weiss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Weiss of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., have been announced by her parents, Phyllis Golden-Gottlieb and Jason Gottlieb of Los Angeles.
Miss gottlieb, 25 years old, is a graduate of Arizona State University and an executive recruiter at Gregory &amp; Gregory in New York.


YAZ INDEED!
LEAD:
YAZ
Baseball, the Wall, and Me.
By Carl Yastrzemski and Gerald Eskenazi.
Illustrated. 300 pp. New York:
Doubleday. $19.95.


Gary R. Smith Is Wed To Tracey R. Lampert
LEAD: At Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., Tracey Robin Lampert, the daughter of Dolores Lampert of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Floyd M. Lampert, was married last evening to Gary Robert Smith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Smith of Harrison, N.Y.
Rabbi Norton Shargel officiated.


Sound Advice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sound Advice Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
21,500,000
18,156,852
Net inc
526,000
514,455
Share earns
.14
.17
9mo sales
68,000,000
58,542,343
Net inc
1,900,000
2,287,418
Share earns
.53
.75


Kemper Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kemper Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
697,297,000
681,409,000
Net inc
38,900,000
b80,787,000
Share earns
.79
1.37
Shares outst
48,935,000
58,336,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $10,585,000, or 18 cents a share.


Review/Recital;   Supove's 'Exploding Piano'
LEAD: One of the oldest cliches about the piano is the exhortation by teachers and critics to take what is essentially a percussion instrument and turn it into a singing one.
Few songs were sung at Katherine Supove's piano program at Weill Recital Hall on Thursday, however.
Indeed, its title - ''The Exploding


Pictoretel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pictoretel Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,392,000
4,350,000
Net loss
690,000
b556,000
Shares outst
2,849,073
2,672,980
b-After a one-time after-tax credit of $303,000 for adjustment of inventory values.


The Grave Consequence
LEAD: The long night of repression is falling on Vilnius.
American diplomats have been ejected and Western newsmen are being packed on trains to Moscow.
Any impressments, arrests and beatings will take place in the dark.


Cross-Country Trails Drawing New Interest
LEAD: IMAGINE cross-country skiing around the lake at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.


Hemlo Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hemlo Gold Mines
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
48,891,000
45,181,000
Net inc
9,090,000
6,438,000
Share earns
.10
.07
Results are in Canadian funds.


Metro Datelines;   Pilot Killed in Crash Into Mountain Tower
LEAD: The pilot of a light airplane died shortly before noon yesterday when his single-engine Cessna apparently struck a broadcast tower during a fog and crashed on a mountain in Ulster County, the state police said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Growing evidence suggests that conditions in the ''junk bond'' market may have stabilized and that a turnaround could be in the offing.
A steep drop in prices has pushed yields to nearly twice their historic norms relative to Treasury securities, and investors are beginning to creep back.


Maxim Integrated Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxim Integrated Products (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
14,423,000
10,581,000
Net inc
1,973,000
1,478,000
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
13,135,000
12,542,000
9mo sales
39,831,000
30,382,000
Net inc
5,443,000
3,937,000
Share earns
.42
.32
Shares outst
12,913,000
12,424,000


Reviews/Television;   Koppel Explores Questions Of Romania's Revolution
LEAD: The drama of the Romanian revolution, the only one of the upsurges in Eastern Europe that was attended by violence and the one whose triumph remains the most problematic, is graphically presented on tonight's ''Koppel Report.'' Using pictures that have not been seen before in America or for that matter in Romania, the hour captures the chaos of the few days in December that ended with the fall of Nicolae


Chrysler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chrysler Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,557,000,000
9,655,000,000
Net inc
71,000,000
b351,000,000
Share earns
.32
1.50
Shares outst
222,149,000
233,820,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $13,000,000, or 6 cents a share.


CORRECTION
LEAD: Some of the American League schedule in yesterday's sports section contained incorrect information.
These will be corrected Sunday.


Helix Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helix Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
11,567,000
14,331,000
Net inc
86,000
942,000
Share earns
.03
.37
Shares outst
2,495,000
2,515,000


BEI Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BEI Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
19,107,000
16,433,000
Net inc
1,687,000
1,288,000
Share earns
.25
.27
Shares outst
6,861,000
4,857,000
6mo sales
38,279,000
31,202,000
Net inc
3,548,000
2,770,000
Share earns
.51
.56
Shares outst
6,909,000
4,927,000


Review/Music;   Dark, Deep and Sprightly
LEAD: At a certain level, the Polish Chamber Orchestra and its French conductor, Emmanuel Krivine, made sincere, professionally executed music at Carnegie Hall on Friday night.
Grieg's ''Holberg'' Suite, the Lutoslawski ''Musique Funebre'' and Haydn's symphony ''La Passione'' were the work of competent players, eager to please and under tight control.


CMS Enhancements reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMS Enhancements (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
46,383,000
52,876,000
Net inc
b420,000
1,118,000
Share earns
.13
.43
Shares outst
3,167,000
2,582,000
9mo sales
154,153,000
157,554,000
Net inc
b2,150,000
3,585,000
Share earns
.68
1.49
Shares outst
3,155,000
2,405,000


Down and Out? Play the Knicks
LEAD: Need a victory, play the Knicks.
It doesn't matter whether it's a lowly expansion team, a team riddled with injuries or a team trying to put an end to a long losing streak.
The Knicks have accommodated all.


Capital Press And Officials Jab, but in Jest
LEAD: President Bush was teased for detesting broccoli and taking a hoax call from someone purporting to be the President of Iran.
Vice President Dan Quayle was ribbed for procuring an anatomically explicit gag doll in Chile.
And the Democrats were twitted time and again for their seemingly endless political misfortunes.


Southwall Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwall Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
3,574,000
3,565,000
Net inc
b53,000
b36,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
7,077,000
6,171,000
b-Included tax credits of $18,000 for the latest quarter and $14,000 for year- ago period.


United Dominion Realty reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Dominion Realty (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,320,000
b1,759,000
Share earns
.11
.21
b-Included gain of $1,254,000, or 15 cents a share, from the sale of a shopping center.


Barry's Jewelers reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barry's Jewelers (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
62,178,000
55,979,000
Net inc
4,280,000
5,721,000
Share earns
.85
1.14
9mo sales
134,137,000
125,153,000
Net loss
3,419,000
b6,782,000
Share earns
-
1.36


Resource Recycling reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Resource Recycling
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,256,000
2,900,000
Net loss
b140,000
54,000
Shares outst
1,716,591
1,180,879
b-Included a tax loss carryforward of $93,000.
Latest quarter results reflected seasonal low for the deposit legislation division and included start-up costs as company prepared to bring Syracuse, N.Y., and Cape May, N.J., municipal recycling operations on line.


Lawmakers See No Shift By Bush on Raising Taxes
LEAD: Ask a Republican on Capitol Hill whether the Bush Administration is ready to talk seriously about raising taxes, and the answer is yes, as part of a bigger budget deal.
Ask a Democrat the same question and the answer is no, any such idea is a political trap.
Ask the Administration, and the answers are a bit of both and largely off the record.


Hopes for Rangers In a Year of Parity
LEAD: IMAGINE attending a Stanley Cup playoff game 50 years from now between the Rangers and the Islanders at the venerable Nassau Coliseum.


Wisconsin Routs Colgate for Title
LEAD: There were too many Badgers from Wisconsin on the ice and in the stands for Colgate to overcome today.
The Badgers on skates trounced the Red Raiders, 7-3, and won the the national championship of college hockey.


Fischer &amp; Porter reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fischer &amp; Porter (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
48,583,000
48,541,000
Net loss
1,994,000
1,592,000
Shares outst
5,209,000
5,147,000


Modine Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modine Manufacturing Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
108,534,000
110,337,000
Net inc
6,965,000
6,285,000
Share earns
.47
.41
Yr sales
436,347,000
423,855,000
Net inc
25,168,000
26,206,000
Share earns
1.68
1.73


Alliance Capital Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alliance Capital Management (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
35,919,000
44,334,000
Net inc
5,507,000
4,480,000
Share earns
.19
.16


T. Rowe Price reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* T. Rowe Price (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
42,194,000
37,675,000
Net inc
6,920,000
6,907,000
Share earns
.47
.47


Artel Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Artel Communications Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,217,000
3,217,000
Net inc
b45,000
c548,000
Share earns
.01
.15
b-Included $15,000 in tax loss carryforwards.
c-Reflected one-time gain of $1,800,000 from technology license fee.


Irwin Toy Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Irwin Toy Ltd.
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
20,980,000
20,487,000
Net inc
315,000
227,000
Share earns
.06
.05
Yr sales
94,921,000
93,727,000
Net inc
2,284,000
1,515,000
Share earns
.45
.30
Results are in Canadian funds.


Henderson Is Link to Success at Duke
LEAD: The horizontal lines often appear across the forehead of Phil Henderson, a Duke University senior, when he makes a thoughtful observation.
He has been asked to make many observations in the last month.


Sharebase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sharebase Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,631,000
8,068,000
Net loss
b691,000
728,000
b-Included a gain of $642,000 related to restructuring.


Action Auto Rental reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Auto Rental (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
27,519,000
20,527,000
Net inc
60,000
1,353,000
Share earns
.01
.14
Shares outst
10,280,000
9,730,000


Mugabe Wins Decisively in Zimbabwe Voting
LEAD: President Robert Mugabe and his governing party decisively won the national election this weekend, apparently placing the nation firmly on the path to a one-party state.


International Yogurt reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Yogurt (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,633,105
834,692
Net inc
84,939
b48,496
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


50 Hurt in Riot at English Prison
LEAD: Hundreds of prisoners protesting living conditions broke out of their cells today at one of Britain's oldest jails and went on a rampage in which at least 50 people were injured.


Efforts to Speed U.S.-Japan Trade Talks Are Working
LEAD: An accelerated effort to ease trade friction between the United States and Japan is yielding results, with recent agreements to open Japanese markets to American telecommunications equipment and supercomputers and the possibility that an accord on satellites will be reached this week.


Presidential Life reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Presidential Life (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
13,466,000
10,169,000
Share earns
.47
.36
Share earnings for 1990 consisted of 44 cents a share from operations and 3 cents from investment gains.
For 1989, income from operations was 35 cents a share, and 1 cent from investment gain.


Sigma-Aldrich Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
132,256,000
104,443,000
Net inc
18,201,000
15,801,000
Share earns
.73
.64


Wasatch Education Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wasatch Education Systems
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,917,100
2,808,141
Net loss
128,888
70,292
Shares outst
10,772,335
5,308,573
Yr rev
7,558,823
4,556,420
Net loss
1,084,754
2,292,999
Shares outst
10,772,355
5,318,753


'Junk Bond' Rebound Is Forecast
LEAD: As the second quarter begins, evidence is building that suggests conditions in the besieged market for high-yield ''junk bonds'' may have stabilized and that a turnaround could be in the offing.


Computer Horizons reports earnings for Qtr to March 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Horizons (OTC)
Qtr to March 29
1990
1989
Revenue
24,119,000
19,720,000
Net inc
682,000
b1,443,000
Share earns
.28
.59
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $1,042,000, or 43 cents a share, in connection with the adoption of required new accounting principles for deferred income taxes.


Upheaval in the East;   Moscow Sends Armored Vehicles Through Tense Lithuania Capital
LEAD: The Kremlin sent a column of armored personnel carriers through the Lithuanian capital today, strengthening both the Soviet military presence and the psychological pressure on Lithuania to retreat from its claim of independence.


MTS Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MTS Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
38,058,300
29,332,700
Net inc
2,067,500
691,000
Share earns
.45
.15
6mo sales
74,296,500
63,935,900
Net inc
4,895,500
3,343,100
Share earns
1.06
.74


Generics Case Guilty Pleas
LEAD: A former Food and Drug Administration official and a generic drug company pleaded guilty Friday to racketeering and illegal payment charges stemming from an investigation of fraud in the generic drug industry.


Fuel Spill Threatens Water Supply in Pittsburgh    Residents in Harrison Township, 35 miles northeast of Pittsburgh, were forced to rely on water brought in by truck and tanker. (Associated Press)


Upper Peninsula Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Upper Peninsula Energy Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
15,258,000
15,007,000
Net inc
1,575,000
1,462,000
Share earns
1.06
.99


Metro Datelines;   Homeless Woman Is Beaten on Subway
LEAD: A homeless woman was struck on the head and robbed of $20 on a southbound D train early yesterday, the Transit Police said.


Ark Restaurants Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ark Restaurants Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
9,455,000
6,513,000
Net inc
313,000
88,000
Share earns
.09
.03
6mo sales
18,728,000
13,445,000
Net inc
567,000
366,000
Share earns
.17
.11


South Africa: The 2 Sides
LEAD: The indefinite postponement of their first formal meeting has emphasized the differences in the ways President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, the anti-apartheid leader, must maneuver to maintain support within their constituencies.


Upheaval in the East;   More German Borders Come Down


Nets' Fans Watch Another Yawner
LEAD: Acting as if they forgot to set their clocks ahead one hour, the Nets played the first half this afternoon as if they were still asleep.


LSI Logic Corp. of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Logic Corp. of Canada
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
10,220,000
7,272,000
Net loss
1,665,000
b548,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income and included a special gain of $415,000 from recovery of tax loss carryforwards.


Drug Emporium Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Drug Emporium Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
137,417,000
112,689,000
Net inc
2,676,000
3,091,000
Share earns
.21
.24
Shares outst
13,036,837
13,071,100
Yr sales
491,652,000
406,728,000
Net inc
8,206,000
7,981,000
Share earns
.63
.66
Shares outst
13,113,739
12,136,046


M/A-Com reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* M/A-Com (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
97,970,000
69,481,000
Net inc
3,765,000
c2,966,000
Share earns
.15
.12
6mo sales
181,183,000
130,739,000
Net loss
b114,513,000
cd5,686,000
Share earns
-
.23


American Precision Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Precision Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
12,722,000
13,071,000
Net inc
971,000
1,044,000
Share earns
.13
.14
Shares outst
7,326,000
7,306,000
Shares earnings and shares outstanding are restated to give effect to a 5-for-4 share distribution declared April 27, 1990.


Chronicle
LEAD: MARION NESTLE is settling down in a tiny terraced apartment in Greenwich Village.
It came complete with bulletproof windows, a souvenir from its years as the apartment of former Mayor EDWARD I. KOCH.


Doskocil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Doskocil Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
99,691,000
103,193,000
Net loss
b3,716,000
c1,987,000
Share earns
-
.39
Yr sales
482,413,000
247,960,000
Net loss
b7,857,000
c4,596,000
Share earns
-
.90


For Two Democratic Leaders, Two Needed Victories
LEAD: When the 1989 session of Congress ended last November, Democratic leaders said: Wait till next year.


Walker Telecommunications Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walker Telecommunications Corp. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,186,154
439,964
Net loss
b6,592,906
c3,025,543
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $4,462,510, which included loss on disposal of discontinued operations of $634,227.


Metro Matters;   The Eternal Aim To Make Cities More Livable
LEAD: Far-sightedness in state and local government seems to be defined nowadays as anticipating next week's budget deficit forecast.
In that context, a 15-month contract authorized last month by the New York City Transit Authority is positively visionary.


A Roller Coaster Quarter for Foreign Markets
LEAD: The up-and-down performance of the world's stock markets in the first quarter of 1990 has left international portfolio managers with some tough investment decisions.


Amtrak Fighting Battle Over Wastes
LEAD: It was a good day for bass fishing on the St.
Johns River.
The Florida skies were sunny and clear, and so William and Mary Trammell were amazed when a sudden downpour doused them as they were fishing under the Buffalo Bluff Bridge.


Arix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arix Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
12,170,000
22,449,000
Net loss
5,796,000
c1,350,000
Share earns
-
.17
Shares outst
7,685,000
7,822,000
9mo sales
49,556,000
64,846,000
Net loss
b11,190,000
c3,960,000
Share earns
-
.56
Shares outst
7,660,000
7,024,000


Chronicle
LEAD: When GILBERT E. KAPLAN stepped up to the podium at Carnegie Hall seven years ago, people smiled indulgently.
A rich man's fantasy, conducting Mahler's mammoth Second Symphony, the ''Resurrection,'' some thought.


Homeless And Mentally Ill;   Ill, Possibly Violent, and No Place to Go
LEAD: On a recent morning near the subway platform where a deranged homeless man was beaten to death in January, a young man in sweatpants and jogging shoes came upon social workers passing out food to mentally ill people who live in Central Park.


Bolt Beranek reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolt Beranek (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
64,889,000
74,458,000
Net loss
b32,373,000
5,175,000
9mo rev
192,647,000
219,649,000
Net loss
b38,625,000
c2,382,000
b-Included pretax restructuring charge of $20,400,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


CSS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSS Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
25,910,000
24,276,000
Net inc
556,000
1,354,000
Share earns
.05
.25
Shares outst
5,145,000
4,123,000
The company said the latest quarter included a pre-tax charge of $815,000 from the write-off of accounts receivable by its paper magic unit due to the bankruptcy of Ames Department Stores.


Time Air Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Time Air Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
30,400,000
26,900,000
Net inc
378,000
1,500,000
Share earns
.08
.35
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Stanhome Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanhome Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
150,765,000
119,039,000
Net inc
b9,878,000
b8,436,000
Share earns
.50
.42
b-Included pretax gains on sales of assets of $979,000 in 1990 and $8,000 in 1989.


Nuvision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nuvision Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
13,425,000
11,903,000
Net loss
65,000
b201,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


Tyco Toys reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyco Toys (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
71,084,000
37,857,000
Net inc
798,000
263,000
Share earns
.12
.04


National Debt Becomes Beast That Ate America
LEAD: To the Editor:


Loyola Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loyola Capital Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,296,000
2,549,000
Share earns
.47
.51
Shares outst
4,849,104
5,022,595


2-Shot Victory For King
LEAD: Betsy King played prodigally with a six-stroke lead in the Nabisco Dinah Shore today, but held on to win her third major title by two shots over Kathy Postlewait and Shirley Furlong.


Krickstein Leads U.S. to Semifinals
LEAD: The last time Aaron Krickstein played in the Davis Cup for the United States, he became an unwitting foil in a dark moment of American tennis.
By losing the final singles match against Victor Pecci of Paraguay in 1987, he was generally blamed for the team's demise in the first round of the tournament, never mind that Paraguay won, 3-2, and Krickstein succeeded in his other singles match, against Hugo


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Union Exploration Partners Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Exploration Partners Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
204,700,000
233,000,000
Net inc
69,700,000
106,100,000
Share earns
.28
.43
Shares outst
247,400,000
245,700,000
Share earnings and shares outstanding are in units.


Elexis Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elexis Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,879,743
6,148,363
Net loss
1,304,561
b2,680,130
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $330,405 and $63,584 for the latest year and year-earlier period, respectively.


Canadian Jorex reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Jorex
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,084,000
6,404,000
Net inc
1,064,000
b3,118,000
Share earns
.14
-
b-Net loss
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Pep Boys Chief No Kin Of Manny, Moe or Jack
LEAD: Pep Boys - Manny, Moe &amp; Jack, a chain of 280 auto supply stores, has a new chief executive.


Soviet Citizens Like Idea of Family Farm
LEAD: To the Editor:


Honduran Army Seeks U.S. Troops' Attackers
LEAD: The Honduran military began a nationwide search today for the gunmen who wounded eight United States airmen over the weekend.


Omnicom Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Omnicom Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
274,309,000
226,212,000
Net inc
10,849,000
9,000,000
Share earns
.42
.35
Figures for 1989 have been restated to reflect acquisition of Thomas A. Schultz Co.


Republic Automotive Parts reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Automotive Parts (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
17,411,000
18,507,000
Net loss
182,000
417,000


Tests for New York Children Starting School Lack Uniformity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bus Driver Is Shot in Tennessee
LEAD: The driver of a bus carrying passengers for the strike-plagued Greyhound Lines was shot on a highway by a man in a passing pickup truck, the authorities said today.


Ulan Bator Journal;   Faraway Diplomatic Post Warms to Mare's Milk
LEAD: One of America's newest and tiniest embassies occupies one of this city's drab apartment buildings, distinguished by an American flag that flutters outside even when Siberian temperatures have sent the yaks searching for shelter and the hardy Mongolians have retreated to their felt tents.


ILC Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ILC Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,992,000
5,473,000
Net inc
b1,451,000
c659,000
Share earns
.63
-
6mo sales
11,050,000
10,592,000
Net inc
b1,538,000
c424,000
Share earns
.67
-


Columbia Savings Reports Large Losses
LEAD: The Columbia Savings and Loan Association said today that it had experienced larger-than-expected losses in the last three months of 1989 and the first two months of this year, apparently bringing it to the verge of being seized by Federal regulators.


Price Stern Sloan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Price Stern Sloan (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
8,867,000
9,842,000
Net inc
28,000
b459,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
4,107,000
3,770,000
b-Net loss and reflected $311,000 in tax loss carryforward.


Mets Beat Yankees, 5-2
LEAD: Something turned the afternoon hot.
More than the scorching sun, which baked a record turnout at Fort Lauderdale Stadium until the crowd was well done, it was likely the game itself: Mets and Yankees, tied, ninth inning, Dave Righetti on the mound.


Balfour Maclaine Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Balfour Maclaine Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
177,700,000
382,900,000
Net inc
1,726,000
b48,000
Share earns
.26
-
Shares outst
6,606,000
5,855,000
b-Net loss


Lincoln N.C. Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln N.C. Realty (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
659,842
b673,000
Share earns
-
.33
Yr net loss
650,023
b3,022,848
Share earns
-
1.51
b-Net income


Beijing Seals Off Square; Protest Fizzles
LEAD: Faced with the threat of renewed protests in Tiananmen Square, the authorities sealed the area to the general public today while arranging for thousands of schoolchildren to sing and dance in the square.


WLR Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WLR Foods Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
116,045,000
106,202,000
Net inc
2,370,000
2,784,000
Share earns
.36
.42
9mo sales
354,580,000
331,136,000
Net inc
17,799,000
13,971,000
Share earns
1.63
1.34


Kruger Named Florida Coach
LEAD: Lon Kruger of Kansas State was selected today as the head coach for the University of Florida's struggling basketball program.


Defense for Noriega Asserts That U.S., Not He, Is Guilty
LEAD: Calling United States acts in Panama ''illegal and immoral,'' lawyers for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega will try this week to persuade a Federal judge to put the Government, instead of their imprisoned client, in the dock.


Columbus Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbus Energy Corp.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
2,430,000
1,938,000
Net inc
b218,000
c669,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $74,000, or 3 cents a share.
c-Net loss


Domtar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Domtar Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
611,000,000
623,000,000
Net inc
b20,000,000
c26,000,000
Share earns
.19
.26
Shares outst
86,800,000
86,400,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $30,000,000, or 34 cents a share, which included a net after-tax gain of $23 million from the sale of the majority of the assets of the company's salt mine on March 30.


Aerovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aerovox Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,425,000
20,250,000
Net inc
690,000
1,016,000
Share earns
.14
.20


Fingerhut Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fingerhut Cos.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
221,400,000
220,400,000
Net inc
7,500,000
4,200,000
Fingerhut, a former Primerica subsidiary spun off effective April 25, 1990, said accounting rules do not allow it to set out year-ago share earnings, and said it had thus decided not to issue pro forma share earnings for the latest period.


MEI Diversified reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MEI Diversified (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
44,669,000
43,909,000
Net loss
4,541,000
2,367,000


Iowa Resources reports earnings for 12mo March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iowa Resources (NYSE)
12mo March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
356,268,000
346,130,000
Net inc
38,507,000
27,982,000
Share earns
1.77
1.27


Protesters for Soviet Jewry Urge Direct Flights to Israel
LEAD: Tens of thousands of demonstrators rallied near the United Nations yesterday to urge the Soviet Union to allow direct flights to Israel for Jews granted permission to leave.


Diversified Human Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Human Resources
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,766,620
27,123,718
Net loss
309,382
b253,851
Share earns
-
.14
b-Net income and included an extraordinary tax credit of $94,800, or 5 cents a share.


Supreme Court Said to Agree To Take California Death Case
LEAD: The state official leading the fight to carry out California's first execution in 23 years said Saturday that the Supreme Court had agreed to consider an appeal of a ruling that blocked the death sentence.


Budget Talks Break Down In Albany
LEAD: State budget talks dissolved early this morning after an eight-hour private meeting between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders broke down in a new round of angry public accusations.


In Idaho Leader's Veto, A Taste of Independence
LEAD: Gov.
Cecil D. Andrus has been called many things since Friday when he vetoed a bill that would have made it nearly impossible to get an abortion in his state.


Talley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Talley Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
103,164,000
102,479,000
Net inc
2,549,000
2,680,000
Share earns
.21
.21
Shares outst
12,107,000
12,726,000


Baldwin &amp; Lyons Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baldwin &amp; Lyons Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,617,430
4,539,325
Share earns
.64
.77


States Testing the Limits on Abortion
LEAD: Since July, when the Supreme Courtupheld a restrictive Missouri abortion law in the Webster case, state legislators around the country have been considering dozens of new laws intended to test the limits of the right to abortion.


Lynne Chernow Marries on L.I.
LEAD: At the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., Lynne Chernow, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred B. Chernow of New Springville, S.I., was married yesterday to Jacob Inwald, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chester Inwald of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Paul Resnick officiated.


Hathaway Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hathaway Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
13,193,000
12,957,000
Net inc
51,000
b202,000
Share earns
.01
.05
9mo rev
37,418,000
37,844,000
Net loss
532,000
b487,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $180,000, or 4 cents a share, for the quarter and $205,000, or 5 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Mutual Federal S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mutual Federal S&amp;L
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
323,000
298,000
Per share
.25
.24
6mo net inc
698,000
629,000
Per share
.54
.50


Hopes on the Rise For Summer Squall
LEAD: It took just 1:49 2/5 for the Kentucky Derby picture to come into focus this weekend - the time it took Summer Squall to win Saturday's Jim Beam Stakes and prove himself as the top prospect in the East.


Doubles Go Up for Bid
LEAD: OLD joke: How do you get to Carnegie Hall? Practice, practice, practice.


Universal Development L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Development L.P.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
72,576,000
63,337,000
Net inc
7,032,000
7,202,000
Share earns
.45
.60
Latest quarter results reflect impact of partial recapitalization of UDC completed last year, and lower housing margins attributable to a more competitive business environment created in part by slower demand and higher interest rates.


Logic Devices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Logic Devices Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,280,000
3,663,000
Net inc
433,000
b1,197,000
Share earns
.10
.26
b-After an extraordinary credit of $665,000, or 14 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of accounting changes.


Coronet Carpets reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coronet Carpets
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
84,334,000
85,021,000
Net loss
71,000
399,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Premdor Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premdor Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
184,443,000
135,972,000
Net loss
b3,696,000
c3,358,000
Share earns
-
.37
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $3,977,000 and an extraordinary loss of $1,160,000.


Who, Whom and Whoop in the N.C.A.A. Championship
LEAD: YOU wonder about a college basketball team whose 6-foot-10-inch, 240-pound starting center speaks with the grace and confidence that one might expect of, well, a handsomely educated young man.
And so you have to wonder about Duke.
At a news conference yesterday morning here, Alaa Abdelnaby, this considerable center for Duke, which will be playing the University of Nevada-Las Vegas tonight for the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball title, spoke about his team's prospects against U.N.L


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I don't want any handouts. If I can work, I can make it.''
-Miriam O. Jugger, a college student, parent and welfare recipient.
[B8:1.]


Universal Matchbox reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Matchbox (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
36,543,000
41,892,000
Net loss
b4,459,000
4,533,000
b-Included a tax credit of $151,000, or 1 cent a share.


Republic Gypsum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Gypsum (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,976,000
11,835,000
Net inc
257,000
372,000
Share earns
.03
.04
9mo sales
36,689,000
37,480,000
Net inc
579,000
1,680,000
Share earns
.06
.17


New York's Magazines In a Slump
LEAD: For magazines, New York has be-come a town without pity.


JWP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JWP Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
513,000,000
344,850,000
Net inc
11,010,000
7,805,000
Share earns
.50
.41


Review/Opera;   'Rheingold' Raises Curtain on Met's 1990 'Ring'
LEAD: Richard Wagner's mythical world of Rhinemaidens, Nibelungs, gods and giants - with Valkyries and Norns in the wings for future installments - returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Saturday evening in ''Das Rheingold,'' the first of the four operas in ''Der Ring des Niebelungen.''


Playboy Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Playboy Enterprises Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
40,493,000
40,650,000
Net inc
b554,000
c262,000
Share earns
.05
.02
Shares outst
9,408,000
9,407,000,000
9mo rev
125,293,000
126,530,000
Net inc
b5,967,000
c2,208,000
Share earns
.63
.23
Shares outst
9,408,000
9,407,000


Campbell Soup Consolidates
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company said on Friday that it would consolidate its advertising agencies, and the big winners were BBDO and FCB/ Leber Katz Partners.


Kansas Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas Power &amp; Light (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
422,531,000
406,967,000
Net inc
29,984,000
33,713,000
Share earns
.85
.96


Refac Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Refac Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,215,000
2,130,000
Net inc
209,000
657,000
Share earns
.04
.12


Carmike Cinemas Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carmike Cinemas Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
24,003,000
18,147,000
Net inc
394,000
b53,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
7,550,000
5,070,000
b-Net loss


Cypress Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cypress Semiconductor (NYSE)
Qtr to April 2
1990
1989
Revenue
52,831,000
46,184,000
Net inc
8,299,000
7,126,000
Share earns
.22
.19


Brunswick Mining reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brunswick Mining
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
89,316,000
105,901,000
Net inc
7,262,000
18,261,000
Share earns
.19
.51
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Reviews/Television;   Troubled Drifter Takes On Small Town
LEAD: Some movies don't care what they have to do to grab your attention.
A partial list of the oddities in ''Follow Your Heart'' - on NBC at 9 tonight -includes a retarded teen-ager who runs off with his mother's wooden leg; a genial secretary who is also a part-time hooker; a scrawny preacher who stands at the edge of a high cliff and dreams of what a great place it would be to offer up pagans and heathens, and a bar performer, called the Spider Woman, whose New Year's


National Debt Becomes Beast That Ate America;   Elusive Peace Dividend
LEAD: To the Editor:


Colt May Make Assault Rifles
LEAD: The new owners of Colt Firearms are considering whether to resume production of the Colt AR15, a popular assault-style rifle.
The former owners of the Hartford-based company stopped sales to civilians last year when the Government banned imports of similar weapons.
The firearms division of Colt Industries, now called Colt's Manufacturing Company, was sold on March 22 to C.


Haitian Freighter Sinks
LEAD: A wooden-hulled Haitian freighter sank near Key Biscayne early Saturday and four crew members spent six hours in a life boat before they were rescued, the Coast Guard said.
The hull of the freighter Artibonite split and she sank 12 miles southeast of Fowey Rocks, near the southern end of Key Biscayne.


Herman Levin Is Dead; Jewish Lay Leader, 89
LEAD: Herman Levin, a longtime lay leader of the Jewish Reconstructionist movement and the president of the Acme Dress Form Corporation of Brooklyn for 35 years, died of a heart attack Saturday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 89 years old.
Mr.
Levin was an early exponent of Reconstructionism, which redefines Judaism not only as a religion, but also as a civilization that includes language, custom and culture.


Harman Intl Indus reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harman Intl Indus (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
142,690,000
133,504,000
Net inc
3,367,000
3,814,000
Share earns
.39
.44
Shares outst
8,731,000
8,648,000
9mo sales
405,691,000
388,468,000
Net inc
11,621,000
11,600,000
Share earns
1.34
1.34
Shares outst
8,702,000
8,627,000


Summit Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,114,000
781,000
Net loss
1,087,000
323,000
Shares outst
11,794,000
7,990,000


Photographic Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photographic Sciences (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,187,000
2,962,700
Net inc
148,100
116,500
Share earns
.03
.02


Treasury Is Selling Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and an auction of one-year bills on Thursday.
On Wednesday, the Resolution Funding Corporation will announce the size of its April 10 sale of 40-year bonds to finance the bailout of the savings industry.


Many Nominated for Kennedy Courage Award
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Federal Drug Inmates Escape
LEAD: Two drug suspects being held at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Lower Manhattan escaped last night, using an electric cord from a floor polisher to lower themselves out of a second-floor window, the police said.


Cool, Quick and Carefree Savor a Rare Bit of Fame
LEAD: Manhattan has finally been put on the map. Manhattan, Mont., that is.


GNI Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GNI Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,436,827
3,577,408
Net inc
16,636
b266,352
Share earns
-
.06
9mo rev
9,178,558
8,879,609
Net inc
290,133
b69,502
Share earns
.06
.02
b-After income of $49,014, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and a loss of $95,146 for the 9 months, both from discontinued operations.


National Debt Becomes Beast That Ate America;   What Congress Can Do
LEAD: To the Editor:


Capital Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Associates Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
40,494,000
36,535,000
Net inc
695,000
3,489,000
Share earns
.07
.37
Shares outst
9,037,000
9,485,000
9mo rev
119,672,000
97,430,000
Net inc
1,224,000
6,125,000
Share earns
.13
.65
Shares outst
9,389,000
9,474,000


Upheaval in the East;   Poland Honors Victims of Katyn Massacre


Market Place;   Car Makers Have Some Attractions
LEAD: LAST year was difficult for American auto makers and downright miserable for their shareholders as the stocks of the Big Three significantly underperformed the Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks.


Two Roads Lead to One Mountain
LEAD: Mike Krzyzewski and Jerry Tarkanian are separated by age and the traditions of their schools.
But on the eve of what could be the most significant game in either man's career, they find themselves in the same situation: trying to seize the prize that has eluded them, the national collegiate basketball championship.


New England Critical Care reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Critical Care (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
25,864,000
15,560,000
Net inc
2,344,000
1,514,000
Share earns
.18
.13
Shares outst
13,105,000
11,791,000


Outdoors: Trout Opener on the Croton
LEAD: MOVED, one surmises, by the force that through the green fuse drives the flower, fishermen celebrated the opening of the trout season yesterday in New York State.


Genrad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genrad Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
43,145,000
49,337,000
Net loss
3,495,000
b961,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
17,333,000
16,853,000
b-Net income


Electronic Tele-CommunicaFtions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Tele-CommunicaFtions
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,179,484
618,761
Net inc
84,603
b86,811
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


John W. Bromley, Orthopedist, 62
LEAD: Dr.
John W. Bromley, an orthopedist who was doing extensive research on use of the chemical collagen to avert surgery for debilitating back pain, died yesterday battling heart disease and cancer at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Paterson, N.J.
He was 62 years old and lived in North Haven, L.I.


Rebel Guards Are Similar and Different
LEAD: Both Anderson Hunt and Greg Anthony grew up in inner cities, both had basketball skills long on quickness and shooting and both dreamed that one day they would experience the bright spotlight that college basketball's national championship game will offer here Monday night when Nevada-Las Vegas battles Duke.


Albany Budget Talks Dissolve Over Tax Cut
LEAD: State budget talks between Gov.


Medical Sterilization reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Sterilization
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,848,646
1,478,113
Net inc
18,477
b89,901
Shares outst
2,788,800
2,786,253
b-Net loss
There were no share earnings after preferred dividend requirements in the latest first quarter.


Equitable Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equitable Resources Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
205,094,000
160,845,000
Net inc
b25,538,000
28,136,000
Share earns
1.22
1.35
Shares outst
21,019,000
20,865,000
b-In January 1989, Equitable gas placed new rates into effect designed to increase annual revenues by $19.5 million, subject to refund pending final decision by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.


American List Corp. reports earnings for Year to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American List Corp. (AMEX)
Year to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
7,138,455
5,771,089
Net inc
b4,006,079
2,122,750
Share earns
1.45
.76
b-Included a pretax non-recurring litigation award of $1,948,367 ($462,715 net of related expenses).


Magma Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magma Power Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
19,009,000
13,310,000
Net inc
4,888,000
3,391,000
Share earns
.21
.15
Shares outst
23,530,000
21,970,000
The company said the dilutive effect of J.P.


Slocan Forest Pdts reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Slocan Forest Pdts
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
54,900,000
45,400,000
Net inc
1,000,000
2,000,000
Share earns
.18
.37
Figures are in Canadian funds.


P.L.O. Completes Buildup in Lebanon
LEAD: Eight years after Israel's armed forces drove the Palestine Liberation Organization guerrillas out of Lebanon, the organization has completed the rebuilding of its military forces in the country.
P.L.O. hard-liners are urging Yasir Arafat to abandon hopes for a negotiated settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute and use the forces against Israel.


Huffman Koos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huffman Koos Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
21,800,000
25,600,000
Net loss
497,000
b594,000
Share earns
-
.14
Yr sales
78,700,000
83,700,000
Net loss
2,633,000
663,000
b-Net income


Robert Breen, 80, Arts Executive And Theatrical Producer, Is Dead
LEAD: Robert Breen, whose 1952 co-production of ''Porgy and Bess'' was considered the first postwar United States-Soviet cultural exchange and who helped bring Federal financing to the performing arts, died of Alzheimer's disease on Saturday at Brooklyn Veterans Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


The Disabled Picket At Greyhound Buses To Protest a Policy
LEAD: Protesting what they said was an uninformed attitude toward the disabled, about 30 people, some of them in wheelchairs, picketed the Greyhound ticket counter at the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan yesterday.


With the World Made Over, Can Even Belfast Change?
LEAD: With the walls coming down in Eastern Europe, Sean O'Doherty, a Roman Catholic student at St.
Mary's College, dreams of the day when the walls that separate Catholics from Protestants will tumble, too.


German-Spain Phone Tie
LEAD: The Spanish and West German telephone companies, Telefonica de Espana and Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, signed an agreement on Thursday to improve communications links between the two countries.
The agreement also provides for establishing digital circuits between the countries and the linking of electronic mail systems, videotex data banks and toll-free numbers.


Southmark and Creditors Agree on New Payout Plan
LEAD: The Southmark Corporation said today that it had reached agreement with its unsecured creditors on a new bankruptcy reorganization plan.


Hovnanian Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hovnanian Enterprises (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
179,395,000
170,801,000
Net inc
14,622,000
12,721,000
Share earns
.71
.61
Yr rev
410,409,000
370,513,000
Net inc
21,788,000
b28,770,000
Share earns
1.05
1.38


Consul Restaurant Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consul Restaurant Corp.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
20,492,000
18,826,000
Net loss
b674,000
602,000
Shares outst
11,711,000
10,694,000
9mo rev
64,848,000
59,243,000
Net loss
b268,000
411,000
Shares outst
11,435,000
9,755,000


Rangers In a New Role
LEAD: There is recent bad blood to go along with a long and storied history, a combination of ingredients that produces a tremendous amount of promise for the opening-round Stanley Cup playoff series between the Rangers and the Islanders.


Home Federal S&amp;L Assn-S.F.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal S&amp;L Assn-S.F.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,073,000
539,000
Share earns
.78
.39


Correction
LEAD: An article in SportsMonday on March 19 about skiing programs for disabled people stated incorrectly where such programs began.
The first were at Arapahoe Basin, Colo., in the winter of 1968-69.


Medicine Shoppe Internaional reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medicine Shoppe Internaional (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,199,352
7,128,298
Net inc
2,083,602
1,697,481
Share earns
.26
.21
6mo rev
16,429,018
14,207,811
Net inc
4,100,455
3,372,506
Share earns
.51
.42


Business and the Law;   Downturn Crimps Large Law Firms
LEAD: AT a large New York law firm known for its extensive modern art collection, acquisitions of paintings have been put on hold and recruiting from other firms has been halted.
At another firm, two floors will remain unoccupied as plans to expand have been put on hold, and a dozen associates have been evaluated earlier than planned and dismissed.


BP Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BP Canada
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
104,676,000
93,981,000
Net inc
5,951,000
7,155,000
Share earns
.12
.14
Shares outst
32,817,000
31,926,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


California Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Energy Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
16,661,000
7,625,000
Net inc
1,702,000
1,679,000
Share earns
.06
.07


Harvard in Top 10
LEAD: KENNEDY was President, and ''West Side Story'' had just earned an Oscar for best picture when the Harvard men's tennis team last achieved a ranking in the nation's top 10.
The year was 1961.


Don't Back Down on Rights for Disabled
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: ''I was getting so damn bored with the stuff I was doing,'' said HAL HOLBROOK, whose portrayal of Mark Twain won him Tony and Emmy awards and who has also won three Emmys for other parts.
So he has taken on what most actors regard as one of the most challenging roles in the theater, King Lear.
Mr.


Bronx Economy Gaining Vigor After Setbacks
LEAD: More than a decade after the Bronx hit an economic bottom rarely experienced in urban America, a slow infusion of business investment has invigorated its retail areas, pushed up commercial rents and pumped new life into some of its derelict industrial real estate, business people and city officials say.


Oshkosh Truck Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oshkosh Truck Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
128,087,000
109,436,000
Net inc
2,250,000
4,058,000
Share earns
.25
.45
6mo sales
224,426,000
189,167,000
Net inc
2,940,000
7,133,000
Share earns
.33
.79


Inside Big Daddy: Durning Confronts Death's Emptiness
LEAD: Near the end of Act II of ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,'' Big Daddy, the hulking, often menacing but sometimes compassionate Mississippi plantation owner, is told on the evening of his 65th birthday that he is dying of cancer.
His organs have been invaded by the disease; the remainder of his life will be consumed by unimaginable pain.


Laser Recording Systems reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laser Recording Systems
Year to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,028,947
527,582
Net loss
411,807
1,001,665
Shares outst
1,917,376
640,651


Teen-Ager Is Shot Dead In a Brooklyn Robbery
LEAD: A robber shot and killed a Brooklyn teen-ager near his home late Saturday night and stole three gold chains and his father's Cadillac, the police said yesterday.


Republic Engineered Steels reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Engineered Steels
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
158,696,000
-
Net inc
1,297,000
-
9mo rev
205,585,000
-
Net inc
2,296,000
-
Year-ago results are not applicable.
The company, a privately held corporation, operates on a fiscal year basis, ending June 30.


DeRose Industries Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DeRose Industries Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,387,000
4,239,000
Net inc
85,000
b75,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
10,472,000
8,317,000
Net inc
151,000
b65,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


MDC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDC Corp.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
9,167,956
6,148,580
Net inc
130,758
104,904
Share earns
-
.01
There were no share earnings after preferred dividends in the latest first quarter.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Bolar Pharmaceutical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolar Pharmaceutical (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,957,284
37,293,265
Net loss
b9,258,531
c9,430,002
Share earns
-
.45
Yr sales
112,880,343
127,960,319
Net inc
b16,806,267
30,673,693
Share earns
.78
1.51


Total Petroleum N.A. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Petroleum N.A. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
535,370,000
431,803,000
Net loss
12,293,000
b1,811,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Idaho's Laws and Rapists' Rights
LEAD: Idaho's Legislature passed an anti-abortion bill that would have given rapists more reproductive rights than their victims.
That's just one of the reasons Gov.
Cecil Andrus, a professed opponent of abortion, was justified, even compelled by conscience, in vetoing the bill.
While purporting to allow abortions for rape victims, the bill also allowed the ''father of the unborn child'' to get a court order preventing the procedure.


Crayon Art and a Grass Skirt
LEAD: The walls in Jay Kriegel's office are busy with artwork.
None of it is expensive.
Instead, there are childhood drawings - by his son, Conor, 10; his daughter, Isabel, 12, and by the younger Jay himself.


MAI Basic Four reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MAI Basic Four (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
94,972,000
104,677,000
Net inc
2,133,000
2,403,000
Share earns
.07
.16
Shares outst
32,467,753
14,988,684
6mo rev
187,088,000
212,326,000
Net inc
4,580,000
7,866,000
Share earns
.14
.52
Shares outst
32,479,784
15,003,409


Handicapping the Playoffs
LEAD:
Wales Conference
Patrick Division
Rangers Euphoria over first-place finish in a mediocre division masks sobering realities of injured Brian Leetch, streaky goaltending, but they could sneak into the finals.
Devils International team with lots of talent, but the whole doesn't necessarily equal the sum of the parts.


Pathe's Chief Gets 4-Year Jail Term
LEAD: The president and chief executive of the Los Angeles-based Pathe Communications Corporation, has been sentenced in absentia in Italy to nearly four years in jail after being convicted on charges of fraudulent bankruptcy, an Italian news agency, ANSA, reported on Saturday.


Islanders Wander Into Fast Lane
LEAD: The Islanders' trip to the Stanley Cup playoffs this season resembled the journey of a stray puppy across a busy city street.


Biomira Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biomira Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,207,995
576,265
Net loss
960,161
892,711
Results are in Canadian dollars.


RF&amp;P Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RF&amp;P Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
15,700,000
16,400,000
Net inc
3,200,000
9,100,000
Share earns
.18
.52


RLI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RLI Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
20,935,681
24,194,460
Net inc
3,072,024
1,136,957
Share earns
.54
.19
The company said underwriting results improved significantly and noted that the latest period had negligible realized gains from investments, compared to a $208,000 realized loss from investment a year-ago.


Arden International Kitchens Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arden International Kitchens Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,255,343
2,793,333
Net inc
85,050
50,158
Share earns
.03
.02


Georgia Journal;   Auto Tags Offer State Unnerving Lottery
LEAD: It comes every seven years in Georgia, like a scourge of locusts, bringing a plague of troubles for some car owners.


Hooker Chief Faces Trial
LEAD: The chairman of the Hooker Corporation was ordered on Friday to stand trial on corruption charges.


Lasertechnics Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lasertechnics Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,150,008
8,807,261
Net inc
b47,842
c1,986,006
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $158,539, or 1 cent a share, and after an extraordinary credit of $21,000 from tax loss carryforward.


Laser Precision reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laser Precision (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,875,000
6,427,000
Net inc
105,000
282,000
Share earns
.03
.08


Stanford Women Take Title
LEAD: Despite the fact that she scored 21 points and pulled down 9 rebounds to lead Stanford to an 88-81 victory over Auburn and the women's national collegiate basketball championship, Sonja Henning was not voted the outstanding player of the game nor did she make the all-tournament team.
And it didn't bother her at all.


Healthsource Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthsource Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,146,659
11,228,613
Net inc
1,663,002
b1,366,052
Share earns
.31
.36
Shares outst
5,369,400
3,804,980
b-After an extraordinary tax loss carryforward of $330,000, or 7 cents a share.


For Many Harassed Toll Collectors, Cars and Fumes Just Keep Coming
LEAD: In his early toll-collecting days, said Harold Wong, who has been doing it for six years, he made sure to say ''thank you'' after every transaction.


Robinson Nugent Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robinson Nugent Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
14,730,000
14,221,000
Net inc
b302,000
684,000
Share earns
.06
.13
9mo sales
40,737,000
39,345,000
Net inc
b601,000
1,435,000
Share earns
.11
.24
Shares outst
5,289,000
6,028,000


Pulling Families Out of Welfare Is Proving to Be an Elusive Goal
LEAD: Two years ago Congress overhauled the welfare system on the premise that people on public assistance did not need handouts so much as they needed a helping hand to find and keep a job.


Imasco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imasco Ltd.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,021,945,000
964,621,000
Net inc
66,587,000
54,068,000
Share earns
.50
.42
Both revenue figures excluded sales and excise taxes.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Indonesia to Let Lisbon Visit a Disputed Island
LEAD: In a breakthrough in negotiations between Indonesia and Portugal over East Timor, the Indonesian Government, which claims the disputed territory, agreed that a delegation of Portuguese legislators could visit the island and talk with leaders of the East Timorese resistance.


Lomas to Sell Leasing Unit
LEAD: The Lomas Financial Corporation, the financial conglomerate that is under bankruptcy protection, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Ellco Leasing Corporation unit to the General Electric Capital Corporation for $161 million in cash and $30.6 million in preferred stock.
The G.E. subsidiary will also assume $1 billion of


Metro Datelines;   Man Kills His Wife And Hangs Himself
LEAD: Grief over the recent death of their daughter apparently led a Queens man to kill his wife and hang himself yesterday, the police said.


Prenor Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prenor Group
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
45,000,000
31,000,000
Net inc
2,100,000
1,300,000
Share earns
1.23
.71
Figures are in Canadian funds.


More Books Offering First Aid for Planet
LEAD: For authors and publishers of books about the environment, this is anything but a silent spring.
Shelves are brimming with books about the dangers of pesticides, toxic waste and rain forest destruction, and how it supposedly takes 20 trees to keep one baby in disposable diapers for two years.


For Better Living Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* For Better Living Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,446,000
19,325,000
Net inc
146,000
b67,000
Share earns
.16
-
b-Net loss


Laird Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laird Group
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
25,383,000
25,347,000
Net loss
b575,000
b3,003,000
b-After extraordinary losses of $521,000 for the latest year and $2,594,000 for 1988.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Question Box
LEAD:
The First First Pitch
Q.
Which President was the first one to throw out the first ball in a major league season opener?
A.
The starting assignment went to William Howard Taft, a right-hander, who began the tradition 80 years ago while serving as the 27th President of the United States.


Chronar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chronar Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
980,210
1,326,931
Net loss
b16,147,318
11,625,378
Shares outst
13,867,444
13,468,782
Yr rev
18,591,131
28,148,914
Net loss
c49,064,316
d12,759,894
Shares outst
13,675,940
12,200,305


Vulcan International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vulcan International (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,567,727
6,504,463
Net inc
10,515
351,426
Share earns
.01
.23
Shares outst
1,494,866
1,532,470


Continental Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Medical Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
59,978,000
43,615,000
Net inc
2,633,000
1,640,000
Share earns
.18
.12
Shares outst
14,673,625
14,222,099
9mo rev
168,131,000
117,900,000
Net inc
6,065,000
4,474,000
Share earns
.42
.32
Shares outst
14,596,849
14,225,737


Erc Environmental &amp; Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Erc Environmental &amp; Energy (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
19,252,000
16,646,000
Net inc
857,000
790,000
Share earns
.16
.15


American Real Estate PartFners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Real Estate PartFners (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,663,508
14,523,869
Net inc
8,183,125
b6,056,964
Share earns
.56
.40
Yr rev
58,714,670
58,697,899
Net inc
27,412,945
b27,254,962
Share earns
1.84
1.81


Emerson Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emerson Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,906,200,000
1,805,300,000
Net inc
156,200,000
147,800,000
Share earns
.70
.66
6mo sales
3,552,300,000
3,525,100,000
Net inc
298,100,000
284,600,000
Share earns
1.34
1.27


Trans Leasing International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans Leasing International
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,126,000
3,497,000
Net inc
338,000
201,000
Share earns
.12
.07
9mo rev
11,963,000
10,204,000
Net inc
940,000
582,000
Share earns
.32
.20


National Debt Becomes Beast That Ate America;   Rostenkowski Improved
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nicklaus Wins Debut In Seniors
LEAD: Jack Nicklaus used his old game on a bunch of old boys today at The Tradition, with the same basic result he had achieved for approximately 30 years: He beat them like a drum, cruising to victory in his debut on the Senior PGA Tour.


Ducommun Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ducommun Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,193,000
16,491,000
Net inc
b276,000
360,000
Share earns
.08
.11
b-Included extraordinary tax credit of $125,000, or 4 cents a share.


Ilene S. Kleckner Wed To Kent R. Friedman
LEAD: Ilene Sondra Kleckner and Kent Richard Friedman were married yesterday at the Plaza by Rabbi Malcolm Thomson, assisted by Cantor Debbie Zimmerman.


Myers (L.E.) Co.  Group(N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Myers (L.E.) Co.  Group(N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
13,733,000
14,181,000
Net inc
21,000
247,000
Share earns
.01
.09


Merck Treasurer Goes To Top Financial Post
LEAD: Judy C. Lewent, a believer in highly computerized financial analysis, has been named chief financial officer of the world's largest pharmaceutical company, Merck &amp; Company.


Metro Datelines;   Hartford Loses Bit of History
LEAD: In a matter of seconds, 78 years of Hartford history disintegrated today in a flash of flame, a loud rumble and a tidal wave of smoke and dust that billowed along Asylum Street.


ATS Money Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ATS Money Systems
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
706,444
1,089,419
Net loss
208,944
b189,600
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
5,665,970
4,299,548
b-Net income


Upheaval in the East;   Study Proposes Deeper U.S. Troop Cuts in Europe
LEAD: The United States can make deeper troop cuts in Europe than those the Bush Administration has proposed without endangering its security, senior defense experts and influential lawmakers conclude in a new study.


Rabbit Software Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rabbit Software Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,185,100
1,462,100
Net loss
597,700
1,854,500


CBS Says It Won't Renew Its Contract With Musburger
LEAD: Brent Musburger, one of the premier voices in sports broadcasting for the past decade, will not be rehired by CBS Sports when his contract expires in June, the network said yesterday.


Transactions
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CHICAGO (AL) - Sent Jose Segura, pitcher, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
DETROIT (AL) - Sent Shawn Holman and Mike Schwabe, pitchers, to Toledo of the International League.
Sent Scott Livingstone, third baseman; Eric Stone, pitcher, and Richard Rowland, catcher, to their minor league camp for reassignment.


United Insurance Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Insurance Cos. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
60,737,000
57,729,000
Net inc
2,145,000
760,000
Share earns
.55
.23


Strategist Quietly Gains Power Amid CBS Shifts
LEAD: Only a few years after being brought into the exclusive circle entrusted with resuscitating CBS, Jay L. Kriegel, a lawyer and one-time political aide with no background and little interest in television, has quietly emerged as the key strategist of the network's effort to pull itself out of the broadcasting basement.


Pitt-DesMoines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pitt-DesMoines Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
84,991,000
84,970,000
Net inc
1,055,000
838,000
Share earns
.43
.33


Homeplex Mortgage Investents reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homeplex Mortgage Investents
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,290,000
2,105,000
Share earns
.24
.24
Shares outst
9,675,100
8,750,100


U.S. Bars Some European Wines
LEAD: Government health officials have temporarily banned the importing of several types of French and Italian wines into the United States because they recently discovered traces of an unauthorized fungicide in them, a spokesman for the Food and Drug Administration said today.


The Ghost at Freedom's Party;   Giving Amnesty to Terrorists and Torturers
LEAD: And what should be done about the killers and torturers?


Review/Theater;   Abandoned and Penniless
LEAD: ''Neddy,'' a rather silly play by Jeffrey Hatcher that opened last night at the American Place Theater, has all the ingredients of a rejected pilot for a television sitcom except for the one thing it badly needs: a laugh track.


Review/Art;   Dutch Honor van Gogh in Centenary Show
LEAD: The exhibition of Vincent van Gogh's work that has just opened here at the Vincent van Gogh National Museum and at the Kroller-Muller National Museum in the nearby town of Otterlo is a pleasure.
How could it not be?
To commemorate the centenary of the death of this most popular painter, the Dutch have staged a magisterial survey.


Ketchum &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ketchum &amp; Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
71,036,000
60,371,000
Net loss
580,000
1,907,000
Shares outst
2,428,693
2,196,910
6mo sales
136,016,000
122,644,000
Net loss
1,933,000
3,185,000
Shares outst
2,428,693
2,063,316


Viola and Franco Glad to Be Home
LEAD: If down-home togetherness is replacing a bunch of big egos on the Mets this year, as everybody seems to believe, then much of the new hominess is coming from the corner of the locker room near the dugout door where two left-handers with turn-of-the-century mustaches and manners shake down the memories of the days when they were the star pitchers for St.


Tejon Ranch Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tejon Ranch Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,492,000
1,566,000
Net loss
100,000
21,000


Hemlocks and Pines Threatened As Predatory Insects Move North
LEAD: Two voracious insects are ready to emerge from dormancy and may devastate large tracts of red pines and hemlocks this year in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, state foresters said recently.


Association of Retirees to Abandon Credit Union Venture
LEAD: The credit union of the American Association of Retired Persons, created nearly two years ago with high hopes of becoming a giant in the financial services industry, announced last week that it would go out of business.


Wisconsin Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Public Service (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
167,284,000
184,150,000
Net inc
14,417,000
19,352,000
Share earns
.59
.80
The company said that on Jan. 1 it changed its method of accounting for revenue recoveries of gas supplier demand costs.


Royal Lepage Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Lepage Ltd.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
114,090,000
139,006,000
Net inc
1,457,000
6,967,000
Share earns
.11
.52
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Amvestors Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amvestors Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b7,923,530
c1,968,000
Share earns
-
.15
Shares outst
14,406,418
12,872,539
Yr net loss
b4,506,326
c6,603,644
Share earns
-
.50
Shares outst
14,377,369
11,122,614


Surgical Laser Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to April 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Surgical Laser Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to April 2
1990
1989
Sales
6,172,000
4,944,000
Net inc
389,000
62,000
Share earns
.07
.02
Shares outst
5,590,000
4,047,000


The Talk of Middletown;   1950's Town Now Battles 1990's Woes
LEAD: At first glance, this seems like an aptly named small city.
It is in the middle of the state and midway between New York and Boston.
It is still dotted with many of the symbols of middle-class, middle-American life from the mid-20th century: homes with big porches, a roadside diner and a Main Street complete with a striped barber's pole, an old movie marquee and an Art Deco-style


Symbion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Symbion Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
226,000
1,002,000
Net loss
449,000
545,000


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the United States census incorrectly identified in some copies a country in which census data was shared with other Government agencies.
That was done in West Germany, not in the United States.


48 Who Died in Bronx Fire Return Home
LEAD: Accompanied by the President of Honduras and other government officials, survivors of those who died in the Happy Land fire in the Bronx gathered on the runway here today to meet the cargo jet carrying the dead.
It landed shortly before noon.


Midland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midland Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
42,686,000
37,374,000
Net inc
810,000
3,050,000
Share earns
.25
.91
Shares outst
3,237,000
3,341,000


Biomagnetic Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biomagnetic Technologies (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,420,000
1,773,000
Net loss
1,953,000
1,263,000
6mo rev
3,281,000
5,647,000
Net loss
3,602,000
1,438,000
Share earns
.62
.35


Electronic Data Tech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Data Tech (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,659,000
4,426,000
Net inc
670,000
491,000
Share earns
.18
.13
6mo rev
13,475,000
9,009,000
Net inc
1,358,000
b1,275,000
Share earns
.36
.34


Barry (R.G.) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barry (R.G.) Corp.(A)
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Sales
10,084,000
19,838,000
Net loss
b2,651,000
c33,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Included a $700,000 reserve for a plant closing.
c-Net income


Greek Campaign Shooting Leaves One Dead
LEAD: An assailant in a moving car fired today at a barricade erected by Socialists campaigning for next week's Greek elections, killing one person and wounding four, the police said.


Tele-Communications Delays Plan
LEAD: Tele-Communications Inc. has told securities analysts that it has not finished its plan to distribute certain assets to shareholders.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Chang Takes Final: Second-seeded Michael Chang survived another upset bid by Jim Grabb and captured the Volvo Chicago tournament, 7-6, 1-6, 6-4, yesterday.
Chang, ranked ninth in the world, broke the tournament's fifth-seeded player in the 10th and final game of the match with three sensational passing shots.


Ohio Casualty reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Casualty
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
16,377,000
38,633,000
Share earns
.80
1.79
Shares outst
20,414,000
21,582,000


INSIDE
LEAD:
New Civil Rights Agendas
The South is awash in remembrances of civil rights groups that made history 25 years ago.
But elsewhere the groups struggle to adapt to a more diverse black America.
Page B8.
P.L.O. Rebuilds in Lebanon
Eight years after Israel drove the Palestine Liberation Organization from Lebanon, the organization has rebuilt its forces there.


London's Tax Riot Is Called the Work of a Violent Minority
LEAD: Scotland Yard began an investigation today into the worst riots in decades in central London, where 341 people were arrested and about 400 demonstrators and police officers were injured Saturday in violent protests against the Government's unpopular new tax.


Crews' Annual Rite: Chasing Harvard
LEAD: PENN, which had one of its best crews, chased Harvard last spring from Boston to Worcester to Cincinnati and on to the Henley Royal Regatta in Britain without ever quite catching up.
The Red and Blue lost four times to the Crimson by margins totaling only 15 seconds.


Leora Batnitzky Weds in Kansas
LEAD: The wedding of Leora Faye Batnitzky, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sol Batnitzky of Overland Park, Kan., and Robert Bruce Lebeau, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
William Lebeau of New York, took place yesterday in Overland Park.
The bridegroom's father and Rabbi Herbert Mandl performed the ceremony at Kehilath Israel


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
MONDAY
Construction Spending
Feb.
Tuesday
Leading Indicators
Feb.
Wednesday
New-Car Sales
March
Thursday
None
Friday
Consumer Credit


Report Outlines Options For U.S. Energy Policy
LEAD: For the first time since the late 1970's, the Federal Government has begun trying to develop a comprehensive energy policy - a system of strategies, goals, inducements and penalties covering everything from how much oil should be produced domestically to the amount of light each watt of electricity should yield.


Colorocs Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colorocs Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,045,000
-
Net inc
b1,658,000
627,000
Share earns
.11
.04
Shares outst
14,152,293
13,055,503
b-Included about $1.2 million pretax gain from the recently announced Savin/Colorocs stock transaction with HCS Technology N.V.


Mini-Courtrooms Aid Crowded Dockets
LEAD: Judge Carl O. Callender has pretty much adjusted to the extremely modest size of his courtroom in the Bronx.
He does not, for example, tell lawyers, as judges often do, that they may approach his bench.


VHC Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VHC Ltd.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
8,901,640
8,687,628
Net inc
165,999
528,112
Share earns
.08
.25
Shares outst
2,086,309
2,094,206


International Game Techology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Game Techology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
47,837,000
32,743,000
Net inc
4,241,000
1,837,000
Share earns
.58
.24
Shares outst
7,240,000
7,615,000
6mo rev
95,466,000
62,459,000
Net inc
8,408,000
b4,539,000
Share earns
1.14
.60
Shares outst
7,340,000
7,604,000


Upheaval in the East;   WEST EUROPEANS NEAR A CONSENSUS ON EAST-BLOC TIES
LEAD: The disintegration of the Eastern bloc, though generally welcomed across Western Europe, is challenging the European Community's vision of the future just when it seemed to be moving confidently along a path toward economic and eventual political union.


Focus National Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Focus National Mortgage
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,629,000
4,930,000
Net inc
1,178,000
1,014,000
Share earns
.54
.63
Results are in Canadian funds.


Syntellect Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syntellect Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,418,000
5,021,000
Net inc
992,000
181,000
Share earns
.15
.03
The company completed on initial public offering on March 29, 1990 of 1,865,000 common shares priced at $15 a share.


Arx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arx Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
30,529,000
24,678,000
Net inc
399,000
76,000
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
7,880,289
8,427,289
9mo sales
80,701,000
68,524,000
Net inc
1,237,000
b5,472,000
Share earns
.16
-
Shares outst
7,880,289
8,402,573


Savings Units Trim 'Junk' Holdings
LEAD: During the final quarter of 1989, savings and loan associations sold ''junk bonds'' with a face value of $2.8 billion, according to a recently completed study by K. H. Thomas Associates, a bank and savings industry consulting firm in Miami.


Healthwatch Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthwatch Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,200,365
332,308
Net inc
1,005,630
18,365
Share earns
.43
.01
Shares outst
2,346,387
1,942,150
9mo rev
2,281,627
2,316,585
Net inc
741,075
b1,863,183
Share earns
.32
.99
Shares outst
2,346,387
1,953,265


Kirby Exploration Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kirby Exploration Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
40,368,384
23,720,163
Net inc
b3,629,972
b2,093,466
Share earns
.16
.09
Shares outst
22,881,938
22,870,138
b-After extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $775,000, or 3 cents a share, for the latest first quarter and $700,000, or 3 cents a share, for year- ago period.


Itel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Itel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
563,000,000
489,800,000
Net inc
4,500,000
4,300,000
Share earns
.06
.06
Shares outst
48,700,000
48,800,000


Computer Network TechFnology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Network TechFnology
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,326,905
1,272,346
Net loss
254,603
642,891
Shares outst
13,012,859
12,827,055


Softsel Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Softsel Computer (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
204,235,000
147,702,000
Net inc
2,483,000
2,577,000
Share earns
.20
.20
Shares outst
12,696,000
12,587,000


Head of Panel Assails Leak
LEAD: The chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, Donald W. Riegle Jr., says he strongly disapproves of the unauthorized disclosure last week that the Bush Administration's nominee to direct regulation of the savings industry had experimented with marijuana and cocaine years ago.


Lincoln National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln National Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,970,538,000
1,785,187,000
Net inc
b26,210,000
b51,022,000
Share earns
.54
1.13
Shares outst
42,042,539
41,916,172
b-Included net realized investment losses of $25.5 million for the latest first quarter and after $5.3 million for year-ago period.


Costar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Costar Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
13,497,000
7,529,000
Net inc
1,082,000
350,000
Share earns
.31
.13
Shares outst
3,480,347
2,677,802


Critic's Notebook;   Choreographing the Past, Without Any Jokes
LEAD: When the New York Theater Ballet revived ''Pas de Quatre'' recently at the Dimson Theater, the work looked quaint.
In one sense, it should have. ''Pas de Quatre'' is Anton Dolin's conjectural reconstruction of a plotless work produced at Her Majesty's Theater in London on July 12, 1845, to display the talents of four of the period's greatest ballerinas: Marie Taglioni, Fanny Cerrito, Carlotta Grisi and Lucile Grahn.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A3-11
The European Community's identity has been challenged by the transformation of Eastern Europe.
But a consensus has now emerged to absorb East Germany and to try to form broad pacts with other Eastern bloc nations.
Page A1
Study proposes deeper U.S. troop cuts in Europe


Books of The Times;   Race Against the Heat: Is Earth Getting Warmer?
LEAD:
Dead Heat
The Race Against the Greenhouse Effect
By Michael Oppenheimer and Robert H. Boyle
268 pages. A New Republic Book/Basic Books. $19.95.


Deprenyl Research reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deprenyl Research (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,187,000
181,000
Net inc
1,032,000
b139,000
Share earns
.23
-
b-Net loss
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Carriage Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carriage Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
30,397,000
26,681,000
Net inc
178,000
77,000
Share earns
.04
.02
Shares outst
4,631,000
4,984,000
9mo sales
82,862,000
74,044,000
Net inc
236,000
1,570,000
Share earns
.05
.32
Shares outst
4,882,000
4,966,000


Drive for Civil Rights in U.S. Faces New Agendas
LEAD: From Selma to Greensboro to Nashville, the South is awash in remembrances of the alphabet soup of civil rights groups -N.A.A.C.P., S.C.L.C., CORE, S.N.C.C. and others that made history a quarter of a century ago.


Delmed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delmed Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,686,000
5,742,000
Net inc
108,000
b150,000
Shares outst
45,737,000
44,951,000
b-Net loss


Andover Togs Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andover Togs Inc.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
18,125,000
15,684,000
Net loss
180,000
b280,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


Dawson Geophysical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dawson Geophysical Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,121,000
1,977,000
Net loss
182,000
b309,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo rev
3,970,000
3,347,000
Net loss
569,000
b94,000
Share earns
-
.02


In the Air, a New Battle Over Weight
LEAD: Long after other airlines settled disputes with flight attendants over restrictions on their weight, the nation's largest carrier, American Airlines, is preparing for a battle over limits that are among the strictest in the industry.


West Fraser Timber reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Fraser Timber
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
140,600,000
119,900,000
Net inc
4,900,000
5,900,000
Share earns
.31
.38
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of March 26, 1990:
MONDAY
Central Vt Pub Svc Corp
Nevada Pwr Co
Nat City Corp
Oxford Inds Inc
TUESDAY
Cummins Engine Inc
Weis Mkts Inc
Travelers Corp
WEDNESDAY
Houston Inds Inc
Murphy Oil Co
Mercantile Stores Inc


De Pere Federal S&amp;L Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* De Pere Federal S&amp;L Assn
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
103,000
72,000
6mo net inc
178,000
160,000
The company went public in April 1990.


National Pastime Hearing Footsteps
LEAD: IF you are one of those whose hearts jump when Michael Jordan leaps, and if you plan to be among the millions who will be glued to their television sets for the collegiate showdown between Duke and Nevada-Las Vegas tonight, you'll hardly be surprised that a recent poll has confirmed what you and television executives have known all along: basketball is booming.


Stocks Hold Up in Tough Quarter
LEAD: The first quarter was a period of surprises for many financial analysts.
The stock market showed remarkable strength and resilience in the face of some troubling developments, and for the most part, negative forecasts for the quarter did not hold up.


Bidder Sees 2 Years of Losses for Bonwit
LEAD: Providing new details of its $20 million offer for five Bonwit Teller stores, the Pyramid Companies, the Northeast's largest builder of shopping malls, said it expected the stores to lose about $17 million in the first two years.


Euro-Nevada Mining reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Euro-Nevada Mining
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,425,000
313,000
Net inc
301,000
b135,000
Share earns
.03
-
Yr rev
3,429,000
454,000
Net inc
966,000
b718,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Net loss


A Choice in Idaho
LEAD: Three cheers for Gov.
Cecil Andrus, who rose above his personal predisposition and saw the Idaho abortion bill for what it was - faulty in its origins, overly restrictive in its provisions, thoroughly deserving of his veto.


Luther Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Luther Medical Products
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
854,983
581,518
Net inc
47,187
20,343
9mo rev
1,996,763
1,652,912
Net loss
190,993
92,857


Ryland Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryland Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
319,185,000
294,514,000
Net inc
6,467,000
18,639,000
Share earns
.46
1.40
Shares outst
12,605,000
13,307,000


Pacificorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacificorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
928,900,000
949,100,000
Net inc
130,800,000
131,700,000
Share earns
.52
.51
Shares outst
242,607,000
246,118,000
The company said the decrease in the number of common shares outstanding fort he quarter was the result of shares purchased for future use in the exchange for the shares of a Wisconsin-based local telephone company.


Mylan Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mylan Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
27,102,000
21,577,000
Net inc
9,675,000
3,760,000
Share earns
.26
.10
Shares outst
36,308,000
36,200,000
Yr sales
95,415,000
87,930,000
Net inc
26,210,000
18,270,000
Share earns
.72
.50
Shares outst
36,242,000
36,199,000


Munsingwear Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 7
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Munsingwear Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 7
1990
1989
Sales
29,957,000
32,164,000
Net inc
b657,000
c1,416,000
Share earns
.13
.29
Shares outst
4,889,000
4,877,000
b-After income of $846,000, or 17 cents a share, from discontinued operations.


Quick &amp; Reilly Fees Up
LEAD: The discount brokerage Quick &amp; Reilly Inc. said last week that it had raised commissions by about $5 a trade.
Thomas Quick, president of the firm, said the concern had recently installed a 24-hour telephone stock quote system for investors in 25 cities and added free check-writing privileges for clients with money market accounts.


For a Charity in Spain, Success Spurs Critics
LEAD: A stylized figure of a blind person, followed by the acronym ONCE, seems to be everywhere.


The Editorial Notebook;   A Light Diet for Office Light
LEAD: For nearly a year, employees of the National Resources Defense Council in New York have had reason to feel better about going to their office.
It is a restful oasis of natural light in a city used to windowless confinement and harsh fluorescent glare.
Better still, the new office may show how businesses can control their appetite for energy.


Bridge
LEAD: Jack the giant-killer and David and Goliath are examples of a popular genre of story: the upset victory against overwhelming odds.
A bridge example occurred March 5 in a Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout match at the Cavendish Club in Manhattan.


Symantec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Symantec Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
13,968,000
10,959,000
Net inc
1,995,000
1,383,000
Share earns
.30
-
Shares outst
6,693,000
5,300,000
Yr rev
50,011,000
39,886,000
Net inc
6,680,000
3,157,000
Share earns
1.05
-
Shares outst
6,375,000
5,277,000


Quantum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
129,830,000
77,728,000
Net inc
b12,800,000
6,921,000
Share earns
.46
.27
Yr sales
446,291,000
208,017,000
Net inc
47,212,000
12,887,000
Share earns
1.71
.45


Devils Enjoying Soviets' Influence
LEAD: Vyacheslav Fetisov, the Devils' heralded Soviet defenseman, was mystified in his first few weeks in the National Hockey League over how coaches and players treated every game as if it were the seventh and deciding game of the Stanley Cup finals.


Horsham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horsham Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
615,034,000
399,572,000
Net inc
2,469,000
b8,304,000
Share earns
.03
.11
Shares outst
89,200,000
81,400,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $1,307,000, or 2 cents a share.


Tracy Sharlach Is Wed To Bradley Esterman
LEAD: Tracy Lynn Sharlach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Sharlach of Highland Park, Ill., was married yesterday to Dr.
Bradley Jay Esterman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Esterman of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., and Boynton Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Reuven Frankel officiated at the Knickerbocker Hotel in Chicago.


Nippon Telephone Split Delayed
LEAD: This year's steep drop in prices on the Tokyo Stock Exchange may have saved the world's largest company, the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation, from being broken up.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
Meets at 3 P.M.


STOCKS PLUMMET ON TOKYO MARKET
LEAD: The two-month erosion of confidence in Japanese financial markets grew more serious today, as share prices and the yen plunged in value, causing the second-worst delcine on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.


Buffalo Transit System Shuts; First in U.S.
LEAD: Subway and bus service here shut down early today, hours after the Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority ran out of money.


Fresher Air While Afoot
LEAD: A new athletic shoe is designed with a self-contained ventilation system in the sole that pulls fresh air in around the foot and forces stale air out.


Nashua Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nashua Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
138,211,000
136,358,000
Net inc
3,600,000
b2,558,000
Share earns
.39
.27
Shares outst
9,297,000
9,581,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $1,158,000, or 13 cents a share.


G &amp; K Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* G &amp; K Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
29,962,000
27,554,000
Net inc
2,594,000
2,049,000
Share earns
.19
.15
9mo rev
87,863,000
80,713,000
Net inc
7,864,000
6,287,000
Share earns
.59
.47


Cabletron Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabletron Systems Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
30,060,000
18,596,000
Net inc
5,955,000
3,983,000
Share earns
.23
.16
Shares outst
26,305,000
24,434,000
Yr rev
104,738,000
54,785,000
Net inc
22,500,000
12,100,000
Share earns
.87
.48
Shares outst
25,823,000
24,434,000


J.A.M.  Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* J.A.M.  Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
493,251
352,138
Net inc
836
b218,938
b-Net loss


Plasti-Fab Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plasti-Fab Ltd.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,223,000
8,261,000
Net loss
259,000
592,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


K-Tron International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* K-Tron International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,534,000
13,550,000
Net inc
709,000
695,000
Share earns
.24
.24


Universal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
702,100,000
752,982,000
Net inc
8,558,000
12,426,000
Share earns
.52
.73
9mo rev
2,272,216,000
2,348,353,000
Net inc
b49,567,000
52,230,000
Share earns
2.94
3.08


Exabyte Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exabyte Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
40,474,000
15,024,000
Net inc
6,663,000
b3,185,000
Share earns
.32
.17
Shares outst
20,916,000
18,312,000
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $1,216,000, or 7 cents a share.


Meridian Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian Insurance Group
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
655,000
1,519,000
Share earns
.13
.31


G.O.P. Seeks Challenger To Cuomo and Money
LEAD: Still frustrated in its search for a challenger to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the Republican State Committee is also running short of money at the very time that Republicans consider the Governor most vulnerable because of the state's fiscal crisis.


Pronet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pronet Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,715,369
2,939,847
Net inc
8,862
b156,683
Shares outst
3,889,380
3,752,749
b-Net loss


Temco National reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temco National (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,411,018
17,291,360
Net loss
b961,253
b168,992
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $585,478 and $214,859 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Purchasers Say Slump Is Slowing
LEAD: The nation's economy continued to be in a slump in March, although the rate of decline slowed as production and new orders for export rose significantly, according to a report by an association of the nation's purchasing managers.


Idaho Approves King Holiday
LEAD: A holiday honoring the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. won final approval in the Legislature on Friday, making Idaho the 47th state agreeing to adopt the Federal holiday.
Senate passage of the measure on a 28-to-11 vote assured it of becoming law with Gov.
Cecil D. Andrus's promised approval.
The vote came four years after the state designated the third Monday in January as a commemorative day but not an official holiday for Dr.


A Course For Typists Tailored To Fit
LEAD: IN the age of the personal computer, knowing touch-typing is more important than ever.
There are plenty of programs that turn a computer into a typing teacher and a new one, AXS Type Write 3 in 1, has a lot to recommend it.


Estonia Sends Firmer Signal to Moscow
LEAD: The new Parliament of Estonia told President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today that the Soviet Constitution could not be the basis for realizing the republic's wish to be independent of the Soviet Union.


Drug Reduces Cholesterol in Eggs
LEAD: RESEARCHERS have lowered the cholesterol content of eggs in a small laboratory study by feeding hens a drug commonly prescribed for humans with high cholesterol.


Seltz Journal;   Alsace: Its French-German Nerves Are Showing
LEAD: The villages along this side of the Rhine all have German names, the architecture is pure Hansel-and-Gretel and, to the uninitiated at least, the local language sounds little different from that spoken in Berlin.
Today, though, the population is as proudly French as it is Alsatian.


Nostalgia Network reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nostalgia Network
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,158,474
742,812
Net loss
931,329
b1,425,394
Yr rev
4,119,618
2,802,690
Net loss
2,747,894
b2,771,302
b-Included a non-recurring charge of $671,853 for the quarter and year.


Executive Says Musburger Decision Was Made Week in Advance
LEAD: CBS had decided to release Brent Musburger, its top sports announcer for the past 15 years, at least a week before it announced Sunday that his contract would not be renewed, a CBS executive said yesterday.


Chronicle
LEAD: In the land of Moliere, theater has never been less popular.
So Mayor JACQUES CHIRAC of Paris, in a rare imitation of an American practice, is giving out two theater tickets for the price of one.
Although Paris boasts 100,000 theater seats, attendance has plummeted in recent years, partly because of the increasing popularity of television and movies, and partly because of high ticket prices.


Maynard Oil reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maynard Oil (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
18,413,984
15,501,936
Net inc
b2,337,462
b1,344,856
Share earns
.44
.25
Shares outst
5,353,860
5,430,422
b-Included $1,585,946 and $1,038,559 of gains from property sales for 1989 and 1988, respectively.


Heart Association Cancels Its Program to Rate Foods
LEAD: Besieged by stinging criticism and threats of strong Government action, the American Heart Association announced yesterday that it was canceling its program to award a seal of approval, for a fee, to foods that meet certain low-fat, low-salt guidelines.
The sharply debated program, Heart Guide, was made public only two months ago.


Strategies Show Sharp Contrasts in Marcos Trial
LEAD: The Government's case against Imelda Marcos will emerge in the fine print.
There will be bank accounts and details of financial transactions and documents describing holdings around the world, from Switzerland to New York to Hong Kong.


Maxtor in Offer For Miniscribe
LEAD: The Maxtor Corporation, a disk drive company, said today that it had offered to purchase most of the assets of the Miniscribe Corporation of Longmont, Colo., in a $40 million cash-and-stock deal.


Savings Chief Nomination
LEAD: The Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, in his first comments on President Bush's nominee as the nation's top savings and loan regulator, said today that he and many other senators had doubts whether T. Timothy Ryan Jr. was qualified.


Trump Group Makes Bid For Bonwit
LEAD: A consortium led by Donald J. Trump, the New York developer, and a French department store chain yesterday entered a spirited bidding contest for various parts of the Bonwit Teller fashion chain.
But a bankruptcy judge said no decision would be made until May 18, giving the owner, the Hooker Corporation, the opportunity to review the offers.


Mandela In the Storm
LEAD: Nelson Mandela spoke with respect of President F. W. de Klerk and two of his ministers. ''These three men to me are serious when they say they want a fundamental change in South Africa, and I deal with them on that basis.'' Then he added:


Comerica in Deal
LEAD: Comerica Inc. said it had agreed to acquire Inbancshares, a bank holding company based in City of Industry, Calif., for $20.25 a share, or about $40 million.
The acquisition, which is subject to regulatory approval, would add $242 million to Comerica's assets of about $12 billion.
Inbancshares has four offices and 70 employees.


Landmark Land Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Land Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
160,255,000
186,983,000
Net loss
20,521,000
b16,902,000
Share earns
-
2.09
Yr rev
526,632,000
481,753,000
Net loss
34,889,000
b16,047,000
Share earns
-
1.98


Fire Tests Dinkins as Leader in Crisis
LEAD: Responding to his first big emergency, the Happy Land Social Club fire, Mayor David N. Dinkins has displayed the doggedness and compassion that brought him political success, as well as the defensiveness and fuzziness that sometimes characterize his reaction to criticism.


Oil Company Agrees to Buy Homes of Those Who Sued It
LEAD: Conoco said today that it had agreed to buy the homes of 400 families here who sued the company, saying their underground water was contaminated by toxic chemicals from a nearby oil refinery.


Syms Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syms Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
96,296,000
89,908,000
Net inc
8,886,000
8,813,000
Share earns
.50
.50
Yr sales
300,078,000
282,555,000
Net inc
19,218,000
18,736,000
Share earns
1.09
1.06


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helene Curtis Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
207,014,000
170,543,000
Net inc
5,330,000
4,200,000
Share earns
.58
.44
Yr sales
736,043,000
629,155,000
Net inc
16,825,000
14,434,000
Share earns
1.81
1.71


Spartan Motors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spartan Motors Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,083,878
6,292,011
Net inc
269,964
151,918
Share earns
.06
.03
Yr rev
35,957,569
33,513,781
Net inc
1,179,697
2,301,984
Share earns
.26
.50


GWIL Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GWIL Industries
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
42,428,000
36,237,000
Net inc
4,537,000
b6,032,000
Share earns
.62
.77
b-Included a loss of $598,000 from discontinued operations and an extraordinary credit of $2,623,000, or 38 cents a share.


Chrysler Urges Officials To Buy More of Its Stock
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation has asked 100 senior executives to invest a greater share of their wealth in the company's future by purchasing Chrysler stock.


Concern Over 'Moral Values' Led To Family Murders, Lawyer Says
LEAD: John E. List, a man of rigid religious principles, became so alarmed by the threat to the salvation of his family posed by societal changes that started in the 1960's that he killed them ''with love in his heart,'' his lawyer told a jury today.


Charles A. Matthews; Politician, 72
LEAD: Charles A. Matthews, a former Essex County (N.J.) Freeholder, died on Thursday at the Hospital Center of Orange, N.J.
He was 72 years old and lived in Newark.


Top Officer for Operations Is Appointed by Booz, Allen
LEAD: Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton Inc., the management consulting firm based in New York, has named William F. Stasior as its president and chief operating officer, whose role will be to oversee day-to-day operations.


Treasuries Fall in Light Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped slightly in light trading yesterday, despite the big drop earlier in Japanese equity prices.


Buffalo Settles Transit Dispute On Its 2d Day
LEAD: A two-day shutdown of Buffalo's transit system caused by a dispute between the city and its suburbs over how to finance the system ended tonight.


Japan Isn't Even Playing the Same Game
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about Middletown, Conn., referred incorrectly to the role of the city's police chief in a Federal investigation of possible ties between his department and organized-crime figures.
The chief, George R. Aylward, is not a focus of the investigation; he requested it.
The article also misstated the number of students at Wesleyan University who are from Middletown.


Difficulties in Real Estate Extend Even to Minneapolis
LEAD: Even as the Trammell Crow Company solves some of its problems in the Southwest, it is struggling in a metropolitan area not widely associated with real estate troubles.
The difficulties of the nation's largest developer here are one more indication of the extent of the national real estate slump.


Dead, Too, for the Peris, Is the American Dream
LEAD: On the same day Carlos Roberto Peri came home in a coffin from New York, another plane arrived with his American-born 5-month-old son, bringing tears of joy to a heartbroken family.


S. Zachary Swidler, Lawyer, 72
LEAD: S. Zachary Swidler, a tax law specialist and a founder of Swidler &amp; Swidler law firm, died of heart disease on Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 72 years old and moved last year from Manhattan to Boynton Beach, Fla.


Auxiliary Officer Held in Policeman's Shooting
LEAD: An auxiliary policewoman who dated a city policeman for many years broke down his door and shot him yesterday in his Bronx apartment, where he was being visited by another auxiliary policewoman, police officials said.


Barbara B. Gratwick; Teacher, 83
LEAD: Barbara Burnett Gratwick, a teacher who was the widow of Dr.
Mitchell Gratwick, former headmaster of the Horace Mann School in Manhattan, died of pneumonia on Saturday at the Saddleback Memorial Medical Center in Laguna Hills, Calif., while visiting her children.
She was 83 years old and lived in Philadelphia and Vinalhaven,


Dr. Robert H. Felix Is Dead at 85; Mental Health Unit's First Chief
LEAD: Dr.
Robert H. Felix, a psychiatrist who was the first director of the National Institute of Mental Health, died of complications of Parkinson's disease on Saturday at his home in Sun City, Ariz.
He was 85 years old.


Bobbie Brooks reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bobbie Brooks (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
127,674,000
68,987,000
Net inc
b4,342,000
c4,841,000
Share earns
.14
.40
Shares outst
12,833,209
9,632,389
b-Included a full year of preferred stock dividend requirements of $2,525,000.


Vestro Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vestro Foods Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
20,108,000
16,236,000
Net loss
417,000
b13,000
b-Net income and after an extraordinary credit of $5,000.


ATWATER ENTERS HOSPITAL IN BRONX
LEAD: Lee Atwater, the Republican national chairman, entered the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx yesterday for a specialized radiation procedure to reduce the potential growth of a brain tumor, his office said.


Rockwell Accord


Shearson Sees Loss of $917 Million
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. announced yesterday that it will post a loss of as much as $917 million for the first quarter, the largest such deficit in Wall Street history.


Torchmark Withdraws American General Bid
LEAD: The Torchmark Corporation said today that it had withdrawn its $6.4 billion offer to acquire the much larger American General Corporation, but added that it would try to win a third of the seats on the company's board at the annual shareholders meeting on May 2.


Concord Fabrics Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Mar 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concord Fabrics Inc. (AMEX)
13wks to Mar 4
1990
1989
Sales
49,246,648
44,363,826
Net inc
966,867
551,606
Share earns
.27
.15
26wk sales
89,695,503
80,217,788
Net inc
1,503,479
574,708
Share earns
.42
.16


Voit Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Voit Corp.  (OTC)
Year to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
29,651,958
31,760,403
Net inc
b743,029
1,421,763
Share earns
.13
.38
Shares outst
2,775,399
2,737,692
b-After an extraordinary charge of $80,000 from a pre-payment penalty on early extinguishment of debt.


Devils Enjoy Luxury Of Strong Goaltending
LEAD: Having to choose between two hot goaltenders is a luxury for every coach in hockey and John Cunniff of the Devils is in that position going into the playoff series against the Washington Capitals.


LITHUANIA LEADER SOFTENS HIS TONE TOWARD MOSCOW
LEAD: After three weeks of tension, discord and daily pressure from Moscow, the leadership of Lithuania softened its tone today, insisting that it never expected immediate independence despite declaring itself free of Soviet rule on March 11.


Bridge
LEAD: New York City has a crop of brilliant young players, several of whom made their presence felt at the Spring Nationals in Forth Worth.
One was 26-year-old Lapt Chan, who won two second-tier events: the 0-2000 Knockout Teams, with Andrew Moss, 17, Ronnie Evron, 30, and Mike Chelst, 19, and the Flight A Stratified Pairs with 21-year-old Jeff


Oak Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oak Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
37,093,000
40,421,000
Net loss
b17,182,000
c5,094,000
Share earns
-
.07
Yr sales
160,164,000
163,181,000
Net loss
b25,481,000
c12,864,000
Share earns
-
.17


Japonica Rejects Allegheny's Plan
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc. said its bankruptcy reorganization plan had been rejected by Japonica Partners, which is seeking to acquire the Sunbeam appliance and lawn furniture company.
Japonica had offered to buy the company for $650 million under the bankruptcy proceedings, but Allegheney advanced its own plan instead.


Miami Names Hamilton
LEAD: Oklahoma State's head coach, Leonard Hamilton, was named yesterday as the new basketball coach at the University of Miami.


Profit Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Profit Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
58,988,000
48,725,000
Net loss
118,000
b690,000
Share earns
-
.13
Yr rev
205,457,000
187,475,000
Net loss
2,712,000
2,086,000
b-Net income


Trips Through Geography and Time
LEAD: AS the school year wanes, it is time to put two educational software programs on the honor roll of the class of 1990.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corp., Denver, said it would file for Federal bankruptcy protection after it was unable to get additional credit from its banks.


Noriega Defense Depicts Invasion as 'War Crime'
LEAD: In a spirited pretrial hearing, defense lawyers demanded today that the drug trafficking case against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega be dropped because the United States invasion of Panama was a ''war crime'' that resulted in a ''holocaust'' among innocent civilians.


Kerr Closing In on Records as He Reels Off the 3-Point Shots
LEAD: The soft jump shots that once drove Arizona Wildcat fans into frenzied chants of ''STEEE-VEE KERRR!'' are once again finding the range at the Richfield Coliseum.
With last September's trade to the Cleveland Cavaliers, the freckle-faced Kerr, a disappointing 1988 second-round draft choice who rode the bench for the Phoenix Suns, found a new basketball life.


Hasty Hysteria on Aliens
LEAD: According to Congress's investigating agency, employers subject to sanctions for hiring undocumented aliens under a 1986 law have engaged in a ''widespread pattern of discrimination'' against people who look and sound foreign.
That finding has led critics of sanctions to demand their repeal.


Roadmaster Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roadmaster Industries (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
189,030,000
109,100,000
Net inc
1,238,000
b861,000
Share earns
.05
.03
Shares outst
27,154,000
25,708,000
b-After an extraordinary prepayment fee of $876,000 incurred upon refinancing.


Talking Business; with Cook of Atlantic Richfield;   Oil Industry's Environment Role
LEAD: Lodwrick M. Cook is chairman of the Atlantic Richfield Company of Los Angeles, one of the nation's most profitable oil companies.
He discussed environmental and other issues during a recent visit in New York.


Ecologists Act to Save Ancient Fores in Chile From Industry
LEAD: FEARING that some of the oldest trees in the world are threatened by a burgeoning pulp industry, an international effort has begun to buy and preserve vast tracts of temperate forest in the south of Chile.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-14
The leadership of Lithuania softened its tone, insisting that it never expected to see immediate enactment of the independence that it declared from the Soviet Union on March 11.
Page A1


Blass Isn't Looking Over His Shoulder
LEAD: Bill Blass opened a week packed with fall designer shows with a collection that points up the different ways Europeans and Americans face the new decade in fashion. ''Ethnic is not my bag,'' said the dean of American designers, just two weeks after Yves Saint Laurent, Emanuel Ungaro and Valentino picked over fashion's past in search of contemporary images.


Fannie Mae Offers Securities For Low-Interest Mortgages
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, yesterday introduced Fannie Mae Affordables, financial instruments intended to assist financial institutions that are members of the nation's 12 Federal Home Loan Banks and provide a new source of money for loans at below-market interest rates for home buyers of modest means.


HIGH COURT BACKS STAY OF EXECUTION
LEAD: A California inmate has been spared the death penalty, at least temporarily, because the United States Supreme Court upheld a stay of execution in a 6-to-3 vote late today.


Racial Tension From Slaying Seen at Trial
LEAD: Jury selection began yesterday in the Bensonhurst murder trial amid signs of the same racial tension that engulfed New York City after Yusuf K. Hawkins was killed in the predominantly white neighborhood last summer.


How Schools Can Lure Good Minority Teachers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the stock market's recent performance omitted a reason for the decline in the Incstar Corporation's share price.
The company paid a large one-time dividend during the first quarter.


Chess
LEAD: Homework in chess is not just mastering yesterday's lessons.
That's merely the starting point for the real effort - original thinking.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is the first time the U.S. has invaded a country and leveled it to arrest one man.''
-Frank A. Rubino, a lawyer for Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. [A15:2.]


Construction Spending Aided by Mild Weather
LEAD: Spending on residential, nonresidential and governmental construction projects all increased in February, helped for the second straight month by mild weather over much of the country, the Commerce Department reported today, The department said that construction spending rose by 2.6 percent, to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $436.5 billion.


Strober Organization reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Strober Organization (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
29,681,000
34,986,000
Net loss
b1,666,000
c496,000
Share earns
-
.08
Yr sales
127,654,000
140,394,000
Net loss
b1,169,000
c3,929,000
Share earns
-
.64


General Devices reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Devices (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
39,132,986
51,443,254
Net loss
1,549,645
804,936


Silence and the Sick in Albany
LEAD: The ugly, continuing battle over New York State's overdue new budget is not the only reason to despair about the State Senate.
Its truculence on taxes is matched by its indifference to the suffering of terminally ill patients.


Clamorous Start for the 'Week of the Young Child'


On Horse Racing;   Summer Squall Balances Big Weight
LEAD: rrIf Summer Squall ends up in the Kentucky Derby winner's circle on May 5, he had better be in a good mood: if he kicks out or even tries to turn around someone could get killed.


Iraq Can Deliver, U.S. Chemical Arms Experts Say
LEAD: American experts on chemical warfare said today that Iraq had chemical weapons and the means to fire them into Israeli territory, as President Saddam Hussein of Iraq said today.


b-Impacted by additional bad debt expenses of $1,262,000 and costs asFsociated with the closing of the company's West Haven Center and its Canton,
LEAD:
c-Net income


Herbalife International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Herbalife International (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
121,507,000
119,545,000
Net inc
1,032,000
b6,304,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Bellamy and Spano Affirm Plans To Seek Comptroller Nomination
LEAD: Two Democrats declared yesterday that they wanted to run for their party's nomination for New York State comptroller, a job that only two people have held in the last 36 years.


Guards Recover Part of English Prison


U.S. Kin Press Case of 2 Killed in Guatemala in '85
LEAD: Five years ago last Friday, a freelance journalist and a companion hiked through the Guatemalan highlands on their way into territory frequented by the Guerrilla Army of the Poor.
They were never heard from again.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher While Gold Prices Decline
LEAD: The dollar ended mostly higher yesterday against major foreign currencies despite a wave of profit taking.


Kurzweil Music Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kurzweil Music Systems
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,614,000
6,239,000
Net loss
3,366,000
812,000
Shares outst
6,280,468
5,685,210
Yr sales
19,281,000
25,021,000
Net loss
12,938,000
b27,000
Shares outst
5,868,366
5,681,946


Suspect in Stabbing of Wife Is Found Struck by Lightning
LEAD: A man was struck by lightning over the weekend while he was being sought for questioning in the stabbing of his wife.


Chronicle
LEAD: The single constant in the career of MAURICE BEJART has been controversy.
So the dance world awaits the premiere of his new work, ''Pyramide,'' with some anticipation.
It is to be staged in front of the pyramids of Giza May 17-25.


Nationwide Cellular Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nationwide Cellular Svcs (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
22,710,965
14,335,438
Net loss
1,973,778
1,593,066
Shares outst
6,185,799
3,293,880
Yr rev
72,605,610
48,664,997
Net loss
7,817,141
b4,697,226
Shares outst
5,118,812
3,255,274


Savings-Unit Sales Pressed
LEAD: Under pressure to move more quickly in cleaning up the ailing savings and loan industry, Federal regulators said today that they hoped to sell the Miami-based Centrust Bank and 10 other large savings institutions by June.


Mandela Agrees to Talk With de Klerk on Violence in Townships
LEAD: Nelson Mandela said today that he had accepted an invitation to meet with President F. W. de Klerk on Thursday to discuss the growing violence in the country.


Lebanese Christian Factions Now Hoping for Intervention
LEAD: Leaders of Lebanon's warring Christian factions sought help today after 63 days of fighting that have failed to give either side a military victory.


Review/Television;   The New Days in Leningrad Are Freer, Not Easier
LEAD: The ''National Geographic Specials'' end their 25th season tomorrow night with a thoughtful visit to Leningrad that combines an appreciation of the city's past with concern for its people's future.
The glimpses of tradition in ''Voices of Leningrad'' include the first solo, in ''The Nutcracker,'' of 12-year-old Ira Novikova, a student at the Vaganova Choreographic Institute, once the school of the Imperial Maryinsky Theater, whose alumni include Anna Pavlova, Vaslav Nijinsky and Mikhail Baryshnikov.


U.S. Gaining Ground at U.N., State Department Study Says
LEAD: The United States is winning greater support for its views on international issues as ideological rivalries ease, the State Department says in its annual report on voting trends at last year's General Assembly.


Independents Offer an Education Aid Bargain
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nucorp Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nucorp Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,750,000
6,893,000
Net inc
725,000
172,000
Share earns
.14
.06
Shares outst
5,029,000
3,143,000


Conviction of Pathe's Chief Clouds Deal for MGM/UA
LEAD: News that the head of the Pathe Communications Corporation had been convicted on bankruptcy fraud charges in Italy raised further questions yesterday about whether his pending $20-a-share, $1.22 billion acquisition of the MGM/UA Communications Company would go through.


Indian Youths Said to Lack Mental Care
LEAD: THE Federal Government is failing to meet the mental health needs of American Indian adolescents, a Congressional agency said.


Edward Fireman, 68, Astrophysicist, Is Dead
LEAD: Edward L. Fireman, an astrophysicist who was an authority on the analysis of space debris, died of a heart attack on Thursday.
He was 68 years old and lived in Newton, Mass.


Auto Pollution Has Decreased for a Decade;   Tollbooth Syndrome
LEAD: To the Editor:


By Design;   The Big and the Bold
LEAD: Accessories are getting bigger and bolder.
And the drift is from the wrists to the throat and shoulders.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
Capriati Advances With Ease
Jennifer Capriati, who turned 14 only last week, swept into the second round of the $500,000 Family Circle Magazine Cup Tournament yesterday at Hilton Head, S.C., with a 6-4, 6-1 victory over Susan Sloane.
Capriati, playing in just her third professional tournament, needed only 57 minutes to dispatch Sloane.(AP)


Rite Aid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rite Aid Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 3
1990
1989
Sales
857,601,000
819,215,000
Net inc
34,951,000
c36,095,000
Share earns
.84
.87
Yr sales
3,172,797,000
2,868,297,000
Net inc
b102,058,000
c95,210,000
Share earns
2.46
2.30


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
The Buds of Spring
Q.Do tree leaves bud in the spring because of changes in temperature or in light?
A.''Both, but many of the processes of spring are primed in the previous fall and winter,'' said Dr.
Steven K. Tim, vice president for science at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.


Reviews/Music;   On 6 Strings and on Many
LEAD: Julian Bream, the English guitarist who was also a pioneer of the early-music movement on the lute in the 1950's and 60's, set that instrument aside a decade ago, feeling, he acknowledged recently, that the movement's young lions had to some extent passed him by and that he needed to take stock of his achievement.


Business Digest
LEAD:
Companies


Chronicle
LEAD: In the revolving door: ANN GODOFF, vice president and executive editor of Atlantic Monthly Press, left that job on March 9 to go to Doubleday as executive editor.
Three weeks later, she is back at Atlantic.


Procyte Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Procyte Corp. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,067,937
173,937
Net loss
617,714
1,451,540


Ancient Relative
LEAD: A crushed but nearly complete skull unearthed in Egypt appears to be the oldest higher primate specimen found to date that is closely related to humans.


Southland Reports Loss Of $1.01 Billion in Period
LEAD: The Southland Corporation, the owner of 7-Eleven convenience stores, said today that it had lost $1.01 billion in the fourth quarter of last year and that it might seek bankruptcy if it could not restructure its debt.


Nepalese Police Reported to Fire On Political Dissidents, Killing 5
LEAD: The police opened fire today on protesters demanding legalization of political parties in Nepal, killing at least 5 people and wounding 17, hospital workers and witnesses said.


Eastern Plan for Creditors
LEAD: The president of Eastern Airlines is expected to outline a new proposal today aimed at persuading unsecured creditors to back away from their tough stand of last week, a person close to the creditors said.


Albany Budget Standoff Starts, but 4 Emergency Spending Bills Pass
LEAD: The Capitol settled in today for what many officials fear will be a long vigil as Democratic and Republican state leaders remained at a standoff over a new budget.


Xerox Names President To Be Chief Executive
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation yesterday named its president, Paul A. Allaire, to succeed David T. Kearns as chief executive on Aug. 1.
Mr.
Kearns will remain chairman.


Reviews/Dance;   Ballet of Los Angeles With 2 Soviet Guests
LEAD: Just as actors need good plays, dancers need good ballets.
On Saturday night at Queensborough Community College, the Ballet of Los Angeles revealed itself to be an attractive troupe trained to move in a vigorous, athletic but never exaggeratedly forceful manner.
Provided it assembles a worthy repertory, the little company - it has only 10 regular members - might well become the balletic equivalent of a chamber-music ensemble.


Australian Merger
LEAD: The Australia and New Zealand Banking Group announced it would merge with National Mutual Life Association, making it the biggest financial institution in Australia.
A.N.Z. said it would pay $2.5 billion for a 51 percent stake in National Mutual.
The merger, scheduled for Oct. 1, must be approved by regulators and National Mutual policyholders.


Old Fashion Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Fashion Foods
Qtr to Feb 24
1990
1989
Revenue
4,779,000
4,944,000
Net loss
58,000
b5,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
1,176,609
1,182,405
9mo rev
14,682,000
14,924,000
Net loss
161,000
b147,000
Share earns
-
.13
Shares outst
1,177,432
1,192,631


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Pension Fund Rating Shift
LEAD: The California Public Employees Retirement Systems, considered by some to be the nation's most influential pension fund, said today that it had started a system to evaluate corporate performance that will help it with investment decisions.


Ranger Quandary: Vanbiesbrouck or Richter?
LEAD: The game didn't mean anything, and Roger Neilson decided it didn't matter where he watched it from.
So Neilson, the coach of the Rangers, climbed through the Madison Square Garden crowd Sunday night to a seat amid the fans for the season finale against the Capitals.


Community Psychiatric Ceners reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Psychiatric Ceners (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
84,668,000
80,733,000
Net inc
18,811,000
18,020,000
Share earns
.41
.39
Year-ago revenues included a gain of $747,000 atrributable to a skilled nursing facility in Louisiana; this facility was not in operation during the first quarter of 1990.


No Headline


Cambex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cambex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 3
1990
1989
Revenue
7,519,000
4,046,000
Net inc
933,000
316,000
Share earns
.30
.11
6mo rev
13,740,000
7,817,000
Net inc
1,686,000
619,000
Share earns
.55
.22


Universal Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Holding Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
20,000
b577,000
Yr net loss
312,369
909,343
b-Net loss


Ex-Police Chief Runs for Washington Mayor
LEAD: Asserting that Washington was in governmental crisis and in need of new leadership, a former Police Chief, Maurice T. Turner Jr., announced today that he would run for mayor.


Aldo Fabrizi, 84, A Character Actor In Italian Movies
LEAD: Aldo Fabrizi, an Italian actor who sprang to international fame in the 1940's with his portrayal of a courageous priest executed by Nazis in Roberto Rossellini's film ''Open City,'' died on Monday.
He was 84 years old.


Magadan And Ojeda Demoted
LEAD: Davey Johnson solved the ''numbers problem'' on the Mets today by relegating two of his most popular players to lesser jobs: Bob Ojeda to the bullpen, Dave Magadan to the bench.
And both players admitted they were devastated by the moves.


Reviews/Music;   Gilbert and Sullivan Yield To Gershwin and Ryskind
LEAD: When the Gilbert and Sullivan Players decided to extend their repertory beyond the Savoyard classics that the company has performed exclusively for the last 16 years, they couldn't have made a more felicitous choice of a vehicle to make the break from tradition than ''Of Thee I Sing.''


Dinkins's Extra Taxes Add Up to $200 Million
LEAD: Strapped by persistent revenue shortfalls and planned cuts in state aid, the Dinkins administration has suggested $200 million more in new or higher taxes on items from dry cleaning to automobiles.
The potential increases come on top of $550 million in taxes it is already seeking, city officials said yesterday.


Japan Acts To Raise Imports
LEAD: In an effort to reduce trade tensions with the United States, Japan outlined proposals today to curb some of the more pervasive policy and cultural obstacles to American imports.


America's Catholic Bishops Move Closer to Pope on Women's Issues
LEAD: A committee of Roman Catholic bishops in the United States, revising a major statement on the Catholic Church and women's concerns, has retreated from the liberal tone and content of important sections in a draft issued two years ago.


Reviews/Dance;   Vignettes of Life and Death From the Juilliard Ensemble
LEAD: The Juilliard Dance Ensemble examined some of the joys and sorrows of life on Friday night at the Juilliard Theater.


Devices Help Scientists Find Supernovas
LEAD: ALTHOUGH supernovas are the most violent of all cosmic events visible from the Earth, most of these stellar explosions are hard to detect, either because they are enormously far away or because they are dimmed by intervening dust and gas clouds.
But new devices that search the heavens automatically for faint new supernovas have begun to quicken the pace of discovery.


Ricoh Picks U.S. Chief
LEAD: Hishashi Kubo, credited with the 1981 marketing strategy that gave Japan's Ricoh copy machines a toehold in the United States market, has been named chairman of the company's American subsidiary, the company announced today.
The West Caldwell, N.J., copier unit's sales in the United States grew from $15 million in 1979 to $650 million in 1986, when Mr.


A Chance for Lithuania
LEAD: Tension has been mounting in Lithuania.
So far, Mikhail Gorbachev has been ambiguous, playing brinkmanship.
He is in a difficult bind, and he probably hasn't decided which way to go - to try to ease the pain and save face by wriggling out of the imperial problem gradually, or crack down, prove his power and damn the consequences.


As Plan B Deadline Passes, N.F.L. Has a New, Albeit Indistinct, Look
LEAD: Pro football's Plan B free-agency period has ended with unclear results.


Publisher for Children A Canada Success Story
LEAD: Nearly 10 years ago Valerie Hussey went to her first Bologna Book Fair for children.
As the new publisher of Kids Can Press here, she was looking to buy more than sell.
At this year's fair, being held this week, the opposite is true.


Iraq's Murderous Threats
LEAD: Brazen blackmail - that's how Iraq's President, Saddam Hussein, reacts to being caught red-handed trying again to build nuclear weapons.
Now he threatens to destroy half of Israel with chemical-armed missiles if Israel attacks his weapons factories.
The threat from a leader who already has mercilessly used chemical arms cannot go unanswered by civilized powers.


Israelis Report the Capture Of an Infiltrator From Jordan
LEAD: Soldiers captured an armed Jordanian soldier today after he had infiltrated into the occupied West Bank, approached an Israeli collective farm and hidden near a Palestinian village, the army said.


'Cold Fusion' Claimants Review Puzzling Results
LEAD: For believers, the central mystery surrounding ''cold fusion'' is what is happening in experiments that have been frustratingly erratic.
For skeptics it is why the field does not die.


Salomon Office In East Berlin
LEAD: Salomon Brothers Inc., the Wall Street investment house, announced it was opening an office through a subsidiary in East Berlin.
The office will be run by West German professionals from the subsidiary, Salomon Brothers A.G. in Frankfurt, as well as executives from East Germany.


Strike at 7 Hospitals in California
LEAD: As many as 11,000 employees went on strike at seven hospitals and more than 40 medical offices in Southern California today after weekend talks failed to produce a contract.


Chief's Patient Vision Faces Test at Cummins
LEAD: Henry B. Schacht, once hailed as the ''king of the Rust Belt'' for patiently trying to make the Cummins Engine Company as efficient as its Japanese rivals, is under fire.


Happy Land Arrest Order Ignored in 1989
LEAD: A warrant was issued last year for the arrest of the owner of the building that housed the Happy Land Social Club after he failed to show up in court to answer complaints about safety conditions in the club, city records show.


Deal to Sell Padres
LEAD: An investment group headed by the Hollywood producer Tom Werner signed a letter of intent yesterday to purchase the San Diego Padres, the club owner, Joan Kroc, said.


PC Quote reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PC Quote (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,145,275
7,342,585
Net loss
409,616
b47,681
b-Net income


Johnson Ban to Go On
LEAD: After his two-year international suspension for the use of steroids ends in September, Ben Johnson of Canada will be barred from Grand Prix and other invitational meets in England.


Price Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 18
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Price Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 18
1990
1989
Revenue
1,119,571,000
1,060,459,000
Net inc
25,887,000
25,552,000
Share earns
.51
.51
Shares outst
49,539,000
49,409,000
6mo rev
2,979,893,000
2,663,522,000
Net inc
70,208,000
64,425,000
Share earns
1.37
1.27
Shares outst
49,715,000
49,373,000


He's More George Than Sparky Now
LEAD: rrOut near the right-field fence, Sparky Anderson, his white hair shining in the sun, was running his pitchers.
Trotting by, each pitcher tossed the Detroit Tiger manager a baseball, then sprinted toward the foul line before turning to catch what resembled a short forward pass.


Campeau Chains' Losses Reported
LEAD: Allied Stores and Federated Department Stores, the American retailing operations of the Campeau Corporation that are trying to reorganize, reported losses of $45.6 million in February.
In monthly statements required by Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, Federated showed a loss of $29.8 million and Allied posted a loss of $15.8 million.


U.S. Regains Export Lead
LEAD: The United States regained its position last year as the world's leading exporter, passing West Germany, the International Monetary Fund said on Sunday.


Applied Power reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Power (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
110,004,000
53,607,000
Net inc
4,700,000
4,400,000
Share earns
.36
.33
6mo sales
220,705,000
104,996,000
Net inc
9,400,000
8,500,000
Share earns
.71
.65


United Systems Technology reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Systems Technology
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,135,000
2,547,000
Net inc
252,000
b590,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
11,633,000
11,596,000
b-Net loss


Staging a 'Grapes' of Dust, Fog, Fire and Blood
LEAD: It was backstage, minutes before the opening performance of ''The Grapes of Wrath'' on Broadway, and the show's 35 cast members were staring nervously at Frank Galati, the play's director. ''John Steinbeck sat in this very theater and heard the language of Shakespeare,'' Mr.
Galati said slowly, as the crowd buzzed beyond the curtain in the Cort Theater.


Guam to Drop Abortion Charges
LEAD: The prosecution dropped charges today against an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer accused of violating the new abortion law here by encouraging others to seek abortions.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Avery International Corp., Pasadena, Calif., a manufacturer of office products and specialty chemicals, announced the retirement of Richard J. Pearson as president and chief operating officer, effective July 1.
Charles D. Miller, chairman and chief executive, will take the additional title of president.


Spill That Imperiled Water Passes Down the Allegheny
LEAD: The worst of a fuel spill that threatened the drinking water of a million people passed down the Allegheny River today and cities including Pittsburgh were preparing to end their water emergencies tonight.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Mexico Selects Saatchi Again
LEAD: The Mexican Government's search for a new ad agency concluded for the third time in four months yesterday with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York reappointed to do the nation's tourism ads.


Discus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Discus Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,636,000
3,605,000
Net loss
247,000
656,000
Yr rev
15,449,000
15,362,000
Net loss
146,000
685,000


Winston Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winston Resources (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,485,797
5,081,886
Net loss
21,267
204,746
Shares outst
2,973,766
3,000,000
Yr rev
21,889,934
20,986,821
Net loss
74,326
b127,386
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
2,993,085
3,000,000


U.N.L.V. Applies a Defensive Clamp and It Works
LEAD: The national championship rings were already sized and polished.
The T-shirts and hats were already printed.
The Nevada-Las Vegas players wrapped themselves up in their extra treats, each entrenched in the locker-room delirium that broke loose after U.N.L.V. won the championship here tonight by the largest margin ever in a title game, 103-73, over


ETZ Lavud reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ETZ Lavud (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
21,924,000
21,651,000
Net inc
324,000
b1,001,000
Share earns
.20
-
Yr sales
78,559,046
79,655,348
Net loss
989,666
967,281
b-Net loss


Europe Plan On Patents
LEAD: The European Community submitted a detailed proposal today for new international rules to protect rights to such intellectual property as patents, copyright and trademarks.


Nevada-Las Vegas Says 'We're No. 1' After Rout of Duke    ''It is a real credit to these kids who have gone through so much this year,'' said Tarkanian, whose team lost nine players at various times in the season to injuries or suspensions. Sports Pages, B9. (The New York Times/G. Paul Burnett)


Quake Jars Central England
LEAD: An earthquake shook a broad swath of England and Wales today, emptying buildings and sending hundreds of frightened people into the streets.
There were no immediate reports of injuries or serious damage.
The quake, which geologists said registered 5.2 on the Richter scale, was believed to have been centered west of Nottingham in central England.


Midday Nikkei Is Below 28,000
LEAD: After a brief rebound early this morning, the Tokyo Stock Exchange slipped again and ended the morning session below 28,000 points.


Velazquez Show Closes; Dozens Turned Away
LEAD: About 40 angry people pounded on the doors of the Prado Museum shortly after midnight Sunday in a futile attempt to see a wildly popular exhibition of 80 paintings by the 17th-century Spanish master Diego Velazquez.


Rig Count Springs Back
LEAD: The number of working United States oil and gas rigs made a turnaround last week, increasing by 53, to a total of 946, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
The week's increase reversed a downward slide in the rig count - a historical occurrence in the first three months of the year.
Baker Hughes's rig count, a widely watched industry index of drilling activity, reflects the number of rotary rigs actively exploring for oil and gas as of last Friday, not the number of wells in production.


Las Vegas Hits Jackpot in a Record Runaway
LEAD: All the pent-up fury of a season marked by injuries and marred by suspensions and implications about the character of the team exploded this evening as the University of Nevada-Las Vegas won its first national championship by demolishing Duke, 103-73, in an unrelenting exhibition of pressure basketball.


Gallimard Case In Higher Court
LEAD: France's largest independent publisher, Editions Gallimard, faced an uncertain future today after a court failed to settle a damaging family dispute for control of the company.


Corrections
LEAD: The American League schedule in the Sports section on Sunday included several errors.
A corrected version appears today on page B8.


Triangle Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triangle Home Products (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,210,706
6,922,000
Net loss
1,047,720
979,000
Yr sales
25,665,165
27,129,578
Net loss
798,513
1,226,280


I.C.H.  Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* I.C.H.  Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b247,539,000
c13,533,000
Share earns
-
.12
Yr net loss
b336,225,000
c28,045,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $2,643,000, or 5 cents a share for both the quarter and year.


Pork Prices Climb Sharply On Report of Production Lag
LEAD: Prices of most pork futures rose by their permitted daily limits yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange after a Government report indicated that 1990 hog production would continue to lag behind last year's output.


Seder's 5th Question: Why Do Holiday Prices Rise?
LEAD: Fifteen hundred years ago the authors of the Talmud fretted over the high price of Passover goods in ancient Babylon.
And if one listens to the talk in the aisles of supermarkets and butcher shops in and around New York City these days, it seems that little has changed.


Chronicle
LEAD: Delivering on a promise made 21 years ago, IDA CHAGALL has presented the Israel Museum with 103 works of art by her father, MARC CHAGALL.
TEDDY KOLLEK, the Mayor of Jerusalem, brought them from Paris last week and they will go on exhibit in September at the museum, which Mr.
Kollek founded.


Tony Lama reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tony Lama (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,389,000
21,804,000
Net loss
1,175,000
b695,000
Share earns
-
.37
Yr sales
75,643,000
76,150,000
Net loss
1,814,000
b1,230,000
Share earns
-
.66
b


Hopper Soliday Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hopper Soliday Corp. (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
37,821,034
15,254,457
Net loss
b8,267,872
10,362,569
b-After an extraordinary gain on early extinguishment of debt of $98,687, or 5 cents a share.


Martin W. Juster, 71, Real-Estate Developer
LEAD: Martin W. Juster, a real-estate developer in Manhattan and Westchester in the 1950's and 60's, died of a heart attack on Saturday at the United Hospital in Harrison, N.Y.
He was 71 years old and lived in Boca Raton, Fla.


Simcoe Erie Investors reports earnings for Year Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Simcoe Erie Investors
Year Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
94,244,000
100,305,000
Net inc
2,491,000
4,737,000
Share earns
.26
.50
Results are in Canadian funds.


Forum Retirement Partners reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forum Retirement Partners (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,793,000
23,144,000
Net loss
1,136,000
3,257,000


Dow Off Only 6.76 Despite Tokyo's Plunge
LEAD: After shaking off another sharp decline in the Tokyo stock market, stock prices on the New York Stock Exchange bounced back yesterday in slow trading, with the Dow Jones industrial average ending the day at 2,700.45, down 6.76 points.


Yale to Pay Millions in New Municipal Fees
LEAD: Yale University agreed yesterday to pay $2.6 million to deficit-burdened New Haven and promised a loan of $7.5 million if the city raised $22.5 million from other donors.


Mark's Work Wearhouse reports earnings for Year to Jan 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark's Work Wearhouse
Year to Jan 27
1990
1989
Sales
225,279,000
194,514,000
Net inc
b4,334,000
2,155,000
Share earns
.44
.22
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $724,000, or 8 cents a share.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Gretzky Probably Out Of Playoff Opener
LEAD: The Los Angeles Kings' coach, Tom Webster, said yesterday that Wayne Gretzky would probably miss the team's playoff opener tomorrow night against the Calgary Flames because of a back injury.


Unfair Smoke, S &amp; L Fire
LEAD: The problems of the savings and loan bailout are compounding, each mistake made worse by the one before:


Energy Report Issued
LEAD: Secretary of Energy James D. Watkins released a 230-page interim report today on a proposed energy strategy, listing possibilities that include strict conservation requirements and Government-financed development of renewable alternative fuels like solar power or hydroelectric power.


Told to Ignore Policy Questions, Jury Deliberates Poindexter Case
LEAD: The jury in the trial of John M. Poindexter began weighing five criminal charges against the former national security adviser today after the judge instructed the jurors to disregard whether President Ronald Reagan's policies in the Iran-contra affair were ''wise or unwise.''


H. F. Ahmanson Plans Expansion in New York
LEAD: H. F. Ahmanson &amp; Company moved to expand in New York today by agreeing to acquire the Home Savings Bank of New York in a stock deal valued at approximately $300 million.


Charles Spain Verral, Adventure Writer, 85
LEAD: Charles Spain Verral, a prolific author of books on adventure, sports and other subjects, died of complications from lung cancer on Sunday at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 85 years old and lived in Greenwich Village.


Live Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Live Entertainment (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
181,150,000
132,091,000
Net inc
3,974,000
10,627,000
Share earns
.33
1.30
Shares outst
11,900,000
7,130,000
Yr sales
437,262,000
352,128,000
Net inc
19,427,000
17,548,000
Share earns
1.67
2.15
Shares outst
11,430,000
6,836,000


Judge Postpones Park Rape Trial Over Evidence
LEAD: The first trial in the Central Park rape case was indefinitely postponed yesterday after the prosecution said it had found evidence that had been apparently overlooked by the police crime laboratory.


Franco Renzulli, 54, Played in Piano Duo
LEAD: Franco Renzulli, of the Phillips and Renzulli concert piano duo, died on March 26.
He was 54 years old and lived in East Patchogue, L.I.


Horn &amp; Hardart Selling Restaurants
LEAD: The Horn &amp; Hardart Company said it was putting its East Coast restaurant unit up for sale.
The division includes Bojangles' Fried Chicken and Biscuits, Tony Roma's, and Arby's restaurants in South Florida.
The company said that after the sale its restaurant operations would consist solely of International King's Table, a West


Research in 'Virgin' Amazon Uncovers Complex Farming
LEAD: OVER thousands of years, scientists have discovered, ancient inhabitants of the Amazon and their present-day descendants have evolved a sophisticated blend of agricultural and forestry techniques to shape and reshape the region's vast forests, savannas and river valleys to their needs.


Helen F. McGillicuddy; Illinois Judge, 73
LEAD: Helen F. McGillicuddy, the first woman elected to the Illinois Appellate Court, died on Thursday at Evanston Hospital in Evanston, Ill.
She was 73 years old and lived in Chicago.


Market Place;   Strange Calm After Tokyo's Fall
LEAD: The world's stock markets have shown remarkable complacency in the face of Tokyo's collapse.
After the 1,978.38-point drop in the Nikkei 225-stock index yesterday, the rest of the world's markets fell but did not panic.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Drive to Aid Children Has New Twist
LEAD: WHEN Hal Donofrio learned about a new academic study suggesting that broad marketing campaigns were more effective than public service advertising in persuading people to change their behavior, he smiled and wondered what took the professors so long.


Auto Pollution Has Decreased for a Decade;   Let the Traffic Flow
LEAD: To the Editor:


Deliberations Start on L.I. Killing
LEAD: The prosecutor in the Robert Golub trial said today that the defendant had both the opportunity and the means to kill Kelly Ann Tinyes after she had resisted his sexual advances.


Must Busing Go On Till Racial Balance Is Exact?
LEAD: Outside the small, self-contained worlds of Shelly Bridgwater's and Donna Stover's classrooms rages one of the country's most complex and far-reaching desegregation battles.


Ortega, a Lame Duck, Begins His Diplomatic Farewell
LEAD: In his last regional conference of heads of state before leaving office this month, President Daniel Ortega Saavdra of Nicaragua began talks with four other Central American Presidents here today in what his aides say will be a final push for the quick disbanding of the contra army.


Murder Trial Begins for Ceausescu's Brother


Court to Decide Damage Award Issue
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a jury's award of punitive damages can be so excessive or disproportionate as to violate the Constitution's guarantee of due process of law.


Developer Skips Payment of Taxes
LEAD: The cash-short General Development Corporation has failed to make more than $10 million in property tax payments and is considering filing for bankruptcy protection, the company said.
The tax payments on the nine Florida communities built by the developer had to be sent on Sunday, but none were, a company spokesman, Otis Wragg, said.


A Question of Ethics: Should Alcoholics Get Transplanted Livers?
LEAD: IN teaching a medical class about the ethics of organ transplantation, Dr.
Calvin R. Stiller wanted to stress how biases affect the selection of recipients, particularly those needing new livers because of alcoholic cirrhosis.


Weak Profits Seen for Banks Hurt by Real Estate Loans
LEAD: With the almost daily reports of losses from bad real estate loans, many large banking companies are expected to report weak profits for the first quarter.


Auto Pollution Has Decreased for a Decade;   Raise Tax on Gas
LEAD: To the Editor:


North Finds Security In Bulletproof Vests
LEAD: Oliver L. North and Joseph F. Fernandez, comrades-in-arms in the Iran-contra affair, are back in business.
They are manufacturing and selling bulletproof vests, which Mr.
North says he wears himself.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, an article on Sunday about liquid diets omitted a passage in some copies from a paragraph about a scientific conference in Washington.
The full paragraph should have read, ''In Washington tomorrow [Monday] , at a conference of the American Federation of the American Societies for Experimental Biology, Dr.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.31
7.75
9.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.83
7.80
8.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.81
7.81
8.88
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.68
8.67
9.30
30-YR.


Blue Devils Struggle To Find a Meaning
LEAD: As much as anything else, what made this evening so painful for the Duke Blue Devils, by the end of the most one-sided championship game in the 51-year history of the national collegiate basketball tournament, was that their hard-earned optimism seemed to make so little sense.


Nicaragua Devaluation
LEAD: Nicaragua's central bank on Sunday announced a 1.3 percent devaluation of the cordoba against the United States dollar.
The official exchange rate rose to 47,000 cordobas to $1, from 46,380.
In addition, the departing Sandinista Government announced a 10 percent rise in the price of a gallon of gasoline, to 85,500 cordobas.


CSX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,908,000,000
1,844,000,000
Net inc
b77,000,000
c82,000,000
Share earns
.76
.74
Shares outst
97,903,324
105,523,215
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $51,000,000, or 52 cents a share.


Edward O. Curran, 87, Nestle General Counsel
LEAD: Edward Owen Curran, former secretary and general counsel of the Nestle Foods Company, died after a long illness at a nursing home in Waterville, Me.
He was 87 years old and lived in Waterville.


Careers;   Training With Focus On Service
LEAD: WITH the nature of customer service changing, a new type of worker is needed - one who can make the most of the latest technology.
That was the message of Sandra G. Tuck at a recent meeting held by the management consulting firm Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton Inc.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   A Magazine Is Coming Along With the Menu
LEAD: A new venture owned by a specialty publishing concern and a company that owns restaurants is stapling menus inside a new general interest magazine called Knife &amp; Fork.
The magazine is being given to restaurant customers.


No Decisions On Mark Yet, Kohl Says
LEAD: Moving to stifle the rising furor over proposals for monetary union, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany said today that no decisions had been made.
He also appointed a leading official of West Germany's powerful central bank as his personal adviser on uniting the two nation's currencies.


John Stiefel, 69, Dies; Nuclear Power Adviser
LEAD: John T. Stiefel, a chemical engineer and former vice president of the Westinghouse Corporation of Pittsburgh, died of a brain tumor on Sunday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 69 years old and also lived in Sarasota, Fla.


In Northern Ireland, More Must Be Done
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Storyteller For the War That Won't End
LEAD: For the first time since his Army tour of duty in Vietnam ended 20 years ago, Tim O'Brien will be going back in June.
The official reason for the trip is a conference of American and Vietnamese writers in Hanoi.
A more personal one for Mr.
O'Brien is to return to the area around the village of My Lai.


Bradley Begins Campaign for 3d Term
LEAD: Senator Bill Bradley announced his bid for a third term yesterday, bolstered by $9 million in campaign funds and by the prospect of running as a popular incumbent against a little-known challenger.


Walter Carl Kehm; Lawyer, 63
LEAD: Walter Carl Kehm, a lawyer and conservationist, died of a heart attack on Saturday at his home in Rye, N.Y.
He was 63 years old.


Trammell Crow Will Refinance 150 Properties
LEAD: The Trammell Crow Company, the nation's largest commercial real estate developer, said today that one of the largest United States insurers had provided $456 million to allow the refinancing of more than 150 of its commercial properties, mainly in the Southwest.


Random House Position
LEAD: Rich Szefc has been named chief financial officer of Random House Inc., a new position, Alberto Vitale, chairman and chief executive of the company, announced yesterday.
The appointment was effective immediately.
Mr.
Szefc (pronounced chef), who was also named senior vice president, will be responsible for all financial functions of the company and for the legal and contract department.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Mandela to Meet de Klerk
Nelson Mandela said he would meet President F. W. de Klerk on Thursday to discuss the growing violence in South Africa.
Page A10.
Japan Easing on Imports
In an effort to reduce trade tensions with Washington, Tokyo outlined proposals to curb some obstacles to American goods.


'Junk Bonds' Cause Loss At Insurer
LEAD: The First Executive Corporation, one of the companies most heavily invested in ''junk bonds,'' today reported a larger-than-expected loss for the fourth quarter of last year, reflecting the turmoil in the market for the high-risk, high-yield securities.


PARTY CHIEF QUITS IN EAST GERMANY
LEAD: The founder and chairman of the East German Social Democratic Party resigned today, the second victim of allegations of a compromised past that have haunted East Germany's transition to democracy.


Harry S. Robinson 2d; Shoe Executive, 69
LEAD: Harry S. Robinson 2d, a retired executive of the United States Shoe Corporation, died of cancer on Friday at his home in Cincinnati.
He was 69 years old.


27-Man Roster Approved Until April 30
LEAD: The 27-man roster that was, then wasn't, will be.


Congress Didn't Want to See. . .
LEAD: I wheeled my way up to both houses of Congress in recent months to testify in support of legislation bearing my name: the Brady bill.
It would require a national seven-day waiting period for handgun sales from gun dealers.
The bill is intended to give police departments time to run a background check on the purchaser, to deny instant access of a concealable weapon to a known felon or to another John W.


L.I. Departure At Doubleday
LEAD: Doubleday Book and Music Clubs Inc. will move its customer service operation from Garden City, L.I., to Indianapolis, beginning in August.


Southland Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southland Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,059,831,000
1,972,148,000
Net loss
b1,007,110,000
c37,035,000
Shares outst
205,042,000
200,271,000
Yr rev
8,351,883,000
7,990,497,000
Net loss
b1,306,913,000
c216,231,000
Shares outst
205,042,000
200,068,000


Starving Children of Malawi Kill Leader's Boast of Plenty
LEAD: For the 26 years of his authoritarian rule in Malawi, President H. Kamuzu Banda has insisted that human rights, white power in a black state and coziness with South Africa are minor matters compared with the full stomachs of his people.
Now, as it turns out, many young and infant Malawians do not have full stomachs either.


Transtech Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transtech Industries (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,714,086
1,485,076
Net loss
5,151,702
b13,254,751
Share earns
-
2.72
Shares outst
2,808,496
4,523,727
b-Net income and after income from discontinued operations of $22,436,909, or $4.61 a share.


International Power Machines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Power Machines (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
16,631,000
12,673,000
Net loss
75,000
b201,000
Share earns
-
.03
Yr rev
54,593,000
49,343,000
Net inc
383,000
1,155,000
Share earns
.04
.22


S.E.C. Chief Criticizes Bill to Thwart Takeovers
LEAD: The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission today strongly criticized an anti-takeover law pending before the Pennsylvania Legislature, saying it would disenfranchise shareholders and leave incompetent managers ''free to run a company into the ground.''


Y &amp; A Group Inc. reports earnings for 12mo to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Y &amp; A Group Inc. (OTC)
12mo to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,493,000
4,655,000
Net inc
344,000
198,000
Share earns
.22
.16
Shares outst
1,485,000
1,229,000


U.S. Intec reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Intec
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
59,639,000
58,313,000
Net loss
b972,000
bc353,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
2,969,161
2,999,930
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $1,334,000 and $2,116,000, which included losses of $1,177,000 and $577,000 from disposal of discontinued operations, for 1989 and 1988, respectively.


Soviet Emigres to Israel Topped 7,000 in March
LEAD: Despite terrorist threats and short-lived moves to curtail airline service from Hungary, Soviet Jews poured into Israel in record numbers last month, and even more are arriving in the first days of April.


In Bulgaria's Balkan Politics, Splits Even Within the Splits
LEAD: A kind of bewilderment seems to pervade the life of the Bulgarians more than four months after the bloodless overthrow of a repressive Communist Government and two months before scheduled national elections.


Graf Back Next Week
LEAD: Steffi Graf, who has been sidelined since suffering a chipped bone in her right thumb on Feb. 6, will return to tournament play next week.


Pratt Hotel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pratt Hotel Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
60,448,000
55,418,000
Net loss
10,179,000
cd1,874,000
Share earns
-
.04
Yr rev
254,217,000
234,773,000
Net loss
b18,133,000
d13,748,000
b-After costs of $640,000 related to early extinguishment of debt.


Maloney Playing on Other Side of Rivalry
LEAD: When a player steps on the ice of Madison Square Garden in the uniform of the Islanders and faces the hostile crowd of Manhattan, ''You feel such animosity, such hatred,'' said Don Maloney, the only man on either current roster who has played for both teams.


Driver Licenses Take Aim At the Under-Age Drinker
LEAD: As part of a campaign to curb under-age drinking, the state is issuing new drivers' licenses and nondriver photo identification cards that clearly indicate whether a person is under 21 years of age.


Iraq Chief, Boasting of Poison Gas, Warns of Disaster if Israelis Strike
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, boasting that he had acquired advanced chemical weapons, threatened today to annihilate half of Israel if it moved against his country.


Patterns
LEAD:
The Lauren Girl


Books of The Times;   Going Home Again, and Finding You Can't
LEAD:
In a Father's Place
By Christopher Tilghman
214 pages. Farrar, Straus, Giroux. $18.95.


Elsinore reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elsinore (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
67,847,000
91,840,000
Net loss
b11,585,000
c13,591,000
Share earns
-
.99
Shares outst
34,538,600
13,595,805
b-Included an extraordinary loss from extinguishment of debt of $7,704,000.


Bingo King Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bingo King Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
8,689,000
7,966,000
Net inc
109,000
104,000
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
3,073,000
2,877,000
Yr sales
34,641,000
22,196,000
Net inc
786,000
712,000
Share earns
.26
.33
Shares outst
3,071,000
2,174,000


Impending Suspension
LEAD: Henry Marsh, the world's leading steeplechase runner of the 1980's, said yesterday that he was about to be suspended for two years for failure to report for a drug test.
Marsh said The Athletics Congress, the American governing body for track and field, had notified him of the impending suspension after the organization's hearing board did not accept his explanation.


Auto Pollution Has Decreased for a Decade
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chicago Journal;   Gigantic Face Lift (Headache To Match)
LEAD: When the Standard Oil Company began planning its headquarters building in downtown Chicago 20 years ago, the industrial giant envisioned an enduring showpiece with a distinctive face.


Matthews &amp; Wright Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matthews &amp; Wright Group (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
219,741
87,414
Net loss
963,865
1,550,367
Yr rev
1,171,927
1,126,705
Net loss
2,250,672
3,043,087


Farley Unit Misses Loan Payment
LEAD: A division of Farley Inc. that was formed to acquire West Point-Pepperell Inc. said today that it had defaulted on a $796 million bank loan and would be unable to pay interest owed to holders of $705 million in ''junk bonds.''


N.C.A.A. May Still Try to Ban Tarkanian
LEAD: Jerry Tarkanian, the 59-year-old Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach, whose team won the national championship tonight, may face a suspension and his school may receive additional sanctions in connection with infractions by the basketball program that were cited in 1977.


German Union Instills Vision Of a Great Continent Reborn
LEAD: When European business leaders describe their vision of Europe, they usually talk of building a bigger, more united, more dynamic continent.
German unification fits neatly into that vision.


Review/Music;   New Works for New Ears
LEAD: The Kronos Quartet made one of its regular stops at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday night and, in the process, gave the listener a chance to reconsider one of the concert business's success stories.


Our Towns;   Stringed Jewel Or Fake Fiddle? Wait 4 Seconds
LEAD: From all over the world they come, to an ordinary suburban street here full of high ranch houses, reverently ascending the steps of the one with green aluminum siding.
A polite woman, Maria, greets them, leading them down to the basement, where her husband, the master, Dario D'Attili, sits at his desk, passing judgment on their violins.


Presidio Oil Co. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Presidio Oil Co. (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
72,265,000
27,314,000
Net loss
17,465,000
4,429,000
The company said these results reflected less than a month of operating results from its acquisition of substantially all of the oil and gas assets of Home Petroleum Corp.


Bush Open to Space Voyages With Soviet Union
LEAD: PRESIDENT BUSH has embraced the idea of cooperating with the Soviet Union in the manned exploration of the solar system, including voyages to the Moon and Mars, White House officials said yesterday.


Tabloid Plan In Kansas City
LEAD: Stephen F. Rose, president and co-publisher of Sun Publications Inc., has announced plans to introduce on May 14 a five-day tabloid newspaper called The Evening News.
He said the paper would fill a void created when the Kansas City Star Company closed its afternoon paper on March 1 and merged it with the morning


Dodgers Hope Samuel Can Be Their Spark
LEAD: Not long after the Los Angeles Dodgers acquired Juan Samuel from the Mets last December, Tommy Lasorda made a good-will visit to the Dominican Republic.
His diplomatic mission: make Samuel feel better -make him happy, if possible - about playing center field for the Dodgers, who desperately needed a center fielder.


Linpro Specified Properties reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linpro Specified Properties (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
6,007,131
b154,185
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income
The company said results for 1989 reflected a writedown of $6 million by Linpro Income Fund I Partnership of its investment in Academy Downs near Denver.


Tourism Rises in Israel
LEAD: The number of tourists visiting Israel in 1989 rose by 9.7 percent despite the Palestinian revolt in the Israeli-occupied territories, the Tourism Ministry said today.
It said 1,425,000 people visited the Jewish state last year, up from 1,299,000 in 1988.
Foreign currency receipts, including Israeli airline income from foreigners, rose 9.1 percent, to $1.8 billion, in 1989, from $1.65 billion in the previous year.


First Executive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Executive Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
35,707,000
56,671,000
Net loss
835,656,000
c48,235,000
Share earns
-
.42
Shares outst
84,935,000
97,195,000
Yr rev
257,571,000
233,899,000
Net loss
b775,585,000
c174,510,000
Share earns
-
1.51
Shares outst
84,870,000
97,085,000


Tofutti Brands Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tofutti Brands Inc. (AMEX)
Year to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,918,000
9,493,000
Net loss
1,209,000
652,000


Hotel Investors reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hotel Investors (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
115,463,000
93,951,000
Net loss
b60,338,000
c1,335,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-After an extraordinary credit of $156,000, or 1 cent a share, and also included is a provision for loss of $55.8 million related to the Hotel portfolio, two gaming properties and goodwill.


Supercollider Stands at the Frontier of Science
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on March 24 about the emigration of Soviet Jews to Israel misstated the extent to which they are being resettled in the West Bank.
Only a small number of the Soviet Jews - about 1 percent of the 30,000 who have arrived in Israel in the last few months - have moved to the occupied territories.


A Worry in West Germany: Indolence in East Germany
LEAD: At a construction site on the Leipziger Strasse in downtown East Berlin, a workman is cutting plywood on a table saw.
The blade's high-pitched whine echoes through the brick-and-concrete shell of the unfinished six-story structure.
No other human life is visible.


Provigo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provigo Inc.
Qtr to Jan 27
1990
1989
Sales
1,448,500,000
1,324,000,000
Net inc
7,800,000
c23,500,000
Share earns
.09
.28
Yr sales
6,139,000,000
5,348,000,000
Net loss
b51,400,000
d51,500,000
Share earns
-
.61


Court Urges Easing on Phone Curbs
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in Washington ruled yesterday that a more lenient legal standard should be applied in determining whether the seven ''Baby Bell'' telephone companies are allowed to create information services like electronic shopping and home banking.


Outlet Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Outlet Communications (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
27,636,000
29,194,000
Net inc
3,205,000
b2,395,000
Share earns
.49
-
Yr rev
99,320,000
104,288,000
Net inc
15,931,000
b21,759,000
Share earns
2.43
-


Arthur Houghton Jr., 83, Dies; Led Steuben Glass
LEAD: Arthur A. Houghton Jr., a former president of Steuben Glass and an arts patron who had been chairman of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the New York Philharmonic, died yesterday in Venice (Fla.) Hospital after a brief illness.
He was 83 years old and maintained homes in Boca Grande, Fla., and Queenstown,


Simmons Ends Bid For Georgia Gulf
LEAD: The Dallas investor Harold C. Simmons has ended his $1.1 billion tender offer for the Georgia Gulf Corporation, deciding instead to back the chemical company's recapitalization plan at the April 19 annual meeting.
But Mr.
Simmons's NL Industries, which owns almost 10 percent of Georgia Gulf, left open the possibility of another tender offer if shareholders reject the plan.


Bored by Annual Reports? Try Time Warner's
LEAD: Wall Street, meet MTV.


KILLINGS OF ARABS BY ISRAELIS DROP
LEAD: Israeli soldiers shot and killed fewer Palestinians in the first quarter of 1990 than in any three-month period since the Palestinian uprising began 28 months ago.


Hal Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hal Inc. (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
348,912,000
354,013,000
Net inc
b46,930,000
c8,755,000
b-Included a $5,143,000 gain in 1989 from sale of equipment, and a $309,000 loss due to sale of equipment.
c


Tridel Enterprises reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tridel Enterprises
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
694,000,000
532,000,000
Net inc
b81,000,000
35,000,000
Share earns
7.15
3.56
b-After an extraordinary credit of $36 million, or $3.20 a share, which consisted of gains on the sale of residential property and tax credits.


Concern Abates as Oil in River Passes Pittsburgh
LEAD: Concern about the petroleum that gushed out of a burst pipleline into the Allegheny River has diminished almost as suddenly as the pollutant appeared last weekend.


28,000 People Bilked of $1 Million in Fraud
LEAD: More than 28,000 people in 21 states and Canada were bilked of more than $1 million in a pyramid scheme that offered to turn a $105 investment into a $46,700 profit, the Federal Bureau of Investigation has reported.


Leading Indicators Plunge by 1%
LEAD: The Government's main gauge of future economic growth plunged by 1 percent in February, its steepest drop in nine months, the Commerce Department said today.
But analysts said the decrease was misleading.


Man Shot by Officer's Gun
LEAD: A bullet from a Transit Authority police officer's gun hit a man in the head last night on a Brooklyn subway platform.
Transit Authority police would not say who fired the gun.
The officer, Richard Cummings, had been patroling the Lawrence Street station, a spokesman said.
The wounded man, Alphonso Fernandez, 37 years old, of Brooklyn, was listed in critical condition at Long Island College Hospital.


So You Want to Move to North Carolina?
LEAD: To the Editor:


TV Networks Start Ad Group
LEAD: Putting their common interests ahead of competition, CBS, NBC, and ABC yesterday announced the formation of a new organization, the Network Television Association, to promote network television to advertisers and agencies.


Offer by American To Frequent Fliers
LEAD: American Airlines said it would broaden its frequent-flier program to allow members to turn in their accumulated miles for discounts on cars, sailboats, watches and other products. ''We have taken mileage awards in an entirely new direction,'' Michael W. Gunn, senior vice president of marketing at American, said.


5 Central Americans Call for Disbanding Of the Contras Soon
LEAD: Five Central American Presidents called today for the full demobilization of the contra army by April 25 and urged that United States aid for resettling the rebels be offered only to those who give up their weapons.


Cubans Parade Hardware to Jam TV Marti
LEAD: President Fidel Castro has opened his country up to the foreign press this week for a glimpse at what Cuban officials describe as a nascent war of the airwaves.


Fernandez Seeks Stricter Budget Rules
LEAD: With several local districts in fiscal disarray, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez is moving to require all New York City schools to prepare budgets for public scrutiny and is setting tougher standards for hiring district business managers.


Just Good Drinking: Reds, $10 or Less
LEAD: THERE are two worlds of wine.
One is the world of the collectors and connoisseurs, people to whom wine is terribly important, people who will pay almost anything to get the rare bottles they want.
The other is the world of everyday consumers, people who think of wine the way they do television and an occasional thick steak, as something that adds to the quality of life, but in a low-key, unobtrusive way.


Ichan Sets USX Value
LEAD: A group led by Carl C. Icahn, the New York investor who is proposing to spin off the steel holdings of the USX Corporation, said yesterday that such a separation would yield about $48 a share for stockholders.


Review/Rock;   Eric Clapton: Performer Vs. Star
LEAD: Pop musicians, like actors who perform all week long, month after month, have to emote; it's their job.
A good pop musician has developed complex codes meant to prove to an audience exactly how much the artist cares about what he or she is doing, and how much creativity and passion are being produced on stage.


A Basic Pact On Satellites With Japan
LEAD: American and Japanese officials announced today that they had reached a basic agreement to allow foreign producers to compete for the satellite business of the Japanese Government and its public-sector entities.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: IT appears that little has changed at the Blue Benn Diner since the railroad car-style diner was installed in the early 1940's on a main thoroughfare about four miles from Bennington College and from Southern Vermont College.
Small jukeboxes still preside over the plastic and stainless steel tables flanked by worn wooden booths.


Topics of The Times;   Racism, to Gus Savage
LEAD: Representatives William Gray and Charles Rangel now condemn anti-Semitic remarks made by Representative Gus Savage of Illinois at a campaign rally they attended on his behalf.
So have numerous other House colleagues.
But instead of apologizing, Mr.
Savage has acted to reinforce his reputation as a bigot.


Israel Puts a Satellite in Orbit A Day After Threat by Iraqis
LEAD: Israel successfully launched its second experimental satellite this afternoon, a day after President Saddam Hussein of Iraq threatened to destroy ''half of Israel'' with chemical weapons if this nation becomes involved in an attack against Iraq.


About New York;   At 78, the Doctor Still Gives Them Chills and Fever
LEAD: Yesterday morning, 8 sharp.
The white-haired professor in the crisp blue suit approached the lectern.
The packed crowd leaned forward.


Neuville Molds the 60's for Modern Use
LEAD: CHARLOTTE NEUVILLE'S show yesterday started with a Pow!
Her black and white checks and bold black and white stripes woke up the audience on a rainy morning.
She then lulled them with soft beiges and mossy greens and ended with jazzy dance dresses dripping with beads for a final Pow!


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A two-time world figure skating champion, AJA ZANOVA defected from Czechoslovakia 40 years ago, while defending her title in London.
She attempted to return several times, most recently in 1978 upon the death of her father, but she was always denied permission.


Iran-Contra Judge Orders Jurors Sequestered After Press Contacts
LEAD: The Federal judge in the Iran-contra trial of John M. Poindexter today angrily ordered the jury sequestered during its deliberations after two jurors reported contacts with reporters.


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartmarx Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
342,183,000
327,379,000
Net inc
2,365,000
9,750,000
Share earns
.12
.50
Shares outst
19,616,000
19,478,000


Supercollider Stands at the Frontier of Science;   Major Discoveries Seen
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviews/Music;   Guitar Trio Plays Classics In Transcription
LEAD: In the days before recordings turned music into a spectator sport, most orchestral works were available in piano duet reductions for home consumption.
Musicians still enjoy them, and by extension one can understand that three excellent guitarists might want to get together and play, say, a symphony for their own edification.


L.I. Neighbor Found Guilty In Girl's Death
LEAD: In a case that generated fear and anger in the block where both victim and suspect lived, Robert Golub was convicted today of murdering 13-year-old Kelly Ann Tinyes and stashing her body in a sleeping bag in his family's basement in Valley Stream.


Ruddock-Dokes Matchup Headlines Card at Garden
LEAD: Big-time boxing returns to Madison Square Garden tonight with a card headlined by a pair of world-ranked heavyweights.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
General Motors named Robert C. Stempel chairman and chief executive, succeeding Roger B. Smith, who will retire in August after nearly a decade in office.
Mr.
Stempel, an engineer, is the company's president and chief operating officer.
The appointment had been expected. [Page D1.


G.M. Picks Its Next Chairman
LEAD: Directors of the General Motors Corporation, in a widely expected move, announced today that they had chosen Robert C. Stempel, the company's president and chief operating officer, as the next chairman and chief executive.
He will succeed Roger B. Smith, who will retire this August after nearly a decade in office.


China Ties New Demand to Dissident's Fate
LEAD: Stiffening resistance to American efforts to free the dissident Fang Lizhi, China has made new demands on the United States in discussing terms for his release, American officials said today.


7 Girls Guilty In Pin Attacks On 45 Women
LEAD: Seven black girls have been convicted of jabbing scores of white women in what prosecutors described as a series of racially motivated pin attacks that frightened residents of the Upper West Side last October.


Wheelabrator Deal On Merger Is Set
LEAD: Waste Management Inc. has reached an agreement with Wheelabrator Technologies Inc. to take control of the company for about $500 million.
Waste Management said it would increase its Wheelabrator stake to 55 percent, from 22 percent.
Wheelabrator shareholders will receive 0.469 share of Waste Management stock and 0.574 share of Wheelabrator stock for each Wheelabrator share.


Review/Rock;   Raw, Weary, Dank, Dreary
LEAD: Elemental rock intensity and willful posturing are inseparable with the Jesus and Mary Chain, the English band that gave two shows last weekend at the Ritz.
The songs are no-frills three-chord rock, stomping in classic structures (from the Velvet Underground, the Rolling Stones and the Beach Boys) that are topped with raw guitar noise; they carry lyrics that are bleak and dank, despairing and slightly threatening.


New Mail Sorters Planned
LEAD: The Postal Service Board of Governors today approved spending $379.3 million on new letter sorting machines, which will lead to bar-coding of all mail by 1995.
Bar codes are the series of lines like those used in supermarket pricing.
They are already used to sort much business mail.
The money will buy 1,349 machines that read the codes and sort mail automatically.


Bernard J. Miller, 76; Founded GQ Magazine
LEAD: Bernard J. Miller, an advertising and public-relations executive who was founding publisher of Gentlemen's Quarterly magazine, died of liver cancer yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.


Rebate Plan By Chrysler
LEAD: To drum up business for its most important product, the Chrysler Corporation promised today that current buyers of its mini-vans would be guaranteed any rebates that are offered on the vehicles between now and Sept. 30, when the current model year ends.


Magazine Closings
LEAD: Continuing to pare down its titles, A/S/M Communications, the publisher of Adweek, said yesterday that it was closing two of its trade magazines that were started this year.
The magazines are Media Week and Imaging Retail News, an offshoot of Photo District News.


Bridge
LEAD: The steadiest partnership in sight in the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship final in Fort Worth two weekends ago, in the view of many, was that of Ron Gerard of White Plains and Mike Kamil of Bergenfield, N.J., members of the winning team.


Citizens Utilities Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Utilities Co.  (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
338,655,960
306,821,000
Net inc
88,704,610
77,411,382
Share earns
2.01
1.71


I.B.F. Says It Will Rank Taylor Above Chavez
LEAD: Julio Cesar Chavez must defend against Meldrick Taylor within six months the junior welterweight title he took from Taylor in a disputed ending last month, the International Boxing Federation ruled yesterday.


Upheaval in the East;   East German Parties Aim for Cabinet by April 15
LEAD: East Germany's main political groups agreed today to try to form the nation's first non-Communist government before April 15 and resolve lingering differences over unification with West Germany.


Columbia S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia S&amp;L (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
379,100,000
b16,248,000
Share earns
-
.39
Shares outst
19,781,006
43,249,380
Yr net loss
591,095,000
b64,959,000
Share earns
-
1.55
Shares outst
19,634,358
42,820,938


People
LEAD: *
Paul Basile, an art director, and Jim McKennan, a copywriter, have been named senior vice presidents at Backer Spielvogel Bates.


Authors Warn on Gallimard
LEAD: The heirs of three of France's best-known 20th-century authors and 55 other writers threatened today to switch publishers if a corporate raider gained control of Editions Gallimard, France's largest independent publisher.


Treasury Prices Rise in Slow Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved marginally higher in very sluggish trading yesterday, as dealers moved to the sidelines in advance of March employment data on Friday.


Reuters Seeks Stock Buyback
LEAD: Reuters Holdings P.L.C., the British information services company, said on Monday that it would seek shareholder approval to buy back up to 10 percent of its stock and increase its borrowing power.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Treatment for Chicken Pox
A widely used antiviral drug has proved effective against the only common childhood illness not prevented by vaccination.
Page A23.
China Adamant on Dissident
China has stiffened its resistance to letting the dissident Fang Lizhi, now in the United States Embassy in Beijing, leave the country.


Gretzky Out of Lineup
LEAD: A bad back will keep Wayne Gretzky, the league's leading scorer, out of the Los Angeles Kings' lineup in the first two games of the National Hockey League playoffs in Calgary tonight and Friday night.
It will be the first time in Gretzky's 11-year N.H.L. career that he has missed a playoff game.


New AIDS Experiments Stir Hope and Wariness
LEAD: Kenya's chief medical scientist has reported that the symptoms of AIDS can be alleviated within a few weeks with small amounts of a licensed drug taken in a novel way.
His findings are viewed skeptically by top American experts, but follow-up studies are being planned in the United States and six other countries to determine within a few months whether the results can be repeated.


Upheaval in the East;   LITHUANIANS MEET GORBACHEV'S AIDE; SEEK TO EASE CRISIS
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's closest political ally conferred with a delegation of officials from Lithuania this afternoon amid signs that both sides were seeking a way out of the impasse created by Lithuania's declaration of independence and Moscow's refusal to accept it.


From Calvin Klein, Winning Simplicity
LEAD: THE Calvin Klein collection was quiet, wonderful and just about perfect.
The models wore no makeup.
The colors were never explosive.
The cut was always masterly, and there were no ruffles or any other extraneous decoration.
As a superbly but simply dressed woman often makes others at a social gathering look overdressed, Mr.


Upheaval in the East;   Bulgaria Adopts Election Laws and Names Leader
LEAD: Parliament adopted legislation today for free elections and elected Petar Mladenov, who initiated democratic reforms, to a newly created presidency.
Communists also renamed their disgraced party the Bulgarian Socialist Party.


The Scene: A Family Table The Script: A Tale of Freedom
LEAD: ON Monday at sundown Jews around the world will usher in Passover and repeat a story told for thousands of years.
That story, about the Jews' Exodus from slavery in Egypt, is far more than just a tale about freedom or an excuse to sit down to bowls of matzoh ball soup.
It is a journey that Jews are directed to take as they follow the words of the Haggadah and are instructed not only to say its prayers and carry out its rituals but to feel as if they actually were slaves in


House Approves Latin Aid; Senate Troubled by Priorities
LEAD: The House approved a special spending bill today that provides nearly all the money President Bush requested for Panama and Nicaragua, including $30 million to demobilize and resettle the Nicaraguan rebels.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: IF you consider the cuisines of the world, particularly those of the Middle East, Eastern Europe and Central Asia, lamb is one of the major sources of protein.
Beef-loving Americans may forget that has been true for centuries.


Washburn Arrested
LEAD: Chris Washburn, a former forward-center with Golden State and Atlanta in the National Basketball Association who was banned from the league in 1988 for repeatedly failing drug tests, was being held in the DeKalb County Jail without bond yesterday after being arrested on Monday in Decatur, Ga., on drug-possession charges.


A van Gogh Recovered In a Ransom Attempt
LEAD: A painting by Vincent van Gogh, missing since last month, was recovered when three men tried to pick up $1.3 million in ransom and were arrested, the police said today.


Bettors Angry at Late Casino
LEAD: Thousands of gamblers, angered when the opening of the gaming floor was delayed for six hours, milled about outside Donald Trump's new Taj Mahal Casino today, clogging hallways and chanting, ''Tell Donald to open the door!'' The billion-dollar casino, which opened with a test run on Monday, finally opened for low-level wagering today at 4:18 P.M.


G.E. Names a Lawyer To Environment Post
LEAD: A former Justice Department lawyer who specializes in the enforcement of environmental laws was named yesterday to the top environmental position at the General Electric Company.


American Medical Internaional Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Medical Internaional Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
738,006,000
678,173,000
Net inc
36,021,000
18,135,000
Share earns
.50
.26
6mo rev
1,466,235,000
1,324,930,000
Net loss
17,648,000
b18,575,000
Share earns
-
.26


Energy Development Partners reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energy Development Partners (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
67,611,000
52,579,000
Net inc
20,658,000
5,259,000
Share earns
1.00
.26


Of Fetuses and Safety In the Workplace
LEAD: To the Editor:


Haves Top Have-Nots With 5 Runs in the 9th
LEAD: They were like the city mouse and the country mouse as they met today, less than one week from the delayed start of the season: The Mets, so rich in talent that they could afford to send Bob Ojeda to the bullpen, and the Montreal Expos, so threadbare that they they offered a tryout to a 37-year-old pitcher from the Senior


A Bonanza For Trump Shuttle Users
LEAD: For many travelers on the Northeast's air shuttles, clouds now do have a silver lining.


Maybelline to Be Sold In a $300 Million Deal
LEAD: Seeking to disentangle itself from the financially unpredictable beauty-products business, the Schering-Plough Corporation agreed today to sell its Maybelline unit for $300 million to a group including the division's management and the Playtex Family Products Corporation.


Tyco Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyco Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
479,269,000
494,138,000
Net inc
26,306,000
22,039,000
Share earns
.64
.54
9mo sales
1,546,790,000
1,432,651,000
Net inc
83,885,000
66,208,000
Share earns
2.04
1.70


Real Estate;   South Bronx Will Revive, Builder Says
LEAD: DON'T quote Ogden Nash -''The Bronx? No Thonx!'' - to Bernard J. Rosenshein.


South Africa Sends Army to Halt Strife
LEAD: The South African Government began deploying army troops in Natal's strife-torn black townships today as Nelson Mandela and some other black leaders voiced misgivings but not outright objections over the move.


Riot in London: Angered and Alienated, Youths Find Target in a Hated Tax
LEAD: Brimming with anger and despair, a growing number of alienated young Britons who feel passed over by the Thatcher era seem to have found a target for their rage in an unpopular new Government tax.


PEC Israel Economic Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PEC Israel Economic Corp. (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,258,013
27,600,921
Net inc
15,003,890
10,514,562
Share earns
2.05
1.44


Arrests in Computer Break-Ins Show a Global Peril
LEAD: Three Australians have been arrested on charges of tampering with computers in the United States and Australia in a case that computer specialists say raises troubling questions about the vulnerability of technology to intruders operating beyond American borders and laws.


Bailey Financial Bids for Durham
LEAD: An investment group led by the Bailey Financial Group Inc. has offered to buy the Durham Corporation for $30 in cash and notes valued at $7.50 for each common share.
The total price of Durham's 8.4 million common shares is about $315 million.
Durham, based in Raleigh, N.C., is a holding company with interests in insurance, broadcasting and real estate.


Finding Success in Movie Niches
LEAD: The last few years have been trying ones for the independent movie studios as they struggled with the rising costs of making and marketing movies.
But recently things have gone strikingly well for the New Line Cinema Corporation.
Last weekend, ''Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles,'' a film about the four turtles made famous in comic books and on television, opened to the ninth-biggest audience in history, grossing $25.4 million.


Stocks Rally in Busy Day; Dow Up 36.26
LEAD: Stock prices rallied yesterday in brisk trading on the New York Stock Exchange in the wake of a strong recovery in Japanese stocks, with the Dow Jones industrial average advancing 36.26 points, to 2,736.71.


Armed Sanitation Police Are Wrong Approach to Recycling
LEAD: To the Editor:


Islanders Hoping to Keep LaFontaine Healthy
LEAD: It's one of those memories recalled often and with a note of resentment by fans and others around the Islanders, the one about how, the last time they were in the Stanley Cup playoffs, they lost to New Jersey in part because the Devils roughed up Pat LaFontaine, New York's small but dynamic superstar.


McDonald's Disputes Weight Labeling Law
LEAD: McDonald's, which was challenged years ago on the weight of its Quarter-Pounder, now faces a challenge for the way it sells salad.


Peters (J.M.) Co.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peters (J.M.) Co.(A)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
127,505,000
121,440,000
Net incbb
11,144,000
15,632,000
Share earns
.79
1.13
Shares outst
13,980,000
13,820,000
Yr rev
315,712,000
390,809,000
Net inc
25,334,000
38,693,000
Share earns
1.81
2.81
Shares outst
13,980,000
13,799,000


Landlord of Burned-Out Club Surrenders
LEAD: The owner of the building that housed the Happy Land Social Club surrendered on a year-old arrest warrant relating to safety violations yesterday as the Dinkins administration reversed a previous position and said it would move immediately to padlock 38 social clubs operating illegally.


Katharine Balfour, 69, An Actress and Writer
LEAD: Katharine Balfour, an actress and writer, died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also called Lou Gehrig's disease, at her home in Manhattan yesterday.
She was 69 years old.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Mar. 30
Mar. 23
Mar. 31
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.5
6.6
Distillate production, daily
2.7
2.6
2.7
Gasoline stocks
228.3
235.4
231.8
Distillate stocks
102.8
103.6
95.4
Crude imports, daily
6.0
6.3
4.4
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.7
2.7
Crude stocks
362.8
358.5
325.5
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
83.9
83.7
85.5


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, the insurance company, named Gary G. Benanav, the head of its international insurance operations, a senior vice president.


SENATORS APPROVE CLEAN AIR MEASURE BY A VOTE OF 89-11
LEAD: After a decade-long stalemate over clean-air legislation, the Senate passed a compromise bill tonight intended to reduce acid rain, urban smog and toxic chemicals in the air.
The vote was 89 to 11.


Valvano Almost Out?
LEAD: Jim Valvano is all but out as the head coach at North Carolina State, and all that remains is for the two sides to work out a financial settlement, his attorney Wayne Webb said yesterday.


New Tunes for Whistle Blowers
LEAD: Beginning next season college basketball games will be shorter, players will be allowed to play longer and officials will crack down on the sort of baiting and taunting that has become prevalent in the game.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hillenbrand Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 3
1990
1989
Revenue
279,315,000
237,564,000
Net inc
19,850,000
15,761,000
Share earns
.53
.42
Shares outst
37,116,111
37,280,571


Recession Coming? Ask the Consumer
LEAD: When the United States economy succumbs to recession, as it sooner or later must, it is a good bet that Dr.
Richard T. Curtin and his colleagues here at the University of Michigan will have seen it coming before almost anyone else.


In Texas Race, a Charge of 'Himmler' Tactics
LEAD: Former Gov.
Mark White, who placed third in the Democratic gubernatorial primary last month, today accused State Treasurer Ann Richards, the front-runner, of tactics like those of the Gestapo chief Heinrich Himmler.


Accounts
LEAD: * Lexus Dealer Association, to Team One Advertising.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Post Mixed Yields for the Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were mixed for the week ended yesterday.


Navratilova Motivated After Losing to Zvereva
LEAD: Martina Navratilova sounded unperturbed during a phone conversation Monday when she said her best-laid and hitherto unspoiled plans to win every match in 1990 were shattered last Saturday at the Virginia Slims of Houston after Katerina Maleeva beat her in the semifinals.


Digital Shows New Products
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation today introduced work station products that analysts say will increase the graphics capabilities of its machines.
Digital, based in Maynard, Mass., introduced its DEC station 5000, Model 200 desktop work station and other products at a news conference here.
Digital introduced its first


Congress May Consider Liquor Ad Warnings
LEAD: Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, and Representative Joseph P. Kennedy 2d, Democrat of Massachusetts, are expected to introduce legislation today that would require all advertisements for alcoholic beverages to include health warnings, similar to those that accompany ads for cigarettes.


Norman Patterson, 73, Designer of Hospitals
LEAD: Norman W. Patterson, an architect who designed the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, died March 28 after suffering a heart attack at his home.
He was 73 years old.


Paralyzing Polls
LEAD: We have come to a dead halt here. Polls are being taken.


Billboard Owners Switching, Not Fighting
LEAD: Three weeks ago, the billboard at the corner of 138th Street and Lenox Avenue advertised Salem cigarettes.
It now wishes a happy 85th birthday to Mother Hale, the founder of Hale House and the adoptive grandmother to innumerable abandoned and abused children.


Intergroup Filing
LEAD: Walker Street Associates L.P., which owns 8.4 percent of National Intergroup Inc., said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it had moved to try to raise its stake in the Pittsburgh-based distribution company to more than 10 percent.
Walker, controlled by a New York investor, Steven M.


Books of The Times;   Beauvoir's Life: Feminism's Wellspring, Sartre's Lover
LEAD:
Simone de Beauvoir
A Biography
By Deirdre Bair
718 pages. Illustrated. Summit Books.
$24.95.


Lessons
LEAD: When it comes to education, Kentucky has rarely made much of a splash.
Centre College in Danville upset mighty Harvard in football in 1921, and Sherleen Sisney, a Louisville high school teacher, became National Teacher of the Year in 1984.
But by and large the Bluegrass State has been content to paddle the backwaters of


New Hampshire Lawmakers Approve Abortion Rights Bill
LEAD: The state Legislature passed a largely symbolic bill today intended to insure that women can continue getting legal abortions until the fetus is able to live outside the womb.


U.N.L.V. Journal;   Campus Put on the Map by a Team
LEAD: The morning after the Runnin' Rebels of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas won the national collegiate basketball championship, the subject in Sociology 101 today was Emile Durkheim's concepts of the sacred and the profane.


Supercollider Stands at the Frontier of Science;   Pound Foolish
LEAD: To the Editor:


Leo van Munching, 88, Heineken Beer Trader
LEAD: Leo van Munching, the importer who brought Heineken beer to the United States, died of complications of Alzheimer's disease yesterday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Greenwich.


Twin Sisters Accused of Bilking Elderly Blind Man
LEAD: Identical 25-year-old twin sisters endeared themselves to an elderly blind Brooklyn man and then bilked him out of his life savings, the police have charged.


So You Want to Move to North Carolina?;   Accentuate the Positive
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wines From Czar Are Sold At Auction
LEAD: Wine collectors from around the Western world spent more than $1 million on Monday bidding for 13,000 bottles of Crimean dessert and fortified wine produced from the 1830's to 1945 and never before available in the West.


Moscow's Reforms: Turning Radical
LEAD: The Soviet economy is sliding downhill so fast that Mikhail Gorbachev must jettison milquetoast reforms in favor of radical change.
That will bring pain to Soviet workers.
And that, in turn, will exact a political price.
Even then, the economic outcome is uncertain.


$1.5 Billion in Debentures Are Offered by Fannie Mae
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, priced two debenture issues yesterday, totaling $1.5 billion, through its regular selling group.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ''Last week was the first week without seeing double,'' BARBARA BUSH said yesterday, talking about her radiation treatment for Graves' disease.
The disease is an immune system disorder that affected her thyroid and caused the First Lady to lose weight last year.
It also caused eye irritation and double vision.


Grants to Schools Aim at Innovation
LEAD: In an effort to help schools with innovative educational programs, the RJR Nabisco Foundation announced the first recipients of its Next Century Schools grants today.


Gartner Gives Rangers New Offensive Spark
LEAD: It had got to the point where Mike Gartner could have been forgiven if his belief in predestination had been shaken a bit.
Gartner, who had contributed a decade's worth of consistent production on the ice and solid citizenship off it to the Washington Capitals, was all of a sudden spending as much time talking to real estate agents as church groups.


Rehoboth Journal;   Fearful Namibian Tribe Raises Flag of Freedom
LEAD: Johannes Gerard Adolph Diergaardt likes to tell how his pioneer forebears wandered across the desert 120 years ago to found the community that he now heads.


Bonnett Back Home
LEAD: Neil Bonnett, suffering from severe amnesia as a result of a race-car accident on Sunday, was back at home in Birmingham, Ala., yesterday, but his wife, Susan, said full recovery may take days, a month or years.


Upheaval in the East;   Nothing but Nice Things to Say of Gorbachev
LEAD: A week after the Kremlin barred foreign correspondents from the crisis in Lithuania, they were invited today to get their news directly from the new office of the presidential press secretary and its inaugural occupant, Arkady Maslennikov.


New Owner Will Keep Lynne Palmer on Track
LEAD: The Lynne Palmer Agency, one of the gatekeepers to employment in New York's publishing world, has a new owner, Susan Gordon.


Review/Music;   Bach's B-Minor Mass In Period Rendering
LEAD: Any discussion of Bach's Mass in B minor must start with the understanding that there is no such work.
The four parts of the piece that goes by that name, composed separately over more than 20 years, were apparently never performed as a unit in Bach's lifetime.
They may not have been intended for liturgical service but rather as his summing up of the Latin contrapuntal tradition, just as in the ''Art of the


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We've known for a long time that the Soviets were a military superpower but not an economic one.
I wonder if we are as aware of how much our own world power has depended on our military strength.''
- Senator David L. Boren.
[A5:4.]


Hills Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hills Department Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 3
1990
1989
Sales
719,876,000
573,379,000
Net inc
27,360,000
21,027,000
Share earns
1.43
1.10
Yr sales
2,075,603,000
1,670,866,000
Net inc
2,908,000
11,515,000
Share earns
.15
.60


Mattingly Sets Opening-Day Deadline for a New Yank Deal
LEAD: Don Mattingly's quiet and uneventful spring took a sudden turn today when the Yankee first baseman, upset that there have been no talks about a new contract for him, said he would probably file for free agency when the season ends.


Economic Scene;   Cellular Phones: Room for Three?
LEAD: EVER wonder why cellular mobile telephones, the communications miracle of the 1980's, cost so much to use?
One corporate maverick, Federal Digital Cellular, claims to know the answer: monopoly power.
It is asking Federal regulators to make room for a third cellular phone competitor in each city.


Union President to Head Voter Commission
LEAD: A union official was elected chairman of New York City's Voter Assistance Commission yesterday.


Reviews/Music;   Bach Sung In Concert, Not Church
LEAD: Bach's ''St.
Matthew Passion'' is a very different work in the concert hall and in the churches for which it was intended.
For the composer, it was an instrument of worship.
His Leipzig parishioners not only listened, they also sang the chorales -providing their own commentaries on Christ's suffering, death and resurrection.


Ford Motor Credit Sells 10-Year Notes
LEAD: The Ford Motor Credit Corporation yesterday priced $200 million in 10-year notes through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Book Notes
LEAD:
More From Hemingway


Besieged Vermont Governor Rules Out Race for 4th Term
LEAD: Vermont's Governor, Madeleine M. Kunin, faced with budget problems and a backlash against a tough environmental planning law, announced today that she would not seek a fourth two-year term this fall.


Review/Theater;   Soviet Georgians' Essential 'Lear'
LEAD: Robert Sturua's extraordinary production of ''King Lear'' is so unyielding in its intensity that one can see why the Rustaveli Theater Company from Soviet Georgia might regard Shakespeare as its national playwright.
This distinguished company began an all too brief one-week engagement on Monday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Majestic Theater.


Eastern Creditors Reported To Reject Latest Debt Plan
LEAD: The unsecured creditors of Eastern Airlines yesterday voted to reject the carrier's latest proposal to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy and they agreed to seek the appointment of a trustee to sell the airline, two people close to the creditors' committee said.


Dollar Ends Mostly Mixed; Finance Talks Are Awaited
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed against major foreign currencies in light trading yesterday as dealers lacked incentives to buy or sell heavily.


Clean Air Act: The Senate Bill
LEAD:
AIRBORNE CHEMICALS
Current Law: Eight pollutants have been controlled since 1970.
Bush Proposal: Would control half the sources of about 191 toxic substances in seven years.
Environmental Portection Agency would determine how and when to regulate the remainder.
WHAT THE FULL SENATE APPROVED: Would require industrial plants to install best technology available to control the release of 191 hazardous chemicals linked to cancer, nervous disorders and birth defects.


Topics of The Times;   The Chancellor's Duty
LEAD: By superseding a local school board in Brooklyn's District 17, the New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, encourages critics who charge that he has become a dictator.
In fact, the takeover is less a grab for power than an attempt to reassure the public about the school system's integrity.


Thomas F. Daly, 87, Retired Law Partner
LEAD: Thomas F. Daly, a retired partner in the New York law firm of Lord, Day &amp; Lord, now known as Lord, Day &amp; Lord, Barrett &amp; Smith, died on Monday at Riverview Hospital in Red Bank, N.J.
He was 87 years old and lived in Rumson, N.J.


Official Faults Charter-Linked Money Pleas
LEAD: New York City's budget director said yesterday that some elected officials and agencies were using their revised duties under the new city charter as an excuse to ask for money that they do not need.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: DOUGLAS A. PARKER and his 2-year-old son were shopping in a store in their neighborhood in Manhattan.
In addition to newspapers and candy bars and greeting cards and such, the store has an impressive display of stuffed dolls, a fact that did not go unnoticed by the youngster.
It was not until they returned home that Mr.


From Nobody to Somebody in Art
LEAD: Being an art star at the age of 58 makes John Baldessari slightly nervous. ''It's a bit scary to have acceptance,'' the artist said the other day. ''You wonder what you're doing wrong.''


Market Place;   Bailout Agency Stirs Small Crisis
LEAD: A GOVERNMENT agency threw a corner of the financial markets for a loop two weeks ago when it announced that it had the authority to withhold interest payments on mortgage-backed bonds issued by savings and loans that have since gone into receivership.


34 Killed in Bomb Blast at Hindu Rite in Punjab
LEAD: At least 34 people were killed in Punjab State today when a bomb believed to have been set by Sikh radicals exploded in the middle of a Hindu religious procession.


Safety Improvements Are Planned for Central Park
LEAD: More recreation programs to draw young people into the north end of Central Park will be started this summer, volunteer patrols will be stepped up and better paths and signs are planned to make the park safer, New York City officials and a private group that supports the park said yesterday.


Upheaval in the East;   Dual Bluffs On Lithuania
LEAD: Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, arrived in Washington today for meetings with President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, and Administration officials said he faces some tough talk on Lithuania later this week.


Eating Well
LEAD: DURING a recent visit to a bookstore, I watched as a woman foraged through the aisles of the health section, filling her shopping basket with books on diet and nutrition.
A few books she gathered were calorie- and fat-counters, but most were books offering suggestions for healthful eating.
Her total bill must have been close to $70.


Music Played in 1971 as Police Found Bodies of 5
LEAD: As two police officers made their way through John E. List's darkened house toward the bodies of his wife, mother and three children, they were greeted by a recording of funereal organ music, one of the officers testified today.


The Shark Has Swum A Long Way
LEAD: For Duke, even their entrance into the McNichols Sports Arena Monday night was not auspicious.
A cluster of University of Nevada-Las Vegas fans, wearing the red school sweaters, waited in the dusk for the Duke team bus to arrive, and when it did, the fans greeted the debarking with a chant that sounded very much like: ''Air Ball!


Kemp's Choice Is Ruled Out for a New Post
LEAD: The White House said today that it would not nominate Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp's choice to lead a new housing agency.
Mr.
Kemp's selection, Mary K. Bush, is under investigation for awarding no-bid contracts to friends.


The Stress of Being an Author And Married to Salman Rushdie
LEAD: ''We were jubilant,'' Marianne Wiggins said of the June morning last year when she and her husband, Salman Rushdie, learned that the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini had died.


Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cascade Corp. (OTC)
Year to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
159,800,000
140,165,000
Net inc
10,335,000
11,670,000
Share earns
1.72
1.94


Unifirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unifirst Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 24
1990
1989
Revenue
54,806,000
52,792,000
Net inc
2,956,000
2,591,000
Share earns
.29
.26
Shares outst
10,216,655
10,169,257
6mo rev
111,197,000
106,282,000
Net inc
6,737,000
5,539,000
Share earns
.66
.55
Shares outst
10,214,364
10,161,896


Fairfield Communities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairfield Communities (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
58,240,000
52,866,000
Net loss
b25,073,000
c1,653,000
Share earns
-
.17
Yr rev
240,324,000
210,423,000
Net loss
b24,769,000
c3,016,000
Share earns
-
.28


Rebels No. 1, at Last; No Replays Needed
LEAD: Nevada-Las Vegas is the national basketball champion.
There are no doubts about it, no calls for instant replay, no reflections on a missed foul shot that may have turned the tide, no excited chatter about a last-second shot that may or may not have beaten the buzzer.
All there is are hushed and, in some corners, grudging accolades for a team and a performance that ranks among the best in the 51-year history of the national tournament.


Y.&amp;R. Makes A Hollywood Comeback
LEAD: YOUNG &amp; RUBICAM re-entered the business of movie marketing yesterday with its appointment to plan and buy newspaper, radio and local television advertising for the 20th Century Fox Film Corporation.
The studio spends about $45 million a year on local media.


U.S. Easing Disk Curbs
LEAD: The Commerce Department moved on Monday to free exports of hard-disk drives for personal computers.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
76ers Continue to Put Up Points
Charles Barkley scored 26 points, including 14 in the third period, as the 76ers won their eighth consecutive game over all by beating the Houston Rockets, 133-112, last night in Philadelphia.
Rick Mahorn added 23 points for the 76ers.
Philadelphia improved its home record to 32-5.


Sale at SmithKline
LEAD: The SmithKline Beecham Corporation has sold three British food businesses to CPC International Inc. for $255 million in its plan to pare debt.
The businesses - Ambrosia desserts, Bovril beef extracts and Marmite bread spread - had combined sales of $145 million last year, CPC said.
The proceeds will help the company reduce the $3 billion in debt incurred when the SmithKline Beckman Corporation merged with the Beecham Group P.L.C.


Iraq Raises Its Volume, and Arab Hopes
LEAD: When a cease-fire stilled Iraq's war with Iran two years ago, the wisdom or peril perceived by many in this region was that, having disposed of the menace from Teheran, Iraq would return to an older agenda: its establishment as the region's heavyweight in the contest with Israel.


TCG International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCG International
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
409,643,000
268,394,000
Net inc
b10,437,000
b14,593,000
Share earns
.49
.73
b-After extraordinary credits of $3.2 million, or 15 cents a share, for the latest year and $8,211,000, or 41 cents a share, for 1988.


U.S. Urged to Emphasize Economic Strength
LEAD: Promoting a new foreign policy that is not rooted in rivalry with the Soviets, the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, David L. Boren, warned today that the United States risks losing its pre-eminence unless it adjusts to a world order based on economic, not military, might.


Standard Brands Paint reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Brands Paint (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 28
1990
1989
Sales
67,737,000
68,211,000
Net loss
1,220,000
b317,000
Yr sales
314,023,000
304,356,000
Net inc
3,708,000
b4,816,000
Share earns
.36
.57
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $681,000 for the quarter and $1,135,000 for the year; the year also included an extraordinary credit of $1,145,000 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


A Treasure From the Seas, but Whose?
LEAD: When the submersible robot Nemo surfaced from the depths of the Atlantic one day last summer, its mechanical arms clutching a gleaming batch of gold coins and bars, the salvagers of the 132-year-old wreck of the S.S.
Central America figured their dream of fabulous riches - perhaps a billion dollars or more - had at last come true.


MCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b3,009,000
cd448,870,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr net loss
b28,320,000
d977,849,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $11,708,000 for the quarter and $12,306,000 for the year.


Binks Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Binks Manufacturing (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
56,836,000
50,820,000
Net inc
2,102,000
1,872,000
Share earns
.71
.66
Shares outst
2,941,000
2,838,317


Star Rookie Is Unawed by Masters
LEAD: Conventional wisdom says that first-time starters at the Masters are basically fodder for the field.
If the quicksilver putting surfaces don't get them, the tournament's mystique will.


Topics of The Times;   Trade Secret
LEAD: Neiman Marcus, the upscale Texas department store, set an unbeatable standard for lavish Christmas presents several years ago by offering ''his'' and ''hers'' airplanes.
Now the spring catalogue of New York City's upscale gadget emporium, Hammacher Schlemmer, offers the latest in how to flit from here to there - without being detected: the B-2


Met Opera Reaches Pact For Summer Attractions
LEAD: The Metropolitan Opera Association has chosen the Entertainment Corporation U.S.A. to present summer attractions at the Metropolitan Opera House beginning in 1991.
The four-year agreement, announced yesterday at the Met by representatives of the two organizations, is the first long-term arrangement between the Met and an outside presenter of international dance and music attractions since the days of Sol


Ernst Freese, 64, Dies; A Molecular Biologist
LEAD: Ernst Freese, a scientist who was an expert on chemical influences on reproduction and cancer, died of a cerebral hemorrhage on Friday at the Frederick (Md.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 64 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.


Food Notes
LEAD:
Takeout for Seders


The Pop Life
LEAD:
New Inspiration


Vote-Machine Lobbyist Is Said to Report a Bribe
LEAD: A lobbyist for a voting-machine company seeking a contract with the Board of Elections has told investigators that a board member asked him for a bribe, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.


Savings Rules On Disclosures
LEAD: The agency that regulates savings and loan associations said on Monday that it was drafting new rules to cover the release of customers' financial records by federally chartered savings institutions.


Corning Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corning Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 25
1990
1989
Sales
603,200,000
533,500,000
Net inc
b47,100,000
b41,800,000
Share earns
.49
.47
b-Included extraordinary tax benefits of $400,000 which included non-operating after-tax gains of $4.7 million for the latest quarter and $700,000, or 1 cent a share, which included non-operating after-tax gains of $2.6 million for the year-ago period.


Xerox Sets A Write-Off
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation said today that it would take a pretax write-off of nearly $400 million in the first quarter because of its investment in VMS Realty Partners.


One-Shot Funds Backed For Connecticut Budget
LEAD: The General Assembly's tax committee has approved a series of one-year revenue-raising measures that would shore up the state's worsening finances without a major election-year tax increase.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Reviews/Music;   Debussy From a Duo And Friends
LEAD: For their concert at Town Hall on Monday evening, the flutist Linda Chesis and the harpist Sara Cutler decided to look beyond the duo repertory they have been playing since 1982, and to offer an evening of richly textured chamber music.
To that end, they invited some colleagues to collaborate on an evening of works by Claude


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.31
9.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.83
7.83
8.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.82
7.81
8.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.67
8.68
9.22
30-YR.


Lebanon's Currency Hits All-Time Low; Mediation Bid Ends
LEAD: Lebanese saw the value of their money sink to a new low today as mediators trying to end more than two months of Christian fighting ended their mission without success.


China Protest Leader Escapes
LEAD: Chai Ling, one of the top student leaders of last year's democracy movement in Beijing, made a television appearance today to announce her escape to the West after 10 months as a fugitive in China.


Reviews/Music;   Classical Light, Romantic Heat And a Dazzler
LEAD: Gavin Martin, a pianist who gave a debut concert at Weill Recital Hall on Sunday afternoon, is a doctoral candidate at the Manhattan School of Music, and has already started to make his way in the musical world.
Mr.
Martin's achievements are founded on a secure technique, good pianistic instincts and an interpretive spirit that shows the influence of two of his teachers, Jorge Bolet and Gary


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about Lee Atwater, the Republican national chairman, misquoted a spokeswoman's description of his brain tumor.
The spokeswoman, Leslie Goodman, said the tumor was ''non-malignant'' and had ''the potential to behave aggressively.'' She did not call it benign.


Long Lake Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Long Lake Energy
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,250,893
1,830,941
Net loss
758,055
879,597
Shares outst
10,229,261
10,266,928
Yr rev
9,037,723
4,975,011
Net inc
5,654,505
b5,415,944
Share earns
.55
-
Shares outst
10,228,750
10,226,928


Gold Prices Rise Sharply On Middle Eastern Buying
LEAD: Gold futures prices rose sharply yesterday in a burst of Middle Eastern buying, possibly by some of the investors whose sale last week of at least a million ounces of the metal initiated a collapse in prices to four-and-a-half-month lows.


New York Court Sets a Standard For Housing Aid
LEAD: New York State's highest court ruled today that the state must pay welfare recipients a monthly shelter allowance that bears ''a reasonable relation'' to the cost of their housing.


Devils' Playoff Appearance Is Not a Surprise This Time
LEAD: Unlike their first trip to the Stanley Cup playoffs two years ago, the Devils are not going to be the surprise team this time.
They are a talented club with plenty of depth and experience that clinched its playoff berth convincingly rather than in overtime on the last day of the season.


Rates Decline At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates declined at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper yesterday for the third consecutive week and are at their lowest levels since the beginning of March.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: April Fool's Day came late.
A hastily arranged ''news conference'' was held yesterday at the Ritz Carlton Hotel in Boston, where a woman in a revealing green suit presented herself as MARLA MAPLES, who has been linked romantically with DONALD TRUMP.


Relief for the AIDS Disaster
LEAD: In a recent heartfelt speech, President Bush called for more compassion and less discrimination against victims of AIDS.
That was welcome moral leadership, but AIDS, now pushing health care systems of big cities into crisis, demands much more from Washington.
A bill pending in Congress recognizes the urgent need.


Miller (Herman) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller (Herman) Inc.(O)
Qtr to Mar 3
1990
1989
Sales
200,695,000
192,578,000
Net inc
11,462,000
10,892,000
Share earns
.47
.45
Shares outst
24,226,717
24,192,588
9mo sales
609,280,000
588,265,000
Net inc
31,184,000
b35,601,000
Share earns
1.29
1.46
Shares outst
24,265,344
24,361,960


Lawyers Begin Marcos Trial In Air of Raucous Contention
LEAD: With raucous, contentious opening statements in a Federal courthouse in Manhattan, prosecutors said yesterday that Imelda Marcos had committed crimes of ''theft, fraud and deceit on an incredible scale,'' but defense lawyers argued that she had acted with the knowledge and even encouragement of the United States


ANOTHER BUS SHOT IN DRIVERS' STRIKE
LEAD: At least five shots struck a Southeastern Trailways bus today as it traveled along a Greyhound Lines route from Nashville to Louisville, the state police said.


Rocket May Open A New Era
LEAD: A small company, working with the Pentagon and NASA, is scheduled to launch a 50-foot winged rocket from a B-52 flying over the Pacific Ocean today in a pioneering effort to provide a new way to send spacecraft into orbit.


Rowe Furniture Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rowe Furniture Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Mar 4
1990
1989
Sales
19,594,000
21,535,000
Net inc
472,000
655,000
Share earns
.18
.25


Getty Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Getty Petroleum (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
324,544,000
298,348,000
Net inc
6,141,000
9,759,000
Share earns
.47
.73
Shares outst
13,017,000
13,314,000
Yr rev
1,183,744,000
1,040,755,000
Net inc
22,987,000
28,418,000
Share earns
1.75
2.13
Shares outst
13,161,000
13,314,000


United Payment
LEAD: The UAL Corporation said its United Airlines unit had agreed to pay $77.5 million to settle several lawsuits filed by affiliates of the Texas Air Corporation, according to a Securities and Exchange Commission filing.
The lawsuits contended that United and American Airlines had illegally monopolized or tried to monopolize the computer reservations system in various markets.


Japanese Plan On Southland
LEAD: Ito-Yokado, the giant Japanese supermarket operator that agreed last month to buy a big share of the Southland Corporation, said today that it had no plans to bail out the financially pressed operator of the 7-Eleven convenience stores.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Airbus Industrie, Paris, the four-nation European consortium, said Turk Hava Yollari, the Turkish airline, would order five Airbus A340-300's and would take options on five more.
Terms were not disclosed.


ZG Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ZG Energy Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
918,738
936,510
Net loss
109,440
683,375
Yr rev
5,046,411
4,130,871
Net inc
148,246
b1,528,470
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A3-13
A delegation of Lithuanians conferred with President Gorbachev's closest political ally amid signs that both sides want to end the impasse created after the Baltic republic declared its independence last month.
Page A1
News analysis: Foreign Minister Eduard A.


Stealth's Panama Mission Reported Marred by Error
LEAD: As the Defense Department today disclosed new information about its Stealth fighter plane, senior Pentagon officials said the aircraft's first combat mission in Panama was marred by pilot error and a critical target was missed by hundreds of yards.


If the Bread Is Getting Better, Can the City Be Far Behind?
LEAD: FOR 73 years, Louis Orwasher, the patriarch of Orwasher's Bakery in the Yorkville section of Manhattan, has charted the relationship between the quality of bread and the quality of life in his home town.
The bread has got better lately in New York and Mr.
Orwasher wouldn't be surprised if the city follows suit.


Refinery's Neighbors Count Sorrows, and Riches
LEAD: After reaching one of the largest settlements ever recorded in a lawsuit over environmental contamination, the people on the south side of this oil refinery city today counted their sorrows as well as their riches.


U.S. and Japan Agree On Satellite Contracts
LEAD: American and Japanese officials announced yesterday that they had reached an agreement allowing foreigners to compete for the satellite business of the Japanese Government and state-run companies.


Anti-Takeover Proposal Gains in Pennsylvania
LEAD: The Pennsylvania House passed the nation's toughest anti-takeover measure yesterday by an overwhelming vote of 182 to 10.
The bill, which has already passed the Senate, is expected to be approved quickly by a conference committee, and the Governor has said he will sign it.


In U.S. School Spending, Question Is How Much
LEAD: The poster in the Senate subcommittee room portrays several children clamb ering over a Jungle Gym, with the legend: ''It Will Be a Great Day When Our Schools Get All the Money They Need, and the Air Force Has to Hold a Bake Sale to Buy a Bomber.''


Cuomo and G.O.P. at Work On Income-Tax Cut Accord
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders sketched a possible compromise on the state budget today that would freeze income-tax rates for this year and then phase in a scheduled cut.
But after a three-hour meeting that broke shortly before midnight, state leaders still appeared to be far apart on the details of the plan.


Wilkins and Jackson Help Knicks Revive
LEAD: There is nothing wrong with the Knicks that an unselfish effort on offense and an excellent half-court defense won't cure.


The Political Stampede on Execution
LEAD: From one end of the country to the other, political candidates this year are competing to persuade voters that if elected, they would be more vigorous, more vigilant and more relentless than their opponents in the application of the death penalty.


Pesticide Compliance Uneven, Report Finds
LEAD: Some foreign fruit and vegetable producers try to observe bans on certain pesticides imposed in the United States, but others are often unaware of restrictions, according to a report prepared for Congress by the General Accounting Office.


Manville Payments
LEAD: The Manville Property Damage Settlement Trust has completed a review of 14,000 claims for asbestos exposure and has paid $68 million to some of the claimants, the trust announced on Monday.


PEN Gala Raises Money, but Some Wonder at What Price
LEAD: As authors and the very wealthy prepare to gather today at the PEN-Mont Blanc Gala Dinner, some people in the book world are asking whether writers and the rich should become accustomed to rubbing shoulders in this way and for such ends.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly


American Schools Abroad Find a Global Niche
LEAD: Until two years ago, a small pear-shaped room at the 1,160-student American School in London housed the nurse's office.
Today, on any weekday morning, a cluster of children can be found there studying English as a second language.
On the wall is a large map of the world, and every time a child joins the class a colored pin is placed on the spot where that child was born.


Study Shows That Antiviral Drug Aids Children With Chicken Pox
LEAD: A widely used antiviral drug can significantly shorten the course and severity of chicken pox infections in normal children, researchers reported yesterday.


Super Valu Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Super Valu Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 24
1990
1989
Sales
2,643,473,000
2,506,988,000
Net inc
43,506,000
37,955,000
Share earns
.58
.51
Shares outst
75,052,000
74,847,000
Yr sales
11,136,026,000
10,296,325,000
Net inc
147,746,000
137,468,000
Share earns
1.97
1.84
Shares outst
74,972,000
74,785,000


Williams-Sonoma reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams-Sonoma (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 28
1990
1989
Sales
83,461,000
64,202,000
Net inc
7,227,000
4,491,000
Share earns
1.13
.75
Shares outst
6,366,000
5,976,000
Yr sales
218,171,000
174,179,000
Net inc
8,969,000
5,205,000
Share earns
1.42
.87
Shares outst
6,296,000
5,953,000


Rikers I. Worker Is Shot to Death During Robbery
LEAD: A counselor who co-workers said had helped thousands of Rikers Island inmates in his 33-year career was shot to death early yesterday during a robbery on his way to work, the police said.


Industry Wary of Clean-Air Bill
LEAD: Industrial companies across America reacted with varying degrees of pessimism to the clean-air legislation passed by the Senate on Tuesday.
They are resigned to paying billions of dollars in additional pollution-control costs but warn that those costs will be passed on to consumers.


Circle K Debt Plan
LEAD: The Circle K Corporation, the nation's second-largest chain of convenience stores, said today that it had reached an agreement with lenders to restructure part of its $1.3 billion debt.
It said the agreement was with its bank lenders, holders of $200 million in senior secured notes and the American Financial Corporation, Circle K's largest shareholder and a creditor.


Transtector Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transtector Systems Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,765,361
2,484,352
Net loss
556,127
b129,401
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
3,382,566
3,662,708
Yr sales
8,465,374
9,672,042
Net loss
475,694
b617,172
Share earns
-
.17
Shares outst
3,412,722
3,689,758


Hall Financial Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hall Financial Group (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,190,000
34,769,000
Net loss
6,195,000
5,867,000


Railroad Fincl Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Railroad Fincl Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
111,000
597,000
Yr net loss
1,948,000
698,000


Aide to Nixon Says The Former Leader Has Heart Ailment
LEAD: Former President Richard M. Nixon has a heart disturbance that is not life-threatening but is reducing his stamina, and his doctors have advised him to cancel scheduled activities for two weeks, an aide said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the experimental use of the drug alpha interferon to treat AIDS misidentified the newsletter that reported the findings.
It was Biotechnology Newswatch, not Biotechnology Newsletter.


ICN Biomedicals reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ICN Biomedicals (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
32,969,000
12,920,000
Net inc
1,913,000
b942,000
Share earns
.18
.09
Shares outst
10,843,000
10,631,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $273,000, or 3 cents a share, due to the repurchase of debt.


Mets' Opener to Bring Sweet Sounds to Shea


Inrad Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inrad Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,566,645
3,791,955
Net loss
81,675
55,321
Shares outst
1,388,355
1,387,840


East Germany's Mass Graves Prompt Inquiry by Moscow
LEAD: The Soviet Union said today that it had opened an investigation into mass graves where thousands were buried after World War II in Soviet-occupied East Germany.


Arts Endowment Hearing Scene of Emotional Debate
LEAD: Congressional supporters and critics of the National Endowment for the Arts engaged in an emotional debate today over the issues of obscenity, artistic freedom and Federal support of the arts.


Ojeda Can Conquer Injuries but Not Math
LEAD: ''When it was my elbow,'' Bob Ojeda said, remembering the hard times, ''I knew who the enemy was: my elbow.
When it was my finger, I knew who the enemy was: my finger.''


The Juicer From Outer Space
LEAD: PHILIPPE STARCK, the seemingly unstoppable French designer of interiors, furniture and boats, has now given three common household objects a futuristic shape.


Cattleguard Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cattleguard Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,700,000
1,800,000
Net loss
2,500,000
620,662
Shares outst
5,300,000
975,000


Taro Vit Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Taro Vit Industries (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,790,000
9,270,000
Net loss
201,000
b119,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


A Walker That Rolls And Is Lightweight, Too
LEAD: THE Samhall Group is a Swedish company that makes products for the occupationally handicapped.
Of its 35,000 employees, 30,000 are handicapped.


Books of The Times;   When an Illness Binds and Defines
LEAD:
Love and Other Infectious Diseases
A Memoir
By Molly Haskell
302 pages. William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


Riggs National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Riggs National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,701,000
10,579,000
Per share
.27
.77


Delmed Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delmed Inc. (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,820,000
21,071,000
Net loss
b4,908,000
bc5,948,000
Shares outst
45,367,000
43,126,000
b-Included charges of $1,575,000 in the latest year and $2,000,000 in the prior year, both from settlement of litigation.


Steve's Homemade Ice Cream reports earnings for Year to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Steve's Homemade Ice Cream (OTC)
Year to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
33,429,000
21,817,000
Net inc
b1,428,000
1,201,000
Share earns
.12
.10
b-Included a gain from the early extinguishment of debt of $424,000, or 3 cents a share.


Salvador and Rebels Agree to New Talks
LEAD: Representatives of El Salvador's United States-backed Government and the rebel movement opposing it signed an agreement here today to resume talks to end the country's civil war.


Richard A. Levin, 57, Ex-Federal Prosecutor
LEAD: Richard Aaron Levin, a former Federal prosecutor and an investment fund manager, died of stomach cancer on Tuesday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old and lived in South Orange, N.J.


Pan Am Offers 'Hourly' Paper
LEAD: A 24-page tabloid billed as the nation's first hourly newspaper was introduced on Monday on a midafternoon flight from Washington to New York.


Conan in Comics? Yes. Hulk? Sure. But Fafner? Wotan?
LEAD: ''GRONNK'' cries Alberich the toad as Wotan steps on him. ''AROOOOOOOOO'' echoes Hunding's horn as he pursues Siegmund and Sieglinde with murderous intent. ''HARRARG'' howls Fafner the dragon during his fight with Siegfried. ''KTHOMP'' goes his mighty claw as it slams into the ground.


Overkill in Panama
LEAD: On the same day the U.S. invaded Panama last December, the Lithuanian Communist Party declared its independence from the overall Soviet party.
In an article on Dec. 22, 1989, I pointed out that the news from Lithuania had been ''little noticed among the headlines'' about Panama.


Review/Theater;   Of a Slow Cancer Death And the Pain of a Friend
LEAD: The grinding, day-to-day realities of terminal illness have rarely been dramatized on the stage with the exhaustive precision that Anne Commire's drama ''Starting Monday'' brings to a subject that is almost unavoidably depressing.


ATS Money Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ATS Money Systems
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
583,774
436,965
Net loss
b156,498
c269,507
Yr rev
3,918,984
2,973,336
Net inc
b466,605
d159,686
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
5,449,202
4,166,000


Czar Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Czar Resources
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,160,000
16,194,000
Net inc
1,301,000
1,472,000
Share earns
.05
.05
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Children's Discovery Centers reports earnings for Year to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Children's Discovery Centers
Year to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
15,720,000
10,611,000
Net inc
223,000
303,000
Share earns
.04
.06
Shares outst
5,837,000
5,152,000


Abraham Lincoln Fedl Svgs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abraham Lincoln Fedl Svgs
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
901,000
b228,000
Share earns
-
.38
9mo net loss
2,569,000
b470,000
Share earns
-
.79
b-Net income


Electrosound Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electrosound Group Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
4,595,000
7,054,000
Net loss
b710,000
c259,000
9mo rev
19,600,000
24,958,000
Net loss
b99,000
c7,221,000
b-Included an extraordinary charge of $186,000 from a reversal of tax-loss carryforward for the quarter and the 9 months included an extraordinary tax benefit of $28,000.


Jet Makes Emergency Landing
LEAD: A Boston-bound Eastern Airlines jetliner made an emergency landing at National Airport today after the rear stairway of the Boeing 727 popped open, an airport spokesman, David Hess, said.
No injuries were reported.


Copper Prices Fall Sharply As Miners' Strike Is Settled
LEAD: Prices of copper futures fell sharply yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange.
Selling was prompted partly by settlement of a 24-day strike against the Southern Peru Copper Corporation.


Republicans Sidestep Cuomo Barbs
LEAD: New York's budget is late and the state is in a crisis ''wrought by Republicans,'' said Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo. ''Every day there's more pain,'' he told reporters in the Capitol earlier this week. ''Every day there's more shame.''


Eastex Energy Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastex Energy Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
139,067,000
84,496,000
Net loss
445,000
69,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   U.S.-Japan Partnership Wins a Job
LEAD: IN an unusual cross-cultural pairing of agencies, NEC Technologies Inc. has awarded the advertising assignment for an innovative video game to a joint venture formed by TBWA Advertising and Hakuhodo Advertising America.


Study Backs Advice on Preventing Heart Disease
LEAD: A study of more than 12,000 middle-aged men found that those given help to stop smoking, lower their blood pressure, lose weight and go on cholesterol-lowering diets substantially cut their risk of heart attack.


Energy Ventures Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energy Ventures Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,148,000
15,822,000
Net inc
1,213,000
73,000
Share earns
.13
.01
Yr rev
107,927,000
54,191,000
Net inc
2,851,000
882,000
Share earns
.31
.10


Penny Stock Oversight Bill
LEAD: A key member of the House of Representatives introduced legislation today to increase Federal oversight of the nation's penny stock market.


Dollar Is Narrowly Mixed; Gold Prices Finish Higher
LEAD: The dollar ended narrowly mixed against major foreign currencies yesterday as dealers marked time before the release of Government unemployment data and this weekend's meeting in Paris of finance ministers and central bankers of the seven leading industrial nations.


All American Semiconductor reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* All American Semiconductor
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
37,076,048
33,093,173
Net loss
205,040
b1,037,077
Share earns
-
.28
b-Net income
Year-ago share earnings are adjusted for a 5-for-4 stock split effect in February 1989.


Baruch School Losing Chief Amid Unease
LEAD: The president of Bernard M. Baruch College, which operates the nation's largest business school, announced his retirement yesterday amid uncertainty over the school's accreditation.


Carrington Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carrington Laboratories Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
2,431,000
1,740,000
Net loss
657,000
b193,000
b-After a gain from discontinued operations of $28,000, or 1 cent a share.


Corcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corcom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,028,000
8,522,000
Net loss
3,518,000
b33,000
Share earns
-
.01
Yr sales
32,206,000
32,948,000
Net loss
4,440,000
2,588,000
b-Net income


Playland Was Run as Political Club, Jury Says
LEAD: A report by a Westchester County grand jury released today says that the county's Playland Amusement Park in Rye was run as a ''cozy politicized club'' by Republican officials, who conducted business there ''with sometimes stunning indifference to sound management.''


Woman, 40, Is Slain; Had Sought Protection
LEAD: A Brooklyn woman who had sought court protection from her companion was stabbed to death yesterday, and the companion was being sought as the prime suspect, the police said.


Ironstone Group Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ironstone Group Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
250,088,000
135,757,000
Net loss
12,915,000
b1,368,000
Share earns
-
.12
b-Net income
The company said 1989 results included restructuring charges of $4.7 million.


Gemco National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gemco National (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
287,000
c359,000
Yr net loss
b1,090,000
c621,000
b-Included an extraordinary charge from a loss on disposal of discontinued operations of $750,000.
c-After income from discontinued operations of $4,000 for the quarter and $560,000 for the year, and extraordinary charges from a loss on disposal of discontinued operations of $436,000 and $938,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Clarus Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clarus Corp.
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
62,445,000
67,316,000
Net loss
1,454,000
b339,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income
Results are in Canadian dollars.


International Mobile MaFchines reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Mobile MaFchines (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,471,037
4,329,982
Net loss
19,073,550
21,444,878


First National Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Corp. (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,310,331
1,195,767
Net inc
b440,610
b315,588
Share earns
.23
.15
b-Included extraordinary tax benefits of $148,000 and $95,000 for the latest year and year-ago period, respectively.


American Oil &amp; Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Oil &amp; Gas Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
112,969,000
27,794,000
Net loss
3,806,000
2,440,000
Yr rev
194,052,000
86,854,000
Net loss
16,278,000
8,958,000


Rangers Have Edge in Round One
LEAD: When the Rangers play the Islanders in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs, which begins tonight in Madison Square Garden, the Rangers' obvious advantages should lead any rational observer to choose them to win in four or five games, or six at the most.


Iran-Contra Jurors Continue to Weigh Poindexter Charges
LEAD: The jury in the Iran-contra trial of John M. Poindexter completed its third day of deliberations today without reaching a verdict in the case of the former national security adviser accused of deceiving Congress about the affair.


Anthes Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anthes Industries
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
564,000
-
Net inc
478,000
b123,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss
Revenue for the latest quarter is comprised of interest income.
The company sold all of its operating businesses in March 1989 and did not disclose revenues for the year-earlier period.


BTR Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BTR Realty
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,010,593
12,253,370
Net loss
82,309
b551,486
Share earns
-
.06
Yr rev
27,242,743
30,095,778
Net inc
243,652
1,330,786
Share earns
.03
.15
b-Net income


New Jersey Offers Top-Rated Debt
LEAD: New Jersey, one of the few states whose general-obligation debt is still rated triple-A by both Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, is offering $350 million of the securities through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is important to understand that cross burnings are more than arson and that swastikas painted on synagogues are more than vandalism.
This kind of violence affects not only the individual it is aimed at, but the whole group with whom the victim is identified.''
- Representative Charles E.


Amerihealth Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerihealth Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,946,000
9,063,000
Net loss
1,121,000
d246,000
Yr rev
35,757,000
35,274,000
Net loss
b3,587,000
cd700,000
b-Included a loss of $904,000 from a cumulative effect on prior periods of an accounting change.


Bush Officials Say War on Drugs In the Nation's Capital Is a Failure
LEAD: Bush Administration officials say they have concluded that a year-old effort to make the nation's capital a ''test case'' in the war on drugs has largely failed.


Let Nonpartisan Panel Do the Redistricting Job
LEAD: To the Editor:


Most Stock Advisers Failed To Match S.&amp;P. in Quarter
LEAD: The first quarter proved a tough one for the nation's investment advisers, with most failing to match the total return of the Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks.


Chronicle
LEAD: PAUL N. YLVISAKER had two welcome visitors yesterday to his room at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Brookline, Mass.
The 68-year-old former director of the Ford Foundation, recuperating from heart surgery, was presented the Distinguished Grantmaker Award for career achievement in philanthropy by DWIGHT L.


Petroleum Development reports earnings for Year Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petroleum Development
Year Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,233,400
9,293,900
Net loss
767,500
1,094,200


Paris Bourse Reaches Highs
LEAD: The Paris stock market surged today to new highs on news that leading French banks had cut their base lending rates.


Bridge
LEAD: The final of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship, played in Fort Worth two weeks ago, featured a plethora of hands in the slam zone: 15 in the first 32 deals.
The team led by Zia Mahmood of Manhattan, which eventually lost the title, got the worst of most of them, and two early in the second half dealt the team a blow from which it did not recover.


Dickerson Not Kidding
LEAD: Eric Dickerson, the 29-year-old running back for the Indianapolis Colts, who gained 10,000 yards rushing faster than anyone else in National Football League history, said Tuesday that he was serious about his plans to retire. ''I told Jimmy last week that I didn't want to talk to any more teams and that I had no desire to play for anyone,'' Dickerson said, referring to Jim Irsay, the Colts' general manager.


Carter Meets Arafat in Paris, Praises Him as Peacemaker
LEAD: Former President Jimmy Carter met twice today with the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, Yasir Arafat, and praised him for what he said were Mr.
Arafat's efforts to advance peace in the Middle East.


Bomem Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bomem Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,883,994
16,138,711
Net inc
34,553
b3,383,735
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Reading Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reading Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,562,000
1,728,000
Net loss
1,400,000
cd12,145,000
Share earns
-
2.45
Yr rev
5,314,000
7,312,000
Net inc
b16,361,000
d8,965,000
Share earns
3.29
1.81


St. Clair Paint &amp; Wallpaper Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Clair Paint &amp; Wallpaper Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,000,000
19,600,000
Net loss
3,600,000
93,000
Yr rev
85,900,000
76,900,000
Net loss
4,400,000
b125,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


William T. Slater, 56, Pension Fund Officer
LEAD: William T. Slater, senior vice presi-dent of the College Retirement Equities Fund of the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association, died of heart disease on Sunday at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical Center in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 56 years old and lived in Matawan, N.J.


Gulf Applied Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gulf Applied Tech (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,167,000
954,000
Net inc
b346,000
d1,149,000
Share earns
.11
.35
Yr rev
4,089,000
3,329,000
Net loss
b2,543,000
cd1,444,000
Share earns
-
.43


Skyline Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skyline Gold
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,131,000
2,559,000
Net loss
1,250,000
920,000
Year-ago quarter was restated.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Collaborative Research Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collaborative Research Inc.
Qtr to Mar 3
1990
1989
Revenue
2,378,000
3,153,000
Net loss
757,000
1,494,000
6mo rev
4,467,000
7,083,000
Net loss
943,000
1,914,000
Shares outst
10,656,000
10,655,000


Funds Assail Exxon Board
LEAD: Several large pension funds threatened yesterday to begin a campaign to remove the board of the Exxon Corporation at the company's annual meeting this month if it fails to meet their demands to make a stronger commitment to the environment.


For Annuals, a Renaissance
LEAD: THE title, ''The Importance of Being Annual,'' seemed innocuous enough.
Yet when Steven Frowine delivered his talk on annual flowers in October at the New York Botanical Garden, it came smack in the middle of a symposium on perennials, the plants that have been in the horticultural limelight for close to a decade.


Grubb &amp; Ellis REIT reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grubb &amp; Ellis REIT (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
698,000
256,000
Share earns
.25
.09
Yr net inc
1,758,000
1,706,000
Share earns
.64
.62


Eastern's Fate Clouded by Creditors' Move
LEAD: The stance by the unsecured creditors of Eastern Airlines to sell the carrier, either whole or in pieces, has put the airline's fate more than ever in the hands of Judge Burton R. Lifland, who is overseeing Eastern's Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings.


King Robert of Zimbabwe?
LEAD: As a result of a repressively conducted election, the way is now clear for President Robert Mugabe to scrap multiparty democracy in Zimbabwe.
Not only did Mr.
Mugabe win re-election last weekend by a lopsided 78 percent; his party took 116 of 120 elected seats in Parliament.
If he acts on this ''mandate'' for one-party autocracy, the people of


GORBACHEV WARNS ESTONIA ON MOVES FOR INDEPENDENCE
LEAD: The Estonian president said today that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had personally warned him that Estonia should not follow Lithuania in declaring independence.


Lynam Is Major Weapon Behind 76er Success
LEAD: An hour before a recent game, Jimmy Lynam, the Philadelphia 76ers' coach, was sitting quietly in his office at the Spectrum.
Outside the coach's door, Charles Barkley was playfully slapping one of his teammates on the head.
And Rick Mahorn, the 76ers' power forward, was laughing uncontrollably, telling a visitor that the necktie he was wearing was the ugliest necktie


Edgar G. E. Moss; Dog Breeder, 83
LEAD: Edgar G. E. Moss, a dog breeder and former publisher of The New Brunswick Spokesman, a weekly newspaper in New Jersey, died of cancer on Tuesday at the Hunterdon Medical Center in Flemington, N.J.
He was 83 years old and lived in Lebanon, N.J.


Exhibit of the Best 80's Fabrics
LEAD: TEXTILES that look like pleated aluminum, black lacquer or marble are among more than 150 exhibited at ''Color, Light, Surface: Contemporary Fabrics.'' The show, which opened Tuesday at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Design, is a retrospective of the most avant-garde fabric design of the 1980's from Europe, the United States and Japan.


George Washington Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* George Washington Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
1,484,177
1,712,395
Yr net loss
3,170,541
3,374,485


Teacher Layoffs Are Feared With Call for Budget Cuts
LEAD: Board of Education officials have been asked by the hard-pressed New York City government to prepare cuts of $190 million in its budget for the next school year, an amount the officials said yesterday could mean teacher layoffs and more crowded classrooms.


Eastgroup Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastgroup Properties (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,668,000
2,498,000
Net loss
b1,938,000
c1,065,000
Yr rev
13,278,000
9,518,000
Net inc
b13,996,000
c8,863,000
Share earns
5.56
3.48
b-Included a loss from sale of investments of $1,946,000 and a 1989 gain of $12,297,000 from sales of real estate, for the quarter and year, respectively, and a bond restructuring loss of $455,000 for the quarter and year.


Sensormatic Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sensormatic Electronics Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
44,134,000
34,517,000
Net inc
3,823,000
b1,847,000
Share earns
.14
.07
9mo rev
134,665,000
105,259,000
Net inc
13,787,000
b6,318,000
Share earns
.49
.23


Group of 7 Meeting Is Expected to Be Quiet
LEAD: The top economic policy makers from the United States and its six main industrial allies, when they meet in Paris Saturday, will discuss the momentous political and economic changes that have swept the world since their last meeting in September: the moves toward free markets in Eastern Europe, the German unification effort and the battering of the


Environmental Control reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Control (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,475,000
11,451,000
Net loss
5,248,000
c782,000
Share earns
-
.11
Shares outst
7,115,000
6,928,000
Yr rev
77,009,000
55,522,000
Net loss
b5,749,000
c4,507,000
Share earns
-
.77
Shares outst
6,995,000
5,878,000


Bird Stars As Celtics Rout Nets
LEAD: Larry Bird put on a performance tonight that inspired his teammates, electrified the Boston Garden and demoralized the Nets.


Peres Says He Can Form Next Israeli Government
LEAD: The Israeli Labor Party announced tonight that it had gained sufficient political commitments to command a majority in Parliament and form a new government.


Edwards (A.G.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Edwards (A.G.) (N)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
150,400,000
134,000,000
Net inc
12,500,000
11,400,000
Share earns
.55
.50
Yr rev
607,000,000
500,700,000
Net inc
58,800,000
34,900,000
Share earns
2.56
1.54


Results Plus
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Cavs Gain Tie for Last Playoff Spot
Brad Daugherty scored 24 points and Mark Price handed out a career-high 20 assists last night as the Cleveland Cavaliers beat the Atlanta Hawks, 101-95.
The teams are tied for the final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.
The Cavaliers won for the 10th time in 14 games.


Carnival Cruise Lines reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carnival Cruise Lines (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
259,400,000
231,800,000
Net inc
25,200,000
46,300,000
Share earns
.19
.34


Tokyo Call Warrants Are Offered on Amex
LEAD: Two international financial institutions signaled yesterday that they were ready to bet that the Tokyo stock market, after some of its worst days in history, had bottomed out.


Newspapers Warned Of Threat of Comfort
LEAD: The nation's press is too comfortable, too well paid and too much part of the establishment for the country's own good, the president of the American Society of Newspaper Editors told his colleagues today.


Task for Batus Official: Selling Off B.A.T. Units
LEAD: Arthur C. Martinez is working assiduously to sell a group of companies - and eventually put himself out of a job.


Czech Holds a Mirror Up to Canada
LEAD: It is a substantial assignment anywhere to use words to knit a national fabric of nonfiction heroes and fables.
It is a gargantuan assignment to take on that task in Canada, a vast collection of disparate regions that have traditionally lacked unifying heroes and villains.


Nguyen Lam; Vietnamese Official, 68
LEAD: Nguyen Lam, a former Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam, died on Sunday, the official Hanoi radio reported.
He was 68 years old.


Cordatum Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cordatum Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,236,573
1,357,058
Net loss
229,014
462,075
Shares outst
6,372,200
4,174,800


Strober Organization reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Strober Organization (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
29,681,000
34,986,000
Net loss
b1,666,000
c496,000
Share earns
-
.08
Yr sales
127,654,000
140,394,000
Net loss
b1,169,000
c3,929,000
Share earns
-
.64


Medcross Inc. reports earnings for 12mo Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medcross Inc. (OTC)
12mo Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,238,082
3,689,163
Net loss
482,596
1,026,694
Shares outst
6,862,500
4,766,956


Dionics Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dionics Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,405,900
1,671,500
Net loss
465,900
856,900


Chief Consolidated Mining reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chief Consolidated Mining
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
475,926
379,631
Net loss
267,242
138,647
The company is listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange.


DISPUTE EMERGES IN BOSTON MURDER
LEAD: In a bitterly contested move, prosecutors investigating the Charles Stuart murder case are trying to force Mr.
Stuart's lawyer, to whom they believe he confessed killing his wife, to testify before a grand jury.


Julius Granirer; Lawyer, 86
LEAD: Julius Granirer, a lawyer and the president of the Peninsula Hospital Center in Far Rockaway, Queens, died of a heart attack on Tuesday at Huntington (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in Rockaway Park, Queens.


Willie Musarurwa; Journalist, 62
LEAD: Willie Musarurwa, a veteran journalist who spent 10 years in jail for his political activities, died on Tuesday, apparently of a heart attack, hospital officials said.
He was 62 years old.


Expos Scramble for Pitching Help
LEAD: When the Montreal Expos arrived in New York last August, they might as well have been greeted by mammoth, intimidating signs at La Guardia Airport, in Times Square and on the Grand Central Parkway blaring, ''Welcome to the Pennant Race.''


Yet Another Use for Those Sticky Little Papers
LEAD: IT is not easy to remember life before Post-it notes, those ubiquitous pieces of paper that stick to almost any surface but are easily removed.
To celebrate their 10th anniversary, the manufacturer, 3M Corporation in St.
Paul, sponsored a national Post-it art contest in January.
The winners were announced today in New


Arena Stage Head Quitting To Join New York Troupe
LEAD: Zelda Fichandler, the producing director and a co-founder of Arena Stage in Washington, will leave her post at the end of the 1990-91 season to become artistic director of the Acting Company in New York.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Olympic Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olympic Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
88,659
b734,175
Per share
.07
-
Year net loss
1,696,722
1,562,772
b-Net loss


Catholics' Dilemma
LEAD: To the Editor:


Northrop May Sell Additional Assets
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation, the military contractor, is weighing further asset sales because of flat sales so far this year, the company said.
It expects this year's sales to be even with the $5.25 billion in 1989, but down from 1988's $5.79 billion, it said in its annual report.


Metro Matters;   Same Old Story: Doing Business New York Style
LEAD: rrClifford Wilson recalled yesterday his first reaction to the accusation by Edward L. Sadowsky, a lawyer for a voting-machine company, that he had been extorted by Anthony Sadowski, a New York City Election Commissioner.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Lawyer Ads Are Rising
LEAD: Even amid lingering questions about its propriety, television advertising by lawyers continues to soar, according to the Television Bureau of Advertising.
The bureau said that spending on ads for legal services on local television rose to $82.3 million in 1989, up 28.7 percent from 1988, when $63.9 million was spent.


Sarah Vaughan, 'Divine One' Of Jazz Singing, Is Dead at 66
LEAD: Sarah Vaughan, a singer who brought an operatic splendor to her performances of popular standards and jazz, died of lung cancer on Tuesday at her home in the Los Angeles suburb of Hidden Hills.
She was 66 years old.


Commercial Bank Growth
LEAD: Allowing commercial banks to underwrite securities and to open branches nationwide are two crucial steps Congress can take to improve the global competitiveness of the industry, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board said today.
Mr.
Greenspan told a House subcommittee group that another essential step is to lower the cost of capital for United States banks by cutting the federal deficit.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Business People column yesterday about Susan Gordon, the new owner of the Lynne Palmer Agency, misstated the title she had when she worked at Random House and the year she joined Lynne Palmer.
She was a personnel recruiter at Random House, and moved from there to Lynne Palmer in 1983.


Infinite Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Infinite Graphics
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
991,834
1,227,066
Net loss
533,588
416,677
9mo sales
3,808,255
4,776,567
Net loss
1,174,339
391,243


What Can Go Wrong in Census? 2.3 Million Undelivered Packets
LEAD: Census Bureau officials said today that more than 2.3 million of the 88.5 million census forms that the bureau mailed out to households around the country could not be delivered.


Market Place;   Surprise Hurts Oracle Systems
LEAD: WALL STREET hates a surprise.
So when the Oracle Systems Corporation unexpectedly announced late on March 28 that earnings in its most recently completed quarter were flat, analysts dropped their recommendations and investors dumped a record volume of shares in the company, which is the leading producer of software for managing large data bases.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on Friday on the obituary of Isidore Adler, a scientist, educator and researcher, referred incorrectly to his research on the moon.


Outside Shooting Sparks Knicks
LEAD: The Knicks waited all season for Kiki Vandeweghe's outside shooting, and tonight it surfaced.


Codenoll Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Codenoll Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,188,000
1,922,000
Net loss
727,000
523,000
Yr sales
8,475,000
7,806,000
Net loss
2,463,000
1,695,000


HMG-Courtland Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HMG-Courtland Properties Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,137,898
1,074,695
Net loss
424,873
c1,811,449
Yr rev
4,885,677
6,067,521
Net loss
1,220,142
bc10,902,832
Share earns
-
9.00
b-Net income


AW Computer Systems reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AW Computer Systems
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,909,112
2,401,140
Net loss
193,467
1,190,780
Shares outst
3,382,232
3,281,828


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amre Inc., Irving, Tex., a supplier of home-improvement products, said a management group expects to propose the purchase of all the shares of the company that it does not already own for $8.75 a share.


Texan Declines to Apologize After She Is Likened to Nazi
LEAD: State Treasurer Ann Richards is offering no apologies for her tactics in the Democratic gubernatorial campaign after former Gov.
Mark White likened her behavior to that of the Gestapo chief Heinrich Himmler.


Contel to Combine Telephone Groups
LEAD: The Contel Corporation, a telecommunications company based in Atlanta, said it would eliminate about 600 jobs across the country in its telephone operations division.
It said the cutbacks, which represent about 4 percent of the telephone operation's staff, would take place in the next two years and are expected to be achieved largely through attrition and voluntary separation programs.


How the West Was Done
LEAD: The South Fork of the Shoshone River moves languorously through the hills, past cottonwood groves and whipped-cream peaks dotted with sagebrush and elk.
Here, not far from the eastern border of Yellowstone Park, geography is measured not in tidy streets and avenues, but in bluffs, basins and gnarled nubs of rock.


Germania Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germania Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
9,369,000
b903,000
Per share
-
.46
Year net loss
19,953,000
b1,854,000
Per share
-
.94
b-Net income
In the latest quarter the bank established $7.7 million in additional provisions to cover credit losses, losses on real estate owned and changes in the market value of non-investment grade corporate bonds.


Progress In Talks With Japan
LEAD: The United States and Japan were nearing an understanding today on how to curb some of the more pervasive policy and cultural obstacles confronting foreign businesses in Japan.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Ladies' Home Journal Goes to Lotas Minard
LEAD: Lotas Minard Patton McIver picked up its third magazine trade account yesterday, when the Meredith Corporation gave it the assignment to advertise The Ladies' Home Journal, the venerable women's magazine.


Great American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great American Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
482,000
4,445,000
Share outst
2,222,000
2,221,000
Yr net loss
844,000
9,958,000


Talking Deals;   Lockheed's Moves In Proxy Fight
LEAD: COMPANIES have long been willing to pay a high price to maintain their independence when faced with corporate raiders and disgruntled minority shareholders.
But when challenged with a proxy fight started by the Dallas investor Harold C. Simmons, the Lockheed Corporation decided to make major concessions to the institutional investors that own the majority of its stock.


Cato Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cato Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 3
1990
1989
Revenue
69,172,000
64,070,000
Net loss
b4,839,000
c737,000
Yr rev
256,505,000
233,285,000
Net loss
b5,337,000
c4,852,000
b-Included pretax restructuring expenses of $459,000 and $1,951,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Raychem Sees Loss for Year
LEAD: The Raychem Corporation said that it would take a charge of $75 million to $90 million against third-quarter earnings and eliminate 900 jobs as part of a major overhaul of its business.
It said the charge would result in a loss for the fiscal year, which ends June 30.
Raychem, based in Menlo


Metallurgical Indus reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metallurgical Indus
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,363,280
3,893,830
Net loss
676,495
b468,915
Share earns
-
.46
b-Net income and included income of $521,658 from discontinued operations, which included a gain of $562,536 from disposal of discontinued operations, and also was after an extraordinary credit of $240,000 from a tax benefit from tax loss carryforward.


Olympia Broadcasting reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olympia Broadcasting
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,824,000
13,571,000
Net loss
b11,031,000
bc10,329,000
Share earns
-
4.28
b-Included a $3,324,000 writedown of assets in 1989 and a $17,359,000 gain on the sale of stations in 1988.


Mayor and a Councilman Are Indicted in Hialeah
LEAD: The Mayor of Hialeah, Florida's fifth-largest city, has been indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges that he conspired with a City Councilman to extort payoffs from developers in exchange for approving zoning changes.
The Councilman was also indicted.


Oklahoma Faces Suit
LEAD: Saying he had ''a slam-dunk case'' against the University of Oklahoma, a Washington-based lawyer demanded yesterday that the school reinstate its women's basketball program or face a Federal lawsuit.
Arthur Bryant of Trial Lawyers for Public Justice, a public-interest law firm, said last week's decision by Oklahoma officials to eliminate the women's basketball program was in violation of the Constitution and Federal law.


Bush Is Sent Bill Requiring Data On Bias Crimes
LEAD: The House of Representatives today approved and sent to President Bush legislation that for the first time would require the Federal Government to collect statistics on crimes motivated by prejudice based on race, ethnic background, religion or sexual orientation.


More on Gathers
LEAD: Bruce Fagel, an attorney for the mother and family of the late Hank Gathers, said Tuesday that the appointment of a lawyer from Philadelphia to administer the estate of the Loyola Marymount basketball star would have no bearing on wrongful-death suits planned by family members.
The suits, he said, would be filed in about two weeks.


6,400 Jobs To Be Cut By Baxter
LEAD: Continuing to suffer from slow growth and pressures to hold down prices in its core medical-supply business, Baxter International Inc. said today that it was revamping the entire company and laying off 6,400 workers to try to improve operating profits and cash flow.


Bonn Investigates 2 Concerns in Libyan Deal
LEAD: West German authorities are investigating two companies suspected of violating the nation's export laws by trying to purchase a computer system used in industrial processes and ship it to a Libyan chemical plant.


Michael J. Cody; Executive, 61
LEAD: Michael J. Cody, an insurance executive, died on Tuesday at his home in Short Hills, N.J.
He was 61 years old.


Senate Confirms Savings Chief, Letting the Bailout Plan Proceed
LEAD: After intense lobbying by the Bush Administration, the Senate confirmed T. Timothy Ryan Jr. today as the top regulator of the savings and loan industry, enabling the Government to resume its seizures of insolvent institutions and moving the giant savings and loan bailout forward.


Universal Medical Bldgs L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Medical Bldgs L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,787,951
17,630,919
Net loss
940,194
b1,111,961
Share earns
-
.04
Yr rev
78,386,430
64,174,770
Net loss
3,562,068
b3,695,725
Share earns
-
.14


Angio-Medical Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Angio-Medical Corp. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,731,975
3,588,275
Net loss
2,086,315
2,957,171


Corona Strike Ends
LEAD: The brewery that makes Corona beer was back in operation today after workers ended a seven-week strike for higher wages.
Officials at the Cerveceria Modelo S.A. de C.V. brewery said workers returned after a new union was formed.
Negotiations between the company and the old union, representing 5,200 workers, failed to resolve the dispute.


Bangkok Talks on Cambodia Are Proposed by Sihanouk
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that he had proposed a meeting of all four warring Cambodian factions in Bangkok on April 15.


P&amp;F Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* P&amp;F Industries
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,977,000
12,913,255
Net inc
459,520
246,006
Share earns
.14
.06
Shares outst
2,592,886
2,338,630
Yr rev
64,031,276
47,852,830
Net inc
1,568,324
615,445
Share earns
.45
.07
Shares outst
2,530,800
2,467,438


A Czech Cousin Haunts Budweiser
LEAD: Anheuser-Busch, the brewer of Budweiser beer, is negotiating with the Czech producer of the 16th-century original of the same name to settle longstanding trademark differences.
If they reach an agreement, European beer drinkers may soon confront the question: Which Bud's for you?


Christian Factions Trade Fire In Battles in Beirut and Hills
LEAD: Rival Christian factions traded artillery shells and rockets today in Christian East Beirut and the Kesrouan hills northeast of here, and a five-story building in the militia-held quarter of Nabaa was set ablaze.


Thackeray Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thackeray Corp. (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
47,653,000
41,537,000
Net inc
b2,117,000
c392,000
Share earns
.41
-
b-Included a loss of $1,191,000 from discontinued operations and an extraordinary credit of $6,595,000, or $1.27 a share, representing gains of $3,898,000, or 75 cents a share, on disposal of discontinued operations, and $2,697,000, or 52 cents a share, from use of tax loss carryforwards.


Peoples Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Telephone
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,424,518
3,883,056
Net inc
246,650
52,348
Yr rev
19,113,249
12,968,314
Net inc
1,193,428
788,393
Share earns
.32
.26
The net income for the latest year included $155,925 attributed to the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle.


A Hard Road For Mandela;   Doubt About Support Is Clouding Prospects
LEAD: As Nelson Mandela prepares to meet with President F. W. de Klerk on Thursday, doubts persist about the readiness of the African National Congress to undertake serious negotiations with the white-dominated government and about Mr.
Mandela's ability to consolidate the widest black support.


Computer Power reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Power
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,802,000
11,394,000
Net inc
101,000
100,000
Share earns
.07
.07


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Economy


International Broadcast reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Broadcast (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,834,235
4,514,901
Net loss
1,369,317
297,170


First Western Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Western Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,231,000
1,686,000
Share earns
.20
.27
Shares outst
6,204,000
6,259,000
Yr net inc
6,551,000
7,970,000
Share earns
1.06
1.26
Shares outst
6,205,000
6,325,000


American Physicians Service reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Physicians Service
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,357,000
2,923,000
Net loss
518,000
bc480,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
4,721,000
5,694,000
Yr rev
13,723,000
12,643,000
Net inc
14,000
c4,483,000
Share earns
-
.78
Shares outst
4,972,000
5,724,000


Gordon Braislin, 89, A Retired Chairman Of the Dime Bank
LEAD: Gordon S. Braislin, a former chairman of the Dime Savings Bank and a retired real-estate broker, died on Tuesday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 89 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Pawling, N.Y.


Honduran Says Contras Will Disarm
LEAD: Eight years after his country first became a sanctuary for Nicaraguan rebels, the President of Honduras has said he is confident that contra bases in Honduras will be quickly dismantled under an accord signed last month.


ACS Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ACS Enterprises
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
850,244
619,675
Net loss
373,397
101,512
Yr rev
3,306,459
2,613,884
Net loss
788,040
b301,802
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


Underdog to Front-Runner in Connecticut
LEAD: Representative Bruce A. Morrison, looking gaunt and running 45 minutes late, stepped before the Democratic Town Committee here last week to try to win over a group that a week earlier probably would not have given him the time of day.


SIS Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SIS Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,893,681
10,435,167
Net loss
1,065,953
745,218
Yr rev
38,399,141
44,027,541
Net loss
1,893,211
2,085,322


Chronicle
LEAD: A former soccer goalie, POPE JOHN PAUL II, will bless the rebuilt Olympic Stadium in Rome on May 31.
It has been remodeled for the finals of the World Cup, and the Italian national team will play the first game in the remodeled stadium on June 9, against Austria.


SPEEDUP ORDERED IN DEATH ROW CASE
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has ordered a speedup in the handling of the case of Robert Alton Harris, a convicted murderer whose stay of execution was backed by the Supreme Court on Monday.


Suspected Burglar Dies In Fall After Shooting
LEAD: A man who tenants say forced his way into a fifth-floor East Harlem apartment yesterday afternoon fell to his death after being shot by someone who fled the building, the police said.


John Adams Life Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Adams Life Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
77,000
b3,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr net loss
21,000
543,000
b-Net loss


Garnet Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Garnet Resources
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,385,705
1,373,928
Net loss
986,073
487,113
Shares outst
5,963,170
5,322,299


Notebook;   Significant Changes in the Rankings
LEAD: The two shocking scores in college lacrosse were Yale 20, Cornell 8, and Brown 10, Loyola of Baltimore 7.


Great American CommunicaFtions Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great American CommunicaFtions Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
84,226,000
92,960,000
Net loss
b25,534,000
c31,468,000
Yr rev
300,624,000
333,996,000
Net loss
b115,571,000
c72,437,000
Shares outst
32,250,000
29,870,000


Miss Piggy, Kermit, Meet Meep
LEAD: MOVE over, Miss Piggy. Meep, the Party Animal, has arrived.


More Child Labor-Law Infractions Found
LEAD: Federal investigators who uncovered 7,000 child labor violations during a three-day sweep last month found 4,000 more infractions in a review of case files, the Labor Department says.


U.S. Panel Is Told of Pan Am Security Flaws
LEAD: A Government panel investigating the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 today disclosed new evidence of serious flaws in the airline's security measures that existed before and lingered long after the fatal attack in December 1988.


Seeds of Arab-Israeli Hope Bloom in the Desert;   A Chance for Peace
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prosecution Rests in Slaying of New Jersey Family
LEAD: The prosecution rested its murder case against John E. List today after putting into evidence autopsy, ballistics and handwriting reports and about two dozen pictures, including some that were characterized as inflammatory by Mr.
List's lawyer.


Global Natural Res reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Global Natural Res (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
13,675,000
7,666,000
Net inc
2,379,000
b2,587,000
Share earns
.10
-
Yr rev
40,592,000
36,443,000
Net inc
2,440,000
b1,148,000
Share earns
.11
-


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: KENT RAVENSCROFT admits that, for the moment at least, both he and his wife prefer their 7-year-old son to their daughter.


Witness Tells of Marcos Co-op Deal
LEAD: Imelda Marcos was determined to go to extraordinary lengths to conceal her attempts to buy a Park Avenue co-op apartment and millions of dollars of artwork and she used a close friend as a front in carrying out the transactions, a former employee of Sotheby's auction house testified yesterday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Backer Spielvogel Bates has produced a dozen public service television commercials to mark the 25th anniversary of the New York Landmarks Preservation Commission.


BUSH MAY SUPPORT EASING AIDS POLICY
LEAD: The Bush Administration said today that it was considering offering support to a new bill intended to relax immigration restrictions on people infected with the AIDS virus.


Washington at Work;   A Year After Rejection in Senate, Tower Replays Loss of Coveted Job
LEAD: Is there a Washington afterlife for John G. Tower?


When Those Nice Kitties Are Jaguar Cubs
LEAD: To the Editor:


To Ease Harsh Drought, Greeks Try Prayer
LEAD: At a church in an Athens suburb, the Rev.
Pavlos Alexiou raised his arms and told the congregation to kneel in response to the Archbishop's appeal to help save Greece by praying for rain.


Technology Development reports earnings for 13wk to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology Development
13wk to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,795,000
6,435,000
Net loss
205,000
b133,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
2,055,759
2,485,105
Yr rev
22,369,000
22,058,000
Net inc
25,000
637,000
Share earns
.01
.33
Shares outst
2,044,925
2,481,689


Bank of New England Plans to Cut 5,600 Jobs
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation announced a drastic plan yesterday to cut expenses and return to profitability by eliminating about a third of its payroll, The banking company, which had already begun to reduce its size by selling loans, said it planned to cut 5,600 jobs.
About 1,700 workers would be notified within a few days, it said, and other jobs will be cut by the end of the year through attrition, sales of businesses and consolidations.


Daniel Dyer, 73, Dies; Led a Sugar Brokerage
LEAD: Daniel L. Dyer, a sugar broker, died of a heart attack on Sunday while playing paddle tennis in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 73 years old and lived in Bronxville.


Seeds of Arab-Israeli Hope Bloom in the Desert
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senate Roll-Call On Nomination
LEAD: Following is the 62-to-37 roll-call by which the Senate voted today to confirm T. Timothy Ryan Jr. as director of the Treasury Department's Office of Thrift Supervision.
A yes vote was a vote to confirm Mr.
Ryan while a no vote was a vote to reject the nomination.
Voting yes were 17 Democrats and 45 Republicans.


Ascot Investment reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ascot Investment
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,945,431
3,230,675
Net inc
1,560,589
1,019,296
Share earns
.04
.03
The company said Revenue Properties Co. now owns 37 percent of Ascot shares, fully diluted, after purchasing 25 million Ascot shares at 15 cents a share.


Review/Television;   'Outsiders,' a Drama of Socioeconomic Divisions
LEAD: If ''The Outsiders'' movie worked for Matt Dillon, Patrick Swayze, Rob Lowe, Emilio Estevez, Tom Cruise and Ralph Macchio, can ''The Outsiders'' television series make stars of Jay R. Ferguson, Rodney Harvey, Boyd Kestner, Robert Rusler, David Arquette and Harold Pruett?
Francis Ford Coppola certainly hopes so.


After 4 Years, an Aftershock
LEAD: A moderate earthquake hit the San Diego area today, and scientists said it was an aftershock from a larger quake that occurred four years ago.
A spokesman for the California Institute of Technology said today's tremor measured 4.2 on the Richter scale.
No damage was reported, but residents said they were shaken from their beds.


Soft Shoes and Hard Hats


Behind Atlantic City's Glitz Lies Decay 878&gt;
LEAD: The grandmotherly ladies on the three-acre casino floor cooed, ''Donald, Donald, there's Donald,'' when Donald J. Trump sauntered onto the floor to open the Taj Mahal on Monday, but most of them continued to pump money into his slot machines without letup.


Smartcard International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smartcard International
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
165,302
200,256
Net loss
1,045,799
2,389,922


Volcano's Lava Invades Hawaiian Subdivision


Pacesetter Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacesetter Homes
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,915,000
4,762,000
Net inc
832,000
b346,000
Share earns
.54
-
Yr rev
71,888,000
40,742,000
Net inc
3,743,000
b735,000
Share earns
2.43
-
b-Net loss


Heritage Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Financial
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
1,693,000
640,867


New Step in Kansas City Integration
LEAD: A Federal appellate court order permitting more than than a fourth of Kansas City's black students to transfer to predominantly white schools in the suburbs at the state's expense is stirring a debate among partisans in the schools' long-running legal battle.


Starrett Housing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Starrett Housing Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
38,952,000
33,094,000
Net inc
1,199,000
1,186,000
Share earns
.12
.11
Shares outst
6,603,000
7,451,000
Yr rev
116,141,000
118,963,000
Net inc
6,555,000
6,297,000
Share earns
.74
.64
Shares outst
6,596,000
7,663,000


General Communications reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Communications
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
52,144,000
42,283,000
Net inc
1,302,000
b12,915,000
Share earns
.08
.97
b-Included earnings of $22,043,000 from settlement of certain anti-trust litigation.


Baker Warns Shevardnadze Against Clamp on Lithuania
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d cautioned Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union today that a crackdown in Lithuania could wipe out much of the progress made in Soviet-American relations in the last year.


Review/Dance;   Japanese Distillation In 3 Works At the Joyce
LEAD: Eiko and Koma, choreographers and performers who left their native Japan for New York, where they have presented their work for the last 15 years, offered three new fables for our time on Tuesday night.


Salem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salem Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,213,000
24,573,000
Net inc
646,000
351,000
Share earns
.52
.28
Yr rev
120,829,000
92,504,000
Net inc
1,913,000
3,593,000
Share earns
1.54
2.89


We Are Warned
LEAD: Once more we have been clearly warned and once more we have a choice.


Review/Opera;   New Jersey State Troupe's 'Nabucco'
LEAD: ''Nabucco,'' Giuseppe Verdi's third opera and his first major success, has been trying to break out of the ghetto of operatic rarities.
Several points militate against its escape.
One is that Verdi's late operas are so much richer than his early ones that ''Nabucco'' - a decidedly mature effort, with three-dimensional characters and some splendid music - is regarded as a stepping stone.


A New Buyout Firm Finds Salt to Its Liking
LEAD: D. G. Harris &amp; Associates, a leveraged buyout firm, has found a niche in the salt mines with the creation of a new company, the North American Salt Company.
Michael R. Boyce has been named its president and chief operating officer.


Cimflex Teknowledge reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cimflex Teknowledge (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,900,000
-
Net loss
b5,000,000
-
Shares outst
22,582,000
-
Yr rev
39,511,000
36,390,000
Net loss
b7,833,000
c7,008,000
Shares outst
21,055,000
12,794,000


DCNY reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DCNY (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
4,688,569
4,948,442


Chemfix Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemfix Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
7,000,000
7,000,000
Net inc
401,118
b217,509
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
13,700,000
13,100,000
Net inc
864,038
b103,054
Share earns
.13
-


Money-Fund Yields Mixed
LEAD: Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week that ended yesterday, with yields for taxable funds down and those for tax-exempt funds higher.


New Peril Seen on Earth Warming
LEAD: Chemicals counted on as substitutes for chlorofluorocarbons, widely used substances that are destroying the Earth's protective ozone layer, could contribute significantly to long-term global warming, scientists say.


Tokyo Stocks Drop Sharply And Recover
LEAD: The Nikkei index of 225 stocks fell nearly 4 percent here Thursday morning, but then scored a stunning recovery, regaining almost all its loss in the last hour of trading.


Echlin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Echlin Inc.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
375,874,000
344,936,000
Net inc
6,638,000
12,490,000
Share earns
.12
.23
Shares outst
55,792,000
55,717,000
6mo sales
746,882,000
700,892,000
Net inc
20,128,000
27,650,000
Share earns
.36
.50
Shares outst
55,788,000
55,701,000


Ireland Is Expected to Scrap The Death Penalty This Year
LEAD: Ireland is to formally abolish the death penalty and introduce automatic jail sentences of at least 30 years for certain convicted killers, the Government said in a bill published today.


Rada Electronic Indus reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rada Electronic Indus (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
22,200,000
18,130,000
Net inc
1,310,000
1,030,000
Share earns
.20
.16


House Drafting Stiff Bill on Urban Air Pollution
LEAD: Now that the Senate has voted to amend the Clean Air Act, the legislative struggle has shifted to the House of Representatives, where a bill is being drafted that would crack down more strongly on urban air pollution.


Telebyte Technology reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telebyte Technology
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,134,362
3,246,824
Net inc
b48,397
c511,612
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
1,871,283
1,942,004
b-After an extraordinary credit of $10,000, or 1 cent a share.


Envirosource reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Envirosource (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
49,292,000
44,668,000
Net loss
b12,990,000
d10,861,000
Shares outst
8,739,000
8,567,000
Yr rev
190,263,000
139,289,000
Net inc
b22,110,000
cd37,419,000
Share earns
.82
-
Shares outst
12,181,000
8,554,000


U.S. Hotel Project Includes Japanese
LEAD: A group of four Japanese companies and one from the United States will jointly build an $88 million resort hotel in a San Diego suburb, the Japanese concerns said.
The Kumagai Gumi Company, the Kawasaki Steel Corporation, the Marubeni Corporation and the Tekken Construction Company will participate in the project with the United States developer Joelen


C. R. Smith, Pioneer of Aviation As Head of American, Dies at 90
LEAD: Cyrus Rowlett Smith, an aviation pioneer who was the first chief executive of American Airlines and built it over three decades into one of the world's leading airlines, died yesterday after a long illness in Ginger Cove Life Care Center, a retirement community in Annapolis, Md.
He was 90 years old and lived for many years in


U.S. Securities Advance Sharply
LEAD: Waves of speculative buying pushed prices of Treasury securities sharply higher yesterday.
One impetus for the buying was rumors that a Japanese financial institution would disclose serious financial problems when the markets opened for business in Tokyo today.


Chronicle
LEAD: MARC CHRISTIAN was awarded $5.5 million from the estate of ROCK HUDSON a year ago because he had not been told of the actor's infection with AIDS during their two-year relationship.
Now he has filed a $22 million libel suit against the authors and publisher of a new biography of the late movie star, ''Rock Hudson: Friend of Mine.


Most Units Of Bonwit Will Close
LEAD: Most of the Bonwit Teller specialty retail chain, including the main store in Trump Tower in Manhattan, will go out of business by June under several arrangements announced in bankruptcy court yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sunday about liquid diets, and a correction in this space on Tuesday, referred incorrectly to the director of human nutrition at the University of Michigan.
He is Dr.
Adam Drewnowski.


PROTEST FOCUSES ON ABORTION ISSUE
LEAD: The Planned Parenthood Federation of America has started a nationwide campaign to protest A.T.&amp;T.'s withdrawal of longstanding support of the federation's teen-age pregnancy prevention programs because of its advocacy of abortion rights.


American National Pete reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American National Pete
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,266,000
12,533,000
Net inc
697,000
271,000
Share earns
.10
.05
Shares outst
6,685,000
5,625,000
Year-ago results are restated to reflect a change in method of accounting for income taxes.


Unity Healthcare Holdings reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unity Healthcare Holdings
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,294,322
4,208,759
Net loss
1,414,992
b
b-The company said it broke even in the year-ago period.


Amerifax Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerifax Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
49,860
1,341
Net loss
560,183
643,257
Shares outst
3,566,068
1,150,365
Prior year results are for the period from Jan. 22, 1988, the date of the company's inception, through Dec.


Margate Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Margate Ventures
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,535,275
10,351,480
Net loss
b1,448,987
204,693
Shares outst
21,794,733
19,762,000
Yr sales
30,034,059
35,731,754
Net loss
b1,782,453
c1,118,279
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
20,961,233
19,762,000


Precision Standard reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Standard
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
42,700,000
-
Net inc
1,000,000
-
Share earns
.08
-
Yr sales
144,400,000
53,500,000
Net inc
4,700,000
b7,800,000
Share earns
.37
-
b-Net loss


Delta Air Expects Decline in Profits
LEAD: Delta Air Lines Inc. said that because of sluggish growth in air traffic, it expects its profit for the quarter ended March 31 to be much lower than a year earlier.
The announcement was made in New York by the company's chief financial officer, Thomas J. Roeck Jr., to members of the Society of Airline Analysts.


Calendar of Events: Springtime Flowers
LEAD:
Not Only Yellow, New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; 212-220-8777.


CBS Shifts News Workers
LEAD: The management of CBS Inc. has said that the CBS News division will no longer be able to call on an exclusive pool of technicians to work cameras and videotape machines, a CBS News executive said yesterday.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Insulating a Closet
Q.I have two bedroom closets, each with a solid door and each on an outside wall.
In the winter these closets are very cold; in the summer, very hot.
What is the best way to insulate these closets?
A.One of the first things you should do is replace the solid doors with louvered doors.


Seeds of Arab-Israeli Hope Bloom in the Desert;   What Happened in '48
LEAD: To the Editor:


Deals
LEAD: YANKEES (AL) - Optioned Clay Parker and Dave Eiland, pitchers, to Columbus of the International League.
Assigned John Habyan, pitcher, and Jeff Datz, catcher, to Columbus.
Sent Jimmy Jones, pitcher, outright to Columbus.


Hand-Painted Tiles Made to Order
LEAD: STACEY FARLEY'S portfolio of hand-painted decorative tiles shows an array of the fanciful and creative.
Besides painting the traditional flowers and baskets of fruit, she has silk-screened blueprints onto tiles, created tiles with bas-relief designs like seashells and made an impression of a paint tube in raw clay.


German State Chief Wants U.S. Troops Cut
LEAD: Premier Walter Wallman of Hesse has requested that United States soldiers be withdrawn from the West German state as part of any European arms cuts.


At Bronx School, She 'Holds It All Together'
LEAD: Sometimes tardiness has its rewards.
At Public School 94, it means the opportunity to be taken in hand by Barbara Williams.
Moments after the 8:35 buzzer, at her post just inside the entrance, she is greeting, admonishing and encouraging, always encouraging, the latecomers and their parents.


Richardson Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Richardson Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
40,145,000
39,602,000
Net loss
b3,127,000
c3,014,000
Share earns
-
.27
9mo sales
114,829,000
109,631,000
Net loss
b694,000
c8,786,000
Share earns
-
.79


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laidlaw Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
440,385,000
326,400,000
Net inc
60,264,000
42,002,000
Share earns
.24
.21
Shares outst
237,635,000
190,107,000
6mo rev
864,317,000
677,872,000
Net inc
121,510,000
84,920,000
Share earns
.51
.43
Shares outst
227,993,000
189,891,000


Kings Rally to Beat Flames In Opener of Playoffs, 5-3
LEAD: Luc Robitaille scored twice as the Los Angeles Kings rallied for four third-period goals tonight to beat the Calgary Flames, 5-3, in the opener of their Smythe Division playoff series.


Nostalgia Network reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nostalgia Network
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,158,474
742,812
Net loss
931,329
b1,425,394
Yr rev
4,119,618
2,802,690
Net loss
2,747,894
b2,771,302
b-Included a non-recurring charge of $671,853 for the quarter and year.


Faraday Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Faraday Resources
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,381,000
5,820,000
Net inc
2,230,000
4,034,000
Share earns
.26
.55
Results are in Canadian dollars.


After Long Island Trial, Parents Speak Out    Mr. Golub's father, John, said: ''In the beginning, we cried for their daughter just as much as they did.   But I feel no sorrow for them now. They've burned it out of us.'' (The New York Times/Vic DeLucia)


36 Unsafe Social Clubs Chained and Locked
LEAD: New York City's social club task force chained and locked 36 places that were open in violation of fire-safety laws on Tuesday night and early yesterday, city officials said.


Gene That Causes Spinal Disease Is Isolated
LEAD: An international team of researchers has located the gene responsible for an often fatal disease of nerve cells, giving doctors their first genetic and clinical handle on a puzzling disorder that is the most common hereditary cause of infant death and is among the most prevalent of genetic defects over all.


Outdoors;   Fishing Guides Help Mark Favorite Runs
LEAD: rrUnless you are totally familiar with the stream you plan to fish, a map of it should be part of your angling equipage.
Such a map will enable you to identify and mark - for future reference - the pools and runs where you have your best luck.
And when you are discussing the stream with a fellow angler, you'll be able to do so with precision.


Danninger Medical Tehnology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Danninger Medical Tehnology
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,317,309
913,759
Net loss
44,852
b35,243
Share earns
-
.01
Yr sales
4,437,896
3,910,108
Net loss
62,630
b404,736
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


Hershey Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hershey Oil (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,370,000
1,458,000
Net loss
b1,270,000
c261,000
Share earns
-
.04
Yr rev
6,358,000
4,827,000
Net loss
b1,184,000
d2,680,000
b-Included a charge of $838,000 related to writedown of an Australian joint venture for both the quarter and year.


Millicom Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Millicom Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
114,549,000
55,450,000
Net loss
bc44,007,000
b7,764,000
b-Reflected impact of $21.9 million gain on sales of equity securities in fiscal 1989, compared with $28.1 million fiscal 1988 gain.


Alliance Well reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alliance Well
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
753,000
1,588,000
Net loss
528,000
c56,000
Yr rev
5,703,000
7,133,000
Net loss
578,000
bc1,044,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income
c-Included an extraordinary charge of $6,000 in the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $970,000 for the year.


Formula to Conquer Masters: Long Drives and Light Touch
LEAD: The players call it the ''touchiest'' course in the world, but history has shown that the best way to conquer the nerve-shattering speed of Augusta National's undulating greens is with strength as much as finesse.


Stocks Weaken, With Dow Falling 17.34
LEAD: Stocks weakened yesterday in thin trading as investors became nervous about rumors that a major, unidentified Japanese financial house might be in trouble.
Heavy computerized program selling also pushed prices lower and the Dow Jones industrial average ended the day at 2,719.37, down 17.34 points.


Tranzonic Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tranzonic Cos. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
24,243,100
19,553,500
Net inc
676,100
971,800
Share earns
.19
.27
Yr sales
96,705,800
79,539,700
Net inc
b4,869,900
c4,639,400
Share earns
1.34
1.29


Thomas Baird; Art Professor, 66
LEAD: Thomas Baird, a professor emeritus of fine arts at Trinity College in Hartford and a novelist, died of a heart attack in his car on March 28.
He was 66 years old and lived in Hartford.


Quest Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quest Medical Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,423,830
1,802,560
Net loss
b1,019,584
c455,821
Shares outst
6,166,356
6,355,362
Yr rev
5,999,431
7,514,978
Net inc
b2,561,372
c61,729
Share earns
.41
.01
Shares outst
6,189,132
6,377,962


M.D.C. Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* M.D.C. Holdings Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
160,834,000
223,486,000
Net loss
b32,322,000
c18,142,000
Shares outst
15,993,000
16,382,000
Yr rev
728,136,000
840,597,000
Net loss
b31,635,000
c31,370,000
Shares outst
15,924,000
17,290,000


Continental Pharma Cryosan Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Pharma Cryosan Inc.
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
14,657,000
16,915,000
Net inc
b484,000
c266,000
Share earns
.04
-
6mo sales
32,528,000
33,536,000
Net inc
b1,126,000
c926,000
Share earns
.10
-


Petrol Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petrol Industries
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
333,919
276,740
Net loss
66,095
162,663
Shares outst
1,775,916
1,817,475
Yr rev
1,352,809
1,142,919
Net inc
31,797
b133,610
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
1,786,906
1,824,480


Trial City
LEAD: New York is home to many worlds, proclaims the Association for a Better New York in a new campaign heralding the city's prominence in culture, finance, fashion and other fields.
There's another world the promoters might consider adding to their universe: trials.


Europe Prices Up 0.5%
LEAD: Consumer prices in the European Community rose five-tenths of 1 percent in February, the same monthly rate as in January, the European Community statistical office, Eurostat, said on Tuesday.
The annual inflation rate held at 5.2 percent for the third month.
Portugal again recorded the biggest monthly increase, 2.3 percent, while living costs in Greece and Luxembourg rose the least, a tenth of 1 percent.


Changing Their Playoff Image Is the Capital's Objective
LEAD: In their eighth consecutive spring in the Stanley Cup playoffs, the Washington Capitals will again attempt to get beyond the second round.


Healing Treatment, 4,000 Years Old, Is Revived
LEAD: To help heal seriously infected wounds, some surgeons have revived a 4,000-year-old treatment, born on the battlefields of ancient Egypt: they pack the depths of treacherous wounds with sweet substances like sugar.


Vehicle Sales Increased By 2.9% in Late March
LEAD: Sales of American-made cars and light trucks rose by 2.9 percent in late March, compared with the weak selling levels of a year earlier, leading some automobile executives to express hope that sales are gaining strength as the important spring season draws near.


Cadema Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadema Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
337,687
434,736
Net loss
391,114
389,181
Yr rev
1,513,081
1,552,482
Net loss
713,175
810,831


Industries Are Wary About Clean-Air Bill
LEAD: Industrial corporations are reacting with disappointment to the clean-air legislation passed by the Senate on Tuesday.
While some companies are resigned to paying the additional expenses, estimated at $20 billion by the Bush Administration, they warn that those costs will be passed on to American consumers.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: WHEN a toilet runs continuously, makes noises or fails to flush completely although unblocked, minor adjustments to internal parts can often cure the problem.
With most toilets, these parts are inside the tank.
With tankless toilets operated by a pressurized flush valve (common in apartment buildings), the parts are inside the valve.


Korea Adds to Export Aid
LEAD: The South Korean Government said today that it would double, to $2.8 billion, its low-interest loans for export industries in an effort to stimulate its economy.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Clem McCarthy, Philip Palazzo Jr. and Vivian Young have been promoted to executive vice presidents at Ammirati &amp; Puris.


Boesky Released on Parole, Ending 3-Year Prison Term
LEAD: At 5:05 yesterday morning, Ivan F. Boesky became a free man.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on the Education page yesterday about grants given by the RJR Nabisco Foundation misstated the size of the grant to Nathan Hale Intermediate School 293 in Brooklyn.
It was $222,886.


Maxtor Accepted In Miniscribe Bid
LEAD: The Maxtor Corporation, a maker of computer disk drives based in San Jose, Calif., said its bid to acquire substantially all of the assets of the bankrupt Miniscribe Corporation, a disk maker in Longmont, Colo., had been accepted by the United States Bankruptcy Court in Denver.
Under the bid, Maxtor will pay $21.5 million in cash and $20 million in stock, and Miniscribe's Hong Kong and Singapore operations will release $4.5 million in cash and acounts receivable to the court.


Rosario Journal;   An Ousted Argentine Rambo Storms the Hustings
LEAD: Residents of one of Rosario's poorest neighborhoods had just strung up a banner that said ''Aldo Rico for President'' when the cashiered army officer strode into the packed union hall to standing applause and the beat of a drum.


Other Rooms, Other Voices: 4 Viewpoints
LEAD: FASHION needed a sugar rush, and at a packed loft showroom Tuesday night, 21-year-old Christian Francis Roth provided it.


Exploration Co. of Louisiana reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exploration Co. of Louisiana
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,757,000
2,442,000
Net inc
57,000
271,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
89,725,000
82,367,000
Yr rev
9,320,000
8,791,000
Net inc
1,122,000
2,212,000
Share earns
.01
.02
Shares outst
86,301,000
81,719,000


6 Men Are Convicted in a Loan Scheme at a Bank in Queens
LEAD: A former bank president and five other men were convicted yesterday of participating in a fraudulent loan scheme that drained $8 million from a financially troubled savings bank in Queens.


Baruch-Foster reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baruch-Foster (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,071,762
2,269,103
Net loss
28,524
b977,229
Shares outst
2,717,757
2,718,009
Yr rev
8,904,813
7,654,726
Net loss
272,326
b2,628,864
Shares outst
2,717,828
2,718,037


Southeastern Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southeastern Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
7,370,000
2,000,000
Year net loss
b14,400,000
8,490,000
b-Reflected $1.5 million writeoff of nonrecoverable previously capitalized assets, $3.9 million of additional reserves for possible loan losses, and the expensing of $5.4 million in connection with the maintenance and disposition of real estate.


United Stationers reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Stationers (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 29
1990
1989
Sales
255,988,000
249,977,000
Net inc
3,711,000
7,099,000
Share earns
.24
.46
6mo sales
500,693,000
489,486,000
Net inc
7,390,000
14,314,000
Share earns
.48
.93


Challenger International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Challenger International (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,324,000
19,000
Net loss
462,000
8,000


Allegheny Sues Japonica on Votes
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc., a Pittsburgh-based maker of small appliances, said it had sued Japonica Partners L.P., seeking to disallow its votes on Allegheny's plan to reorganize under Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
In the suit, Allegheny said a bankruptcy court had the right to rule that the vote on a reorganization plan by certain parties was not in good faith and could be disallowed.


Allis-Chalmers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allis-Chalmers
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,010,000
917,000
Net loss
6,000
bc12,384,000
Share earns
-
1.35
Shares outst
15,272,000
9,163,000
Yr sales
3,834,000
3,248,000
Net inc
68,000
c814,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
12,979,000
9,163,000


North East Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North East Insurance (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b547,637
de502,246
Share earns
-
.17
Yr net inc
c282,387
e1,771,979
Share earns
.10
.60
b-After a reversal of tax loss carryforward of $179,892.


Delaware Otsego reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delaware Otsego
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,571,000
17,055,000
Net inc
1,616,000
193,000
Share earns
1.22
.15
The company said its earnings do not include operation of Delaware &amp; Hudson Railway during 1989.


Publicker Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Publicker Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,208,000
3,372,000
Net loss
650,000
c586,000
Shares outst
18,140,603
12,556,225
Yr sales
13,578,000
14,433,000
Net inc
b4,493,000
cd635,000
Share earns
.29
-
Shares outst
17,831,021
12,556,225


Textile and Shoe Import Bill
LEAD: A bill to restrict textile and shoe imports to the United States was introduced today in Congress with more than 250 House and Senate sponsors.


A Sugar Quota For Nicaragua
LEAD: The United States said Tuesday that it planned to restore preferential treatment for Nicaraguan exports, including a quota for sugar exports to the United States.


Sit-In Movement Had Origins Outside the South
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cummins Expects Turnaround Year
LEAD: The Cummins Engine Company, a maker of diesel engines, predicted at its annual meeting on Tuesday that it was headed toward a turnaround after two consecutive years of losses.
The chairman, Henry B. Schacht, said that Cummins would report a moderate profit for the first quarter despite a decrease in sales from the fourth quarter and that the earnings trend could continue if North


Critic's Notebook;   Plays Are Written By Wrights: Festival Returns to Basics
LEAD: After two years of offering encouragement to the latent theatrical inclinations of celebrity authors, the Actors Theater of Louisville has returned this season to first principles.
For the 14th annual Humana Festival of New Plays, this regional theater presented a marathon weekend of seven plays by playwrights - some new, some experienced, though not with work of equal quality.


As Bush Hails Progress by Blacks, Veto Is Seen on Rights Bill
LEAD: As his Administration threatened to veto new civil rights legislation, President Bush tonight told a black audience that he dreamed of the day that a black man or woman would occupy the White House.


Otha D. Wearin; Politician and Writer, 87
LEAD: Otha D. Wearin, a former Congressman who became a writer of westerns and was elected to the Cowboy Hall of Fame, died of heart disease on Tuesday at a nursing home here.
He was 87 years old.


Intercontinental Life reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intercontinental Life (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
9,622,000
265,000
Share earns
1.04
.06
Shares outst
6,985,000
4,444,000
Share earnings and shares outstanding are adjusted to reflect a 3-for-1 stock split paid February 1990.


Find-SVP Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Find-SVP Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,285,000
12,098,000
Net inc
103,000
80,000
Share earns
.02
.01


Laser Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laser Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,712,000
9,372,000
Net inc
277,000
b603,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss
The company said 1989 results included $1,387,000 representing a reversal of previously accrued expenses associated with royalty liabilities which the company has determined no longer exist.


Ruddock Knocks Out Dokes at Madison Square Garden


Tobacco Trade Pressure Seen
LEAD: The United States is threatening trade sanctions against third-world nations that try to keep out United States tobacco exports, an antismoking conference was told today.
Cigarette sales in North


General Instrument Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Instrument Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
351,202,000
328,774,000
Net inc
21,462,000
20,639,000
Share earns
.78
.61
Shares outst
27,421,000
33,713,000
Yr rev
1,377,344,000
1,304,733,000
Net inc
b98,690,000
85,547,000
Share earns
3.27
2.55
Shares outst
30,155,000
33,567,000


Goldcorp Investments reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldcorp Investments
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,585,620
2,746,318
Net loss
b3,536,017
c766,922
Share earns
-
.04
b-Included interest charges of $6,191,054 related to the acquisition of Dickenson Mines Ltd.


A Luxurious New Look for Bedrooms
LEAD: Tomorrow, when market week in the bed, bath and linen industry ends at the Jacob Javits Center and in the showrooms along the Avenue of the Americas, people will discover a luxurious new look for the bedroom at department stores.


Gorbachev's Need: A Diminished Russia
LEAD: The Lithuanian secession crisis confronts Mikhail Gorbachev with a historic choice: whether to become a George Washington, the leader of a loosely tied and newly created association of free republics, or a George III, the defender of an empire under attack from all sides.


Western Wind Across Urban Plains
LEAD: BY the time Thomas Molesworth opened the Shoshone Furniture Company in 1931, the myth of the American cowboy was laced into the American mindset.


Rival Coaches With Similar Ways
LEAD: Their eyes were popping - and the buttons on their suit jackets were threatening to - as Roger Neilson and Al Arbour, a couple of coaches who could pass as professors, appeared prepared to become pugilists.
The scene at center ice of Nassau Coliseum on Oct. 28 might have been comic if it weren't so convincing.


Hotelcopy Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hotelcopy Inc.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
1,555,201
1,107,912
Net loss
31,253
67,481
Shares outst
1,933,318
1,033,318
9mo rev
4,762,072
2,902,701
Net inc
364,933
204,108
Share earns
.24
.20
Shares outst
1,537,714
1,033,318


Whittaker to Take Gain for Quarter
LEAD: The Whittaker Corporation said it expects to record a substantial gain for the second quarter ending April 30 on the sale for $220 million of two chemical units to Morton International Inc.
Whittaker said it expected that the gain would result in income taxes of about $54 million, but was not immediately able to specify the amount of the gain.


Youths in Estonia Defying the Soviet Military Are Finding Eager Helpers
LEAD: Three young men clustered around a wobbly table in a ramshackle office here in the Estonian capital, filling out questionnaires that could change their lives and threaten their republic's relationship with Moscow.


Chemical Leaman reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Leaman
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
54,863,076
57,017,010
Net loss
1,292,038
b291,515
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
898,110
947,399
Yr rev
231,121,340
241,173,940
Net loss
402,657
b619,755
Share earns
-
.67
Shares outst
925,713
928,722


Southwest Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest Realty (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,706,000
2,910,000
Net loss
1,285,000
760,000
Yr rev
13,081,000
13,093,000
Net loss
4,412,000
2,302,000


Baker Cautions Shevardnadze on Soviet Crackdown in Lithuania


Mutual Funds Outpace the Market
LEAD: After years of weak performance, mutual funds that invest in technology stocks bounced back and were the best performers in the first quarter.
And the break in the Japanese stock market hurt funds that invest in the Pacific region, making these securities the worst performers in the period.


Simmons Wins Award As Outstanding Player
LEAD: Lionel Simmons of La Salle, the third-leading scorer in National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I history, was named yesterday as the winner of the 14th annual John Wooden Award as college basketball's outstanding player.


No Headline
LEAD: FOR fall, Ralph Lauren returned to the military theme that has proved so successful in his spring collection.
But instead of an admiral's navy blue and gold braid, he turned to the Army's traditional khaki and olive fabrics mixed with brown leather.


AT&amp;E Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AT&amp;E Corp. (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,129,000
3,604,000
Net loss
21,549,000
14,278,000


Minnesota Moves to Curb Cigarette Machines
LEAD: At least 20 Minnesota communities have prohibited or put restrictions on cigarette machines, with some of the limits aimed at keeping cigarettes out of the hands of young people.


Belgian King, Unable to Sign Abortion Law, Takes Day Off
LEAD: The civilian Government temporarily suspended King Baudouin I from power today after he declared that he could not, in good conscience as a Roman Catholic, sign a new law permitting abortion.


Why Tax Apartment Dwellers More?
LEAD: With New York City's budget gap widening, a painful rise in the real property tax rate becomes inevitable.
Property valuation under present law makes the pain much worse for apartment house dwellers and commercial tenants than for homeowners.
The impending increase can force attention to the need for reform.


Cintas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cintas Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
70,192,000
61,163,000
Net inc
6,219,000
5,178,000
Share earns
.44
.37
Shares outst
14,164,226
14,141,620
9mo sales
206,408,000
178,402,000
Net inc
18,481,000
15,082,000
Share earns
1.31
1.09
Shares outst
14,156,297
13,849,104


Righetti Will Get Relief Help
LEAD: When the day was done, the game did not seem so important.
Pascual Perez pitched for the first time this spring and the principals in the Don Mattingly contract negotiations conferred for the second time in two days, but the most startling development concerned Dave Righetti.


2 Researchers Spell 'I.B.M.,' Atom by Atom
LEAD: Hiram Maxim, the inventor of the machine gun, used to demonstrate his marksmanship by firing patterns of bullets into walls to spell out the initials of potential customers.
In a similar vein, I.B.M. announced yesterday that its scientists had spelled out the company's initials by dragging single atoms into the desired pattern on the surface of a crystal of nickel.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: I USED to do it a lot, stand in line I mean, listening to the people ahead of me ask for four seats in the center of row H for June 18.
How do they know they'll be alive on June 18, I wondered, and why does it have to be row H?
Given good eyes, good ears and no appointments that I couldn't change at the last minute,


Behind the Furious Fog: Cleaner Air
LEAD: After months of brutal legislative warfare, the Senate has produced the first comprehensive clean air bill since 1977.
It's a huge improvement over current law, and tougher than George Bush's proposals.
It reconciles regional differences, and will encourage technology.
If matched by the House, it will let the nation breathe easier.


Health Insurance Vermont reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Insurance Vermont
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
447,473
460,160
Share earns
.80
.81


Sea Galley Stores reports earnings for 16wk to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sea Galley Stores (OTC)
16wk to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,946,000
16,467,000
Net loss
3,935,000
b402,000
Shares outst
3,144,417
3,060,748
Yr rev
51,508,000
54,102,000
Net loss
6,816,000
c206,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
3,090,591
3,054,522


Plane Crash Examined After Hints of Suicide
LEAD: The Boulder police are investigating the fiery crash of a small plane for signs that it might have resulted from a struggle between the pilot and his suicidal passenger for control of the craft, a department spokesman said.


Edward C. Oelsner, 75, Executive And Leader in Shipping Industry
LEAD: Edward C. Oelsner, retired president of the United States Navigation Company, which represented steamship companies from around the world, died of leukemia on Monday at his home in North Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 75 years old and also lived in Arlington, Vt.


Leisure Concepts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leisure Concepts
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,060,374
1,341,028
Net inc
512,218
74,302
Share earns
.16
.03
Yr rev
5,888,379
4,354,148
Net inc
983,131
540,617
Share earns
.31
.17


Genex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,581,000
705,000
Net loss
945,000
2,691,000
Shares outst
19,230,999
16,850,284
Yr rev
5,041,000
3,365,000
Net loss
6,260,000
8,435,000


Oklahoma Has Done It Yet Again
LEAD: Just when the University of Oklahoma seemed to have yielded its Honorary Dogpatch status to North Carolina State, Oklahoma insinuated itself back into the picture last weekend.


International Banknote Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Banknote Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,029,000
22,695,000
Net loss
b827,000
685,000
Yr sales
82,998,000
81,050,000
Net inc
bc7,308,000
625,000
Share earns
.39
.03
b-Included $1,023,000 for the quarter and $3,690,000 for the year, in proxy and other expenses.


American Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
13,481,000
b325,000
Yr net loss
35,288,000
b3,805,000
b-Net income
There are no share earnings for the year-ago quarter and year because preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income.


AIRLINE WORKERS PROTEST IN NEPAL
LEAD: Pilots and staff members of the Government-owned Nepalese Airline held a daylong work stoppage today to protest human rights violations as thousands of Nepalese gathered at Hindu temples mourning the deaths of pro-democracy campaigners over the last seven weeks.


China Backs Some Autonomy in Hong Kong Code
LEAD: China approved a new constitution for Hong Kong today, giving the territory some autonomy after it returns to Chinese control in 1997.


Architecture Gallery Honors an Innovator
LEAD: UNTIL now, New York City did not have a permanent gallery for architecture.
The New Gallery at Buell Hall opened on the campus of Columbia University on Tuesday, and its first show, ''The Filter of Reason: Work of Paul Nelson,'' comprises some 200 paintings, photographs and models.
It will be on view through


Ruddock Stops Dokes With 3 Lefts in the 4th
LEAD: When Michael (Dynamite) Dokes, the former world champion, entered the Madison Square Garden ring last night, his opponent, Donovan (Razor) Ruddock responded to Dokes's glare by telling him, ''I'm gonna mess you up'' - in language somewhat more extreme.


CASTRO UNBENDING ON CUBA'S FUTURE
LEAD: Thumbing his nose at a changing world, President Fidel Castro is embellishing one of his sturdiest themes, the resolute defiance of tiny Cuba against its gargantuan neighbor, the United States.


Comverse Tech reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comverse Tech
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,746,047
7,589,996
Net inc
413,618
b327,108
b-Net loss


Springer's Medical Tribune To Start Publishing Today
LEAD: Axel Springer Verlag A.G., Europe's largest newspaper publisher and fourth-largest media company, makes its publishing debut in the United States today with the revamped Medical Tribune, a national newspaper for doctors.


Nostalgia and a Burger For Thruway Motorists
LEAD: CONSTRUCTION begins in June on 16 plazas along the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway between New York City and Buffalo.
The plazas - 12 of them new and four that are additions to existing ones - will be in the rustic Adirondack style that was popular at the turn of the century.


Banco Popular de Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banco Popular de Puerto Rico (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
15,142,985
12,466,288
Per share
.75
.62
Shares outst
20,058,063
20,000,000


Golden Cycle Gold reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Cycle Gold
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
68,000
63,000
Net loss
729,000
326,000


Seeds of Arab-Israeli Hope Bloom in the Desert;   Jerusalem Solutions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cost of Building a B- 2 May Exceed $1 Billion
LEAD: Reducing the number of B-2 bombers produced is likely raise the cost of a single plane to more than $1 billion, a Congressional study said today.
Several lawmakers said the report was a reason to cancel the bomber, which they called a ''flying Fort Knox.''


Personal Health
LEAD: My friend Betty is no ordinary 60-year-old.
She jogs daily, swims and hikes regularly, cross-country skis occasionally, writes books and book reviews, entertains friends, prepares wonderful dinners, travels widely, takes excellent photographs, studies tap dancing and, of late, has become a prize-winning ballroom dancer.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-17
The president of Estonia said that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev personally warned him against the Soviet republic's following Lithuania in declaring independence.
Page A1


Momentum Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Momentum Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
44,631,773
3,928,379
Net loss
406,621
147,187
Shares outst
14,099,085
4,383,213


Biotechnology Deveolopment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biotechnology Deveolopment
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
664,285
497,080
Net inc
66,049
c228,713
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
2,424,878
2,308,726
Net loss
b137,824
884,989
b-After an extraordinary credit of $160,000, or 5 cents a share, from refinancing of debt.


High School Press Needs Revitalizing
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bairnco Corp., New York, a holding company, said David C. Bevan Jr. had resigned as senior vice president for finance and administration, treasurer and secretary.
J.
Robert Wilkinson was named vice president for finance and treasurer, and Barry M. Steinhart was named vice president for administration and secretary.


National Patent Devel.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Patent Devel.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
62,907,000
62,607,000
Net inc
b11,692,000
c108,000
Share earns
.90
.01
Yr rev
278,470,000
264,598,000
Net inc
b6,797,000
c2,061,000
Share earns
.62
.19


New Hewlett Lab
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company, America's third-largest computer maker, said it was setting up a research laboratory in Tokyo as part of a global expansion of its research operations.
The company's president, John A. Young, said the lab would focus on applied research in photonics, integrated-circuit testing and low-temperature electronic devices.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
A King Sits It Out


Environmental Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Diagnostics
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
456,941
782,159
Net loss
588,412
1,020,154
Shares outst
35,115,823
34,008,794
Yr rev
2,799,647
2,583,526
Net loss
2,501,182
3,469,522
Shares outst
35,345,062
33,833,524


Citizens Savings Bank -Ithaca reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Savings Bank -Ithaca (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,237,000
2,578,000
Per share
.97
1.12
Year-ago share earnings are adjusted to reflect a 5 percent stock dividend paid in October 1989.


Eastover Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastover Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b705,000
c607,000
Shares outst
1,144,000
1,158,000
Yr net inc
b2,912,000
c2,031,000
Share earns
2.54
1.72
Shares outst
1,145,000
1,180,000
b-Included a loss of $754,000 for the quarter and a gain of $3,322,000 for the year; both from investments.


Ault Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ault Inc.
Qtr to Feb 25
1990
1989
Sales
4,273,000
4,213,000
Net loss
96,000
b108,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
1,960,976
1,963,131
9mo sales
12,480,000
13,267,000
Net loss
91,000
b433,000
Share earns
-
.22


1,000 in Cincinnati Rally in Support of Controversial Photo Exhibit    Photos include depictions of homosexuality and sadomasochism, as well as nude children. (Associated Press)


Seaway Food Town Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seaway Food Town Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 24
1990
1989
Sales
140,545,000
127,513,000
Net inc
123,000
1,412,000
Share earns
.05
.62
Shares outst
2,294,796
2,291,576
6mo sales
274,580,000
252,337,000
Net inc
527,000
2,749,000
Share earns
.23
1.20
Shares outst
2,292,106
2,294,073


Chronicle
LEAD: As a neuropsychiatrist at the Harvard Medical School and Massachussets General Hospital, DR.
ROBERT PORTNEY will lecture tomorrow on prescription-drug abuse at a psychiatric conference in Orlando, Fla.
And as a concert violinist, he will play Bach and Paganini tomorrow night at a benefit in Orlando for


Dekalb Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dekalb Genetics (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
136,200,000
118,800,000
Net inc
10,000,000
5,100,000
Share earns
1.77
.91
6mo rev
168,000,000
152,100,000
Net inc
10,500,000
6,400,000
Share earns
1.87
1.13


Asiamerica Equities Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Asiamerica Equities Ltd.  (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,218,660
8,304,846
Net inc
b6,501,974
3,412,422
Share earns
.74
.52
b-Reflected $566,567 income from discontinued operations.


Gamelan Ensemble
LEAD: Gamelan Son of Lion, a new music ensemble that performs on its own versions of Indonesian gamelan instruments, will give the first performance of ''Round Robin,'' a collaborative work by the ensemble's nine composer-performers, at Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, tomorrow at 3 P.M.


Commoner for a Day, Long Live the King!
LEAD: A day or so after it began, Belgium's royal crisis ended this afternoon when a special session of Parliament declared by a vote of 245 to 0 with 93 abstentions that King Baudouin I was once again capable of reigning.


Catholic Bishops Hire Firms To Market Fight on Abortion
LEAD: The nation's Roman Catholic bishops announced yesterday that they had engaged a major public relations firm and a politically connected polling concern in Washington to conduct a nationwide campaign to persuade both Catholics and non-Catholics to oppose abortion.


Restaurants
LEAD: Cafe des Artistes, in a historic turn-of-the-century building off Central Park West, hardly needs promotion.
Despite its reputation over the years for unpredictable food, getting a table on short notice is harder than booking weekend tickets to Broadway's ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof.''


Avcorp Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avcorp Industries
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,668,000
6,778,000
Net inc
771,000
c986,000
Share earns
.10
-
Yr sales
36,119,000
23,607,000
Net loss
b15,246,000
4,250,000
b-Included a $7.7 million loss on the sale of two divisions and a $2.9 million loss from discontinued operations.


Producer Signs Disney Deal
LEAD: Dawn Steel, the former president of Columbia Pictures, has signed a long-term agreement to produce films and television shows for the Walt Disney Company, Disney said yesterday.
Ms. Steel was president of


Consolidated Fibres Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Fibres Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,798,000
7,617,000
Net inc
175,000
281,000
Share earns
.08
.14
6mo sales
21,438,000
15,718,000
Net inc
67,000
721,000
Share earns
.03
.36


Man Charged in Death of Suspected Burglar
LEAD: A 19-year-old East Harlem man was arrested yesterday and charged with murdering an alleged intruder who was shot before falling to his death from a fifth-floor apartment window, the police said.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Pistons End Road Slump
Mark Aguirre came off the bench to score 25 points and Isiah Thomas hit four free throws in the final 31 seconds last night as the Detroit Pistons broke a streak of four consecutive defeats on the road with a 104-99 victory over the Atlanta Hawks.(AP)
Bulls 111, Magic 104: Michael Jordan scored 16 of his game-high 38 points in the fourth quarter to lead Chicago to its fifth victory in a row.


Campeau Chains Expect Recovery
LEAD: Federated and Allied department stores projected no sales growth for the quarter beginning in May but said they were recovering under Federal Bankruptcy Court protection. ''We clearly are doing better in Chapter 11 than we expected,'' James M. Zimmerman, the president of Federated Department Stores Inc.


Crownamerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crownamerica Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 3
1990
1989
Revenue
17,512,000
19,715,000
Net inc
430,000
124,000
Share earns
.41
.12
6mo rev
35,853,000
38,401,000
Net inc
b839,000
c1,146,000
Share earns
.80
1.09
Shares outst
1,053,000
1,054,157


Jersey Man Is Seized In Brother's Slaying After 13-Year Flight
LEAD: A New Jersey man wanted in the slaying of his brother has been captured after 13 years of hiding under an assumed identity in Tennessee.


Man Charged in '71 Slayings Is Called 'Confused'
LEAD: John E. List, accused of killing five members of his family in 1971, has diabetes and is suffering some memory loss, a doctor who examined him in his jail cell testified today.


Market Place;   First Chicago Action Questioned
LEAD: Last Thursday's announcement by the First Chicago Corporation that a small number of its major real estate loans had gone bad further depressed the bank-holding company's stock.
It closed today at $29 a share, down from $49 less than a year ago.


FNW Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FNW Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,689,000
3,050,000
Share earns
.54
.44


Washington Scientific Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 11
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Scientific Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 11
1990
1989
Sales
21,694,000
17,245,000
Net inc
18,000
b749,000
Share earns
.01
.32
6mo sales
42,083,000
30,264,000
Net inc
1,260,000
b1,534,000
Share earns
.53
.64


Picket-Fence America, As Seen by John Waters
Not content to watch old Presley movies on television, John Waters has made a brand new one, and made it in the manner of a teen-crazed Cecil B. DeMille. ''Cry-Baby,'' Mr.
Waters's epic vision of mid-1950's high-school Americana, has a sweeping scale not usually associated with so dopey a subject, and for a while, almost enough exuberance to make that scale seem right.
It also has droll costumes, elaborate musical numbers and a cast that's less a dramatic ensemble than a collection of found art.
What it doesn't have, unfortunately, is enough true conviction to rise above novelty status.
Nor does it really have a plot.
Mr.
Waters shares with others like David Lynch a profoundly ironic view of picket-fence, middle-American platitudes.
But in his case, that manifests itself as a deep and enduring affection for the grotesque, an affection that renders the forced innocence of ''Cry-Baby'' very precarious indeed.
Unlike his sunnier and more spontaneous ''Hairspray,'' ''Cry-Baby'' has its brittle side, especially after the fun of initially encountering its ringer-filled cast (e.g. Patricia Hearst as a crossing guard) has worn thin.
The latter part of the film is devoted almost entirely to empty posturing.


Upheaval in the East;   East Europe Considers Cutting Aid to Indochina
LEAD: The collapse of European Communism and the withering of Comecon, the Eastern-bloc trading association, have led Eastern European countries to consider reducing their diplomatic representation and aid to Cambodia and Vietnam.


Call for Black Militia Stuns Milwaukee
LEAD: A Milwaukee Alderman has stunned and divided this quiet, no-nonsense city with his efforts to revive the Black Panthers and build a black militia that he says will take violent action if his demands for racial parity are not met within five years.


Baier Lustgarten; Nurseryman, 82
LEAD: Baier Lustgarten, founder of the Lustgarten Nurseries, which had outlets at Shelter Island, L.I., Middle Island, L.I., Cream Ridge, N.J., and Miami, died of cancer on Wednesday at his home in Quogue, L.I.
He was 82 years old.


States Drop Record-Labeling Bills
LEAD: Bills that call for mandatory labeling of record albums with explicit lyrics have been dropped by most of the states that had been considering them, a trade group for record retailers and two parent groups announced today.





Books of The Times;   Suffocating in Society And Unable to Escape
LEAD:
The Stories of Edith Wharton
Selected and Introduced by Anita Brookner
310 pages. Carroll &amp; Graf. $18.95.


Spira Enters a Not Guilty Plea to Extortion
LEAD: Howard Spira pleaded not guilty at his arraignment here today on charges of threatening and trying to extort money from George Steinbrenner, the owner of the Yankees.


Wilshire Oil Co. of Texas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wilshire Oil Co. of Texas Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,434,000
1,140,000
Net loss
134,000
1,192,000
Yr rev
9,873,000
6,713,000
Net inc
230,000
b924,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Review/Theater;   Cariou in 'Mountain,' As Justice Douglas
LEAD: William O. Douglas spent his life on the edge, as an outspoken maverick on the Supreme Court (more than one-third of his 1,306 judicial decisions were dissents) and as a mountaineer and adventurer.
From childhood through old age he courted danger, and during his 36 1/2 years as an associate justice, he was often embroiled in controversy.


Touring the World On Wings of Song (Folk Song, That Is)
LEAD: POPULAR music serves more purposes than a fully loaded Swiss army knife.
It sets dancers in motion, smooths conversation at parties, speeds the work day, exorcises frustrations, annoys parents; it brings groups together and consoles the lonely.
In a city like New York, where the diaspora of the world collect, traditional music tied to a specific place and time can offer a glimpse of faraway lands or, for some audience members, a memory of home.


Two Masters Newcomers Carve Up Augusta National
LEAD: Player debuts at the Masters tournament are usually memorable more for penalty strokes and three-putts than for superlative scores.
But such notions were shattered in today's first round as first-time players dominated the scoreboard and favorites faltered.


Exxon Unit in Deal To Sell 4 Tankers
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation said its Esso Eastern Maritime Ltd. affiliate had agreed to sell all four of its ultra-large crude oil tankers to Ceres Hellenic Shipping Enterprises Ltd., an international shipping company, for an undisclosed amount.


Spearhead Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spearhead Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
10,094,000
11,388,000
Net inc
275,000
111,000
Share earns
.06
.02
9mo sales
23,145,000
28,912,000
Net inc
57,000
799,000
Share earns
.01
.17


Airline Partnership
LEAD: StatesWest Airlines and the USAir Group Inc. agreed to an operating partnership.
The agreement provides USAir, a national carrier, with a stronger base in the West Coast market while lending StatesWest, a regional carrier, the resources it needs to survive, the companies said.
StatesWest will become the first USAir Express operator in the West starting July 15.


Lionel Is Urged To Sell Big Stake
LEAD: An investment group led by a Florida brokerage, which controls a 5 percent stake in the Lionel Corporation, has asked the New York toy retailer to set up a committee to consider the sale of a large stake in the company.


A Calendar of Music for the Easter Season
LEAD: rd's ''Easter Antiphon,'' the Hallelujah Chorus from Handel's ''Messiah'' and other works; Timothy Smith, organist; James A. Simms, director, 9 and 11:15 A.M.
Information: 602-0800.
ST.
PHILIP'S CHURCH (Episcopal), Seventh Avenue at 134th Street.
Works by Bairstow, Richard, Hurd, Bach and Handel; Gerald Morton, director, 6 and 11 A.M.


Worst Season for Wildfires May Be at Hand
LEAD: Firefighting experts across the country are bracing for what they say could become the worst fire season in the nation's history, a result of drought, hurricane debris and a lack of manpower.


WorldCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WorldCorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
51,181,000
43,334,000
Net loss
7,008,000
b2,054,000
Share earns
-
.19
Shares outst
16,314,835
10,994,618
Yr rev
223,842,000
167,528,000
Net inc
11,073,000
c11,835,000
Share earns
.75
1.03
Shares outst
14,857,711
11,438,112


Under Fire, Nepal's King Ousts Cabinet
LEAD: As demonstrators began a general strike, King Birendra dissolved his five-day-old Council of Ministers early today and appointed a new Prime Minister to negotiate with leaders of the pro-democracy movement that is challenging his Government.


Review/Film;   Music, Musicians and a Louisiana Rollick
LEAD: Early in ''J'ai Ete au Bal'' (''I Went to the Dance''), an exuberant tribute to the continuing vitality of Louisiana's Cajun and zydeco music, Marc Savoy, an accordionist, tells a story about two Cajun musicians who worried that there might not be anything for them to do in heaven.


It's 'Themed,' It's Kitschy, It's Trump's Taj
LEAD: Perhaps the toughest job at the Trump Taj Mahal casino here is that of the telephone operators, who have been answering the thousands of incoming calls, ''Thank you for calling the Trump Taj Majal, where wonders never cease.'' The repetition of that sentence, over and over, like a mantra, tells much about this casino hotel, a place where pleasure is not so much encouraged as decreed.


2 G.O.P. Senators Would Double Military Cuts Backed by President
LEAD: Breaking with the Bush Administration, two senior Republican Senators called today for Pentagon spending reductions that are twice as great as those offered by the President.


Upheaval in the East;   Support for German Unity Found Growing in U.S.
LEAD: While Americans seem uneasy about whether the change in Europe is permanent, support for the unification of East and West Germany has grown and two out of three Americans say they do not fear that a united Germany would threaten peace in Europe, according to the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll.


Penwest Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penwest Ltd. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
21,909,000
19,627,000
Net inc
1,963,000
525,000
Share earns
.26
.06
Shares outst
7,488,221
8,657,123
6mo sales
42,824,000
38,004,000
Net inc
3,725,000
1,380,000
Share earns
.50
.16
Shares outst
7,452,333
8,656,490


At the Armory, a Weekend To Study 'Works on Paper'
LEAD: Though it lacks the Rockettes, the Seventh Regiment Armory, at Park Avenue and 67th Street, has become the Radio City Music Hall of the art and antiques trade.
A dozen elaborate productions a year devoted to vintage material - as many as can be handled by the armory, which is also used for military purposes - whirl in and out of its vast Victorian depths.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums


Sanchez Vicario Fails To Stop Capriati's Ascent
LEAD: She kept herself under control as she walked off the court, but let loose with a whoop as soon as she was out of earshot of her victim.
Still more girl than woman, 14-year-old Jennifer Capriati continued to bulldoze her way to the top of women's tennis today by demolishing Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the French Open champion, 6-1, 6-1, to advance to the quarterfinals of the Family Circle Cup.


DINKINS FORECASTS WIDER BUDGET GAP AS REVENUES SLIP
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that New York City was facing an additional $105 million revenue shortfall for the fiscal year ending June 30.
He also said he would seek $309 million in higher taxes to balance the city's budget in the coming fiscal year, on top of the $550 million it is already seeking.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Warning on Latex Paint
Alarmed over potential health dangers, Federal health officials have urged Government regulators to consider banning the use of mercury in latex paint.
Page D1.
Clean Air Bill Gains
A House committee completed work on a bill strengthening the Clean Air Act after settling the issue of how to go about curbing acid rain.


Ninjas, Ha! Come See Our Turtles
LEAD: So which is it, art imitating life or life imitating art?


Upheaval in the East;   Restive Yugoslavs Weigh Options
LEAD: Halfway across Europe from the restive Baltic republics, another fragile union will be put to the test on Sunday when the republic of Slovenia casts the first multiparty vote held in Yugoslavia in 45 years.


Mott's Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mott's Holdings Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
953,362
976,484
Net inc
b2,420,339
c495,802
Share earns
.93
.19
Yr sales
2,898,849
2,872,286
Net inc
b1,778,539
d85,947
Share earns
.68
-
Shares outst
2,610,454
2,614,424


AC&amp;R's Aruba Work Stresses Distinctions
LEAD: AC&amp;R Advertising's first campaign for the Aruba Tourism Authority has much that is standard to island advertising: beautiful scenery, an attractive couple in bathing suits and a narrator who speaks with a Caribbean lilt.
What sets the campaign apart is its attempt to set Aruba apart.


CFS Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CFS Group Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
43,191,000
42,575,000
Net inc
1,004,000
724,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Rowland H. S. Bedell; Ophthalmologist, 55
LEAD: Dr.
Rowland Holbrook Smith Bedell, an ophthalmologist who formerly headed two medical units of the Federal Aviation Administration, died of a heart attack on Wednesday at his home in Bethesda.
Md.
He was 55 years old.


Hornets Sign Littles
LEAD: Gene Littles, who took over as the interim coach of the Charlotte Hornets in January, got the job on a permanent basis yesterday when he was given a multiyear contract by the owner, George Shinn.
The Hornets are 8-25 under Littles, who took over when Dick Harter was dismissed Jan. 31. ''My heart has always been in coaching,'' said Littles, who joined the Hornets' front office when the team was being formed and later took on the additional role of a assistant coach.


Biomagnetic Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biomagnetic Technologies (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,861,000
3,874,000
Net loss
1,649,000
175,000


U.S. Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Gold Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,630,000
4,090,000
Net loss
12,956,000
b566,000
Share earns
-
.01
Yr rev
15,953,000
9,771,000
Net loss
11,577,000
b1,628,000
Share earns
-
.04


G.E. Shows Bright Side of East Europe
LEAD: AMERICAN advertising's fickle relationship with Eastern Europe will take another turn toward sweetness - and most definitely light - this weekend with the release of a General Electric Company commercial that celebrates G.E.'s venture to produce light bulbs in Hungary.


Rafael Lorente de No Dies of Cancer at 87; A Neural Researcher
LEAD: Rafael Lorente de No, a researcher on the anatomy and physiology of the nervous system, died of cancer on Monday in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 87 years old.


Du Pont Note Sale
LEAD: A $300 million note sale by the Du Pont Company was priced yesterday through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The notes, which are due April 15, 2000, were given a 9.15 percent coupon and priced at 99.831 to yield 9.176 percent, or about 60 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Review/Film;   A New-Age Comedy, Crystals And All
LEAD: The beneficial power of crystals has done nothing for ''In the Spirit,'' a nervous new-age comedy much more notable for good intentions than good luck.
A rare appearance by Elaine May, who co-stars with Marlo Thomas in what proves to be an unexpectedly mundane caper story, and a directing credit for the respected acting coach Sandra Seacat give ''In the


Panel Says Sessions Tolerates F.B.I. Discrimination
LEAD: Members of Congress today accused the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, William S. Sessions, of tolerating what one lawmaker described as a ''living hell'' experienced by the bureau's black and Hispanic employees.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bidermann Industries, New York, a clothing manufacturer, appointed Peter C. Kells executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Real S O S Is Obscured By Hoax, and 2 Are Lost
LEAD: The call, on a marine hailing frequency, was urgent: A ship off Massachusetts was transmitting a plea for help.
A minute later there was another call.
That one seemed to be a hoax, so the Coast Guard decided not to start searching the waters.


Coeur D'Alene Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coeur D'Alene Mines (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,829,000
21,366,000
Net inc
4,398,000
3,791,000
Share earns
.42
.34
Shares outst
11,866,234
11,845,436
Yr rev
77,429,000
85,246,000
Net inc
9,405,000
11,737,335
Share earns
.94
1.45
Shares outst
9,978,160
11,737,335


A Chance for Howe
LEAD: Steve Howe, whose career has been wrecked by repeated alcohol and drug abuse, has been given a chance to prove he is finally free of his troubles and still can pitch.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
ASIAN VIDEO FESTIVAL


Stocks Edge Up as Japan Worries Persist
LEAD: Stock prices barely managed to stay in the plus column yesterday after fighting off rumors of new financial troubles among Japanese stock market speculators.


Protesters on Horseback Confront Nuclear-Waste Site Inspectors


Review/Dance;   Pilar Rioja, Flamenco And Falla
LEAD: Pilar Rioja is back in New York, at the Repertorio Espanol, and her new program, ''Falla and Flamenco,'' is one of her best.
There is a somewhat harder edge to her performing, though the graciousness that attracts so many of her devoted fans is still very much present.
That edge is welcome.
And Miss Rioja has lost nothing of the sense of theater that so distinguishes her Spanish dancing.


Boston Educator Offers A Bold Campaign Style
LEAD: John R. Silber is not a conventional candidate for the Democratic nomination for governor of Massachusetts.


You Can't Die in Peace in a New York Hospital
LEAD: To the Editor:


Browning To Drop Waste Unit
LEAD: Browning-Ferris Industries, the nation's second-largest waste-disposal company, said yesterday that it was abandoning its efforts to turn around Cecos International Inc., its struggling hazardous-waste subsidiary.


Upheaval in the East;   D'Amato on the Road
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said today that he would try to drive across the border into Lithuania to show that Congress supports the Baltic republic's drive for independence.


At the Bar
LEAD: In the opening scene of ''Mountain,'' William O. Douglas is on his deathbed, marshaling his dwindling energies to defend his career. ''The law must be about life!'' he rails. ''About the people and their lives!
How can you sit in judgment on them if you haven't lived?
If you haven't taken those journeys?


Food Lion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Food Lion Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 24
1990
1989
Sales
1,201,285,000
1,010,805,000
Net inc
37,129,000
28,720,000
Share earns
.12
.09


Washington Talk;   If Politics Is Broke, Can Talk Fix It?
LEAD: It is hard to say whether American politics can actually be improved, but there sure are a lot of people talking about what is wrong.
In fact, talking about politics has become a cottage industry.


Ciccarelli Scores in Overtime to Lift Capitals
LEAD: Dino Ciccarelli's third goal of the game, 5 minutes 34 seconds into overtime, gave the Washington Capitals a 5-4 victory over the Devils tonight in the opening game of the Patrick Division semifinal series at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Joe Fox; Track Coach, 79
LEAD: Joe Fox, the track and field coach at Fordham Prep for 30 years before his retirement in 1976, died Wednesday at New Rochelle Hospital after a brief illness.
He was 79 years old.


Review/Music;   'Passio,' Arvo Part's Interpretation of the St. John Passion
LEAD: Arvo Part is a name already familiar to American record collectors, many of whom seem to have been drawn to his work because of its reliance on a radical austerity that rejects the tortured complexity of much contemporary music.
An audience eager to hear his ''Passio,'' a setting of the Passion According to St.


A Hard Hit, a Frightening Result
LEAD: In hockey, the unpenalized hits often cause the most serious injuries.


Rangers Win as Opener Closes With Brawl
LEAD: The game, rich in emotion and scintillating for so long, was with one crushing, controversial hit transformed into a frightening scene with Pat LaFontaine flat and unmoving on the ice.
And then - with the sorry sense of inevitability that so often colors National Hockey League games -the events turned ugly and dangerous.


QVC-Damark Deal Canceled
LEAD: QVC Network Inc., which sells merchandise through cable television home-shopping programs, said its planned sale of its C.O.M.B. mail-order business to Damark International Inc. had been terminated.


Equipment Co. of America reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equipment Co. of America
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
14,793,000
16,295,000
Net loss
1,371,000
93,000
Shares outst
3,220,000
2,908,000


Dollar Mixed in Light Day; Gold, Up Abroad, Off in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed yesterday in dull trading on world currency markets.


Field Narrows for Envoy to Managua
LEAD: A career United States Foreign Service officer emerged today as the leading candidate to be Ambassador to Nicaragua, Administration officials said.


Economic Scene;   Lessons for Japan In Stock Plunge
LEAD: THE drop of almost 30 percent in the Tokyo stock market has provoked widespread fears among the Japanese that their economic miracle is ending.


Cycare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cycare Systems (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,468,000
20,921,000
Net inc
715,000
b2,124,000
Share earns
.13
-
Yr rev
86,215,000
83,734,000
Net inc
3,079,000
486,000
Share earns
.54
.09


B&amp;H Ocean Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* B&amp;H Ocean Carriers (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,455,000
6,885,000
Net inc
4,430,000
2,541,000
Share earns
1.09
.62
Yr rev
36,866,000
-
Net inc
12,384,000
-
Share earns
3.04
-
Year-ago results are not comparable because the company began operations on Aug.


Chad Says Its Troops Killed 730 Guerrillas
LEAD: Chad said today that its troops had killed 730 Libyan-backed guerrillas and captured 315 in fighting near the eastern border with the Sudan.


Communications World reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications World
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
491,514
1,025,757
Net loss
153,726
b3,803
6mo rev
1,125,640
2,026,398
Net loss
67,766
b49,728
b-Net income
Year-ago share earnings were not given because they were less than one cent a share.


Tokyo Stocks Up Sharply
LEAD: Share prices soared on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today, encouraged by the dollar's retreat against the yen.
In late trading the Nikkei average of 225 stocks was up 989.44 points, or 3.5 percent, to 29,238.50.


Audrey Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audrey Resources
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,012,000
7,503,000
Net inc
b1,822,000
c1,031,000
Share earns
.16
.11
Shares outst
11,609,653
9,368,248
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $444,000, or 4 cents a share.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
Dixie Carter as Herself


Poindexter Jury Ends 4th Day
LEAD: The jury in the Iran-contra trial of John M. Poindexter today completed four days of deliberations on the five criminal charges against him.
It will resume deliberations Friday.
Mr.
Poindexter, a retired Navy rear admiral who served as national security adviser in Ronald Reagan's Administration, is accused of five criminal charges in the affair, including conspiring to mislead Congress about the arms sales to Iran and efforts to aid the Nicaraguan rebels at a time the aid was forbidden by Congress.


Dean of New School Picked To Head Planning Agency
LEAD: Filling the most important vacancy left in his administration, Mayor David N. Dinkins has chosen Richard L. Schaffer, dean of the Graduate School of Management and Urban Professions at the New School for Social Research, as chairman of the city's Planning Commission.


Paging Concern's Stock Halt
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday suspended the trading of Southland Communication Inc. for 10 days, citing uncertainty about a possible undisclosed change in control at the small paging company, based in Santa Ana, Calif.


Hispanic Residents Rally Against Closing of Social Clubs
LEAD: As New York City clamps down on illegal social clubs, the Hispanic community is rallying to pressure the Dinkins administration to avoid sweeping away clubs that the community says serve vital cultural, economic and educational needs.


On Stage
LEAD:
Vocal Minorities


Chronicle
LEAD: At its 20th annual awards luncheon at the Waldorf Astoria yesterday, New York Women in Communications honored six women with its Matrix Award: LOUISE McNAMEE, the president of the advertising agency of Della Femina McNamee; LYNN SHERR, an ABC News correspondent for ''20/20''; TINA BROWN, the editor in chief of Vanity Fair; MARIAN BURROS, a food writer for The New York Times; MICHELLE H.


Detrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detrex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,072,441
25,386,671
Net loss
b689,957
c192,584
Share earns
-
.13
Yr sales
104,200,597
105,003,570
Net loss
b688,325
c3,233,493
Share earns
-
2.05


Service for Edward Ennis
LEAD: A memorial for Edward J. Ennis, a former chairman of the American Civil Liberties Union, will be held at 5:15 P.M. tomorrow at the City Bar Association in New York, at 42 West 44th Street.
Mr.
Ennis, who headed the A.C.L.U. from 1969 to 1976, died on Jan. 7 at the age of 82.


Most Retailers Had a Good March and Expect Further Gains
LEAD: Apparel sales helped most large American retailers increase their sales in March, the retailers said yesterday, and with a late Easter selling season still ahead, results are likely to improve further in April.


Citizens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
358,322
b794,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr net loss
357,840
662,761
b-Net loss


Valvano Loses Chance
LEAD: Jim Valvano lost a chance yesterday to plead his case before North Carolina State trustees and prepared to negotiate a price for surrendering his 10-year reign as coach.


New Neil Simon Play to Close Before Reaching Broadway
LEAD: Neil Simon's new play, ''Jake's Women,'' will close in San Diego and not come to Broadway this month as scheduled, the playwright announced yesterday.
It will be the first time that a Broadway-bound play by Mr.
Simon has folded out of town.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.31
9.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.75
7.74
8.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.75
7.71
8.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.60
8.60
9.30
30-YR.


Mystical Del Giorno; Chiropractor, 54
LEAD: Dr.
Mystical Del Giorno, a chiropractor, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 54 years old and also lived on Fire Island, L.I.


Eastman Kodak Admits Violations of Anti-Pollution Laws
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company, Rochester's largest employer and taxpayer and one of its major civic benefactors, today admitted two criminal violations of state anti-pollution laws and was fined $1.15 million.


California State Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California State Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
961,000
819,000
Per share
.43
.48
Shares outst
2,259,167
1,723,308


Upheaval in the East;   Kremlin Troops Move In to Evict Lithuania Aides
LEAD: Continuing its campaign of pressure, the Kremlin sent troops on another foray in the Lithuanian capital today and repeated its refusal to hold formal talks with separatist leaders until the Baltic republic voids its declaration of independence.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about a study of a treatment for chicken pox misidentified the scientific journal in which the study was described.
It was The Journal of Pediatrics.


Seagram Shifts Account
LEAD: The Seagram Beverage Company, has awarded the advertising account for its Seagram's Coolers to Wells, Rich, Greene.
The advertising budget was not disclosed, although the company said it spent about $15 million to advertise the wine cooler in 1989.
A new campaign is scheduled for later this spring.


Central Banking System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Banking System (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
1,800,000
24,900,000
Year net loss
29,660,000
42,168,000


United Mobile Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Mobile Homes
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
2,219,530
2,056,722
Net inc
10,442
b118,526
b-Net loss


Buck Calls CBS Games
LEAD: Five days after refusing to renew Brent Musburger's contract, CBS announced yesterday that Jack Buck, for 40 years the voice of the St.
Louis Cardinals, would replace Musburger as the play-by-play announcer for its first team on the network's baseball coverage this season.
Buck will team with Tim McCarver.


Northrop Stakes
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation, the builder of the B-2 bomber, said two investment firms had purchased large amounts of its stock.
The firm of Sanford C. Bernstein has acquired 8.1 percent of Northrop's 47 million common shares, and the Delaware Management Company has acquired 6.3 percent, the company said.


Our 'Open Doormat'
LEAD: In the Shanghai Communique of 1972, the United States and China - whose leaders could never have agreed on a credible ''joint'' communique - used an ingenious method of making parallel but often contrary statements that broke new ground without seeming to give an inch on principle.


Playoffs Are Ciccarelli's Prime Time
LEAD: Nine years ago, Dino Ciccarelli set a National Hockey League record for a rookie with 14 playoff goals in leading the Minnesota North Stars to the 1981 Stanley Cup finals, where they lost to the Islanders in five games.


Adviser to Selectronics Is Chosen Its President
LEAD: Selectronics Inc., a developer and manufacturer of handheld electronic reference products, has named James Finke, a longtime executive in the electronics industry, as its president and chief operating officer.


National Health Care Systems reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Health Care Systems
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,362,009
5,091,440
Net inc
b179,381
b57,277
Share earns
.04
.01
b-After tax loss carryforwards of $81,183, or 2 cents a share, for the latest year and $32,899 for 1988.


Vornado Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vornado Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 28
1990
1989
Revenue
24,737,000
23,638,000
Net inc
1,305,000
1,688,000
Share earns
.58
.71
Shares outst
2,263,568
2,385,970
Yr rev
98,075,000
82,263,000
Net inc
b10,426,000
10,121,000
Share earns
4.55
4.17
Shares outst
2,290,426
2,428,453


Pagurian Corp. reports earnings for Year Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pagurian Corp.
Year Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
73,360,000
53,049,000
Net inc
47,277,000
b89,171,000
Share earns
.78
1.81
b-Included a $53,930,000 disposition and dilution gain.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Triton Group Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triton Group Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
103,033,000
41,896,000
Net loss
7,895,000
b2,960,000
Yr rev
222,859,000
151,313,000
Net loss
17,238,000
c59,589,000
Share earns
-
5.41
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $3,278,000.


A Skewed Vision of a Small Town In 'Twin Peaks,'
LEAD: Welcome to Twin Peaks, says the road sign.
Population: 51,201.
Well, make that an even 51,200.
A young woman named Laura Palmer, the high school homecoming queen, is about to be found murdered, her body wrapped in plastic.
So begins ''Twin Peaks,'' the new ABC series that is bringing the distinctively skewed vision of the film director David Lynch (''The Elephant Man,'' ''Blue Velvet'') to weekly television.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-10


The Editorial Notebook;   Nationalism, Uncorked
LEAD: Rapidly, nationalism has emerged as a potent force in Eastern Europe after Communism.
In every place that elections have been held this year, from the Baltics to Budapest, parties sounding nationalist themes have prospered.
Even Mikhail Gorbachev has enlisted two Russian nationalists to broaden his new Presidential


Rev. Virgil Blum, 76; Founded Rights Group
LEAD: The Rev.
Virgil C. Blum, a Jesuit priest and educator who was the founder and president of the Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights, died at his home yesterday after a short illness.
He was 76 years old and lived in the Jesuit residence at Marquette University in Milwaukee.


Review/Architecture;   A Ubiquitous Modernist Of Zelig-Like Elusiveness
LEAD: Given the zest with which our age goes about searching out forgotten architects and reviving their reputations, it is a wonder that it took until now to rediscover Paul Nelson.
Nelson, the subject of an intriguing exhibition that opens the new Arthur Ross Gallery at the Columbia University School of Architecture, was a most remarkable figure.


Port Authority Drops Plan For Rise in Tolls and Fares
LEAD: Facing opposition from Trenton, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has dropped plans for an immediate $1 increase in its bridge and tunnel tolls and a 25-cent fare hike on PATH trains later this year, the executive director of the bistate agency said yesterday.


Ban Is Sought on Mercury in Latex Paint
LEAD: Alarmed at growing evidence of potential health dangers from mercury in latex paint, Federal health officials have urged Government regulators to consider banning it from the paints.


Suspect in Brooklyn Slaying Had an Order to Stay Away
LEAD: A Brooklyn man, wanted by the police in the fatal stabbing of his estranged companion, had been arrested, charged with her rape and then released on his own recognizance two weeks ago with a court order to stay away from her, court officials said.


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 507 money market mutual funds decreased by $293.6 million, to $390.49 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 159 institutional funds rose by $50.5 million, to $91.47 billion.
The assets of the 246 general-purpose funds were up by $226.0 million, to $133.23 billion.


PLM Equipment Growth Fund I reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PLM Equipment Growth Fund I (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,548,555
2,129,438
Share earns
.55
.50
Yr net inc
5,725,070
7,629,292
Share earns
2.18
2.00


Military Role Is Urged for New TV
LEAD: An advisory panel to the Pentagon is preparing to recommend that the Defense Department vastly increase its efforts to help American industry develop high-definition television displays.


In SoHo, Giltless Fashion
LEAD: Seventh Avenue moved to SoHo late Wednesday for fall shows by some of fashion's Young Turks, who rented big white lofts in keeping with their contemporary attitudes.
Not for them the gilded splendor of the Plaza or the Pierre.


Morton J. Goldman; Camp Founder, 78
LEAD: Morton J. Goldman, the founder and for 42 years the head counselor of Camp Takajo, a summer camp for 400 boys on Long Lake outside Naples, Me., died on Tuesday of heart disease at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 78 years old.


Salomon Optimistic On Earnings
LEAD: In a sharp contrast to a wave of bad news on Wall Street, Salomon Brothers Inc. said yesterday that its earnings for the first quarter would be far higher than many analysts and industry executives had expected.


Chartwell Raises Avon Stake to 16%
LEAD: Chartwell Associates L.P. has raised its stake in Avon Products Inc. to 16 percent from 7.5 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Chartwell reported purchases of 3.4 million Avon shares between March 27 and Wednesday for prices ranging from $33.625 to $36 a share.
The purchases include a block of 3.1 million Avon shares purchased on


South Africa: Not Black and White
LEAD: If the events of the last week in South Africa prove anything, it's that things there aren't as simple as black and white.
That means outsiders will have to show patience as new leaders jockey and jolt each other toward a settlement.


Addendum
LEAD: *
TVSM Inc., the publisher of The Cable Guide, has merged with Cable Publications Inc., the division of the Crosby Vandenburgh Group that publishes TV Entertainment magazine.
The company will retain the TVSM name and will continue to publish both of the monthly television listings guides.


Chronicle
LEAD: PIERRE BERGE came to New York yesterday wearing his opera hat.
At a discussion series formally known as the Arts Forum at the Equitable, Mr.
Berge, the president of the the Bastille Opera, which opened March 17 in Paris, talked about the new opera house.


Extra Events
LEAD: The performances listed are free unless otherwise noted.
WEDNESDAY
RADIO CITY MUSIC HALL, Avenue of the Americas and 50th Street. ''Easter Extravaganza,'' featuring the Rockettes, 7:30.
Through April 23.
Tickets, $27 and $30.
Information: 247-4777.
Tickets: 307-7171.
MAUNDY THURSDAY


Accounts
LEAD: *
Turkish Tourist Board, to Young &amp; Rubicam Europe and Burson-Marsteller Europe, for advertising and public relations in Europe and North America.


Carolina First Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina First Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
243,000
242,000
Per share
.14
.14


Gen. Frank Tharin, War Hero, Dies at 79
LEAD: Frank Tharin, a retired Marine Corps lieutenant general who as a pilot was a hero of the battle of Wake Island in 1941, died on March 21 in San Rafael, where he had been hospitalized for eight months.
He was 79 years old and lived in Laguna Beach.


Canadian Manoir reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Manoir (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
54,714,000
55,759,000
Net loss
b251,000
c1,398,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $592,000, or 12 cents a share.
c-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $94,000.


Ruddock Looks Sharp in Knockout of Dokes
LEAD: When Donovan (Razor) Ruddock let fly three left hands that knocked out Michael Dokes 53 seconds into the fourth round at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday night, he moved onto center stage of the heavyweight picture.


Hope, the Beloved Country
LEAD: The euphoria of two months ago has subsided.
Violence has brought troops into Natal Province.
Talks between the Government and the A.N.C. were postponed.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the death penalty as a campaign issue referred incorrectly to the position of John Van de Kamp, the California Attorney General, on abortion.
Mr.
Van de Kamp says he supports abortion rights.
That position is unrelated to his position on the death penalty, which he says he opposes.


Court Bars Torchmark From a Proxy Fight
LEAD: A Federal judge barred the Torchmark Corporation today from waging a proxy fight to gain a foothold on the board of the American General Corporation.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Grazing at Holiday Inn


Whalers Surprise Bruins, 4-3
LEAD: The Hartford Whalers scored on four of their first eight shots tonight and upset the Boston Bruins, 4-3, in the opener of their Adams Division semifinal series.


Sooner Women's Program Reinstated After Protests
LEAD: A week ago, the University of Oklahoma, citing a lack of interest, dropped women's basketball.
Yesterday, after strong protests from players, legislators and others, the sport was reinstated.


Bernard Glemser, 81, An Author of 30 Books
LEAD: Bernard Glemser, the author of 30 books of fiction and nonfiction, died of emphysema Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


Medchem Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medchem Products Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
7,477,000
5,102,000
Net inc
b938,000
684,000
Share earns
.21
.15
6mo sales
12,741,000
10,406,000
Net inc
b1,940,000
1,416,000
Share earns
.42
.33


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly


The Court Rules for the Homeless
LEAD: For more than a decade, New York's real estate markets, housing policies and welfare rules have conspired to manufacture homeless families, thereby inflicting immense social and financial costs.
A ruling by New York's highest court now opens the way to reform.


Marcos Role in Big Investments Is Recounted
LEAD: Imelda Marcos's lawyers have portrayed her as a woman who was unfamiliar with the business dealings of her husband and certainly had little grasp of high finance.


AIDS Dominates Nonfiction Series OF Film and Video
LEAD: ''WHEN I was told that I'd contracted this virus, it didn't take me long to realize that I'd contracted a diseased society as well,'' declares the artist, poet and experimental film maker David Wojnarowicz in the scorching AIDS documentary film ''Silence Equals Death.'' ''I'm carrying this rage like a blood-filled egg.


Bonn Works on Money Plan Amid Protests in East
LEAD: As hundreds of thousands of East Germans marched in protest today against Bonn's proposed currency conversion, the West German Government took the first legal steps toward monetary union for the two nations but did not discuss the conversion rate, senior Government officials said.


A Wealth of Oratorios
LEAD: The concerts listed are free unless otherwise noted.
PALM SUNDAY
CHURCH OF THE INTERCESSION (Episcopal), Broadway at 155th Street.
The Passion According to St.
Matthew, set to dance by Walter Nicks Dance Troupe, and music by Bach, Faure, Adams, Friedell, Peterich and Stainer; William Randolph Jr., organist and director.


Raphael Marchand; Accountant, 95
LEAD: Raphael Marchand, an accountant and a retired bank officer, died of cardiovascular disease on Tuesday at Mount Vernon (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 95 years old and lived in Mount Vernon.


Britain Approves Upjohn Hair Drug
LEAD: The Upjohn Company has received approval from the British Government to begin selling its anti-baldness drug to women, company officials said.
The drug, sold as Rogaine in the United States and Canada, is a 2 percent minoxidil solution that is sold by prescription for men in 63 countries.
About 20 countries have approved it for women.


Auctions
LEAD: The Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth is auctioning Thomas Eakins's ''Swimming Hole,'' from about 1885, at Sotheby's on May 24.
Art dealers yesterday criticized the sale of the painting, was bought from Eakins's widow for $700 in 1925, because it is the only major work by Eakins owned by a Texas museum, Questions were also raised about the museum's choice of Sotheby's to auction the painting because the chairwoman of the museum is Anne Windfour Marion, who is the wife of John L.


Review/Art;   A Brazilian Explores Loss and Exploitation
LEAD: Cildo Meireles's ''Oblivion'' was shown in last fall's Sao Paulo Bienal as part of a large Brazilian section.
Now the installation has been brought to the Museum of Modern Art as part of the ''Projects'' series of contemporary art.
It is more self-contained in New York, and the national context of the work - particularly the large scale and love of offbeat materials that Mr.


Health-Mor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health-Mor Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,109,202
8,721,207
Net inc
28,895
cd158,904
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
2,158,793
2,314,138
Yr rev
39,747,817
35,580,724
Net inc
b1,367,917
d1,379,894
Share earns
.62
.60
Shares outst
2,222,230
2,290,465


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Avondale Industries, New Orleans, a marine fabricator, was awarded a $104.4 million contract from the Navy to build an oceanographic survey ship.


France Offers NATO Model for United Germany
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bushes See Michael Jackson
LEAD: White House employees, including secretaries and maintenance men, gathered under the Rose Garden portico, straining their necks and clicking cameras.
On Pennsylvania Avenue, curious crowds gathered at the fence awaiting his departure in a white stretch limousine.
A visiting head of state?
No, it was the elusive megastar Michael Jackson, come to see the


Upheaval in the East;   East German Parliament Opens; No Cabinet Picked
LEAD: East Germany's first freely elected Parliament held its inaugural session today, but with the major parties still negotiating a coalition, no government was installed.


Study Finds Little Lasting Distress From Abortion
LEAD: Legal, voluntary abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy does not threaten most women's mental health or cause them great emotional distress, a panel of experts has concluded after assessing leading studies.


Ending of Beckett Play Preserves the Meaning
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Jazz;   Gentle Surprises When a Duo Becomes a Trio
LEAD: The guitar and bass duo of Frank Vignola and Frank Tate has been joined at the Fortune Garden, 209 East 49th Street, by Herman Foster, the happiest pianist since Erroll Garner, forming a trio whose members are still in the process of discovering one another.


Consumer Credit Rise Slows a Bit
LEAD: Americans took out $3.4 billion more in consumer credit than they repaid in February, but the pace slowed because of slackening demand for car loans, the Government said today.


Edward E. Carlson Is Dead at 78; Former Leader of United Airlines
LEAD: Edward E. Carlson, former chief executive of UAL Inc., the hotel and airline holding company, died of cancer on Tuesday at Virginia Mason Hospital in Seattle.
He was 78 years old and lived in Seattle.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
ECONOMY
Many experts see a leveling off in housing prices during the decade, potentially changing the way people spend, save and invest their money. [Page A1.]
Clothing sales helped most large American retailers increase their sales in March, and with a late Easter selling season ahead, results are likely to improve further in April.


EDAC Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EDAC Technologies
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,623,935
9,510,000
Net loss
559,776
6,223,390
Yr sales
27,923,679
41,441,000
Net loss
b1,786,000
6,723,000
b-Included writedowns of $797,777 related to the company's disposition of preferred stock and a $1.9 million note related to its Time Engineering subsidiary, as well as losses of $1,298,378 related to the disposition of the assets and businesses of its Florida operations.


Massachusetts Acts to Permit Homosexual Foster Parents
LEAD: Five years after virtually barring homosexual men and women from serving as foster parents, the State of Massachusetts has proposed new regulations to reverse the policy.


Galvest Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galvest Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,045,000
1,332,000
Net inc
400,000
189,000
Share earns
.06
.03
Shares outst
6,621,426
6,608,648


Old and New Masters Pass In the Light
LEAD: Arnold Palmer's long drive had rolled down almost to the base of the hill on the ninth fairway.
And now, up behind the green of the 435-yard hole, a tournament announcer intoned, ''I do want to give this next man his due.'' Moments later, Palmer's ball landed on the green but rolled onto the fringe.


After 80's Housing Boom, A Decade of Flat Prices?
LEAD: After a long climb in housing prices that has made home ownership all but a sure-fire investment, many experts think those prices will level off or decline during this decade, potentially changing the way people spend, save and invest their money.


Law Schools Boycotted Over Lack of Minority Teachers
LEAD: Students at about 40 law schools around the country boycotted classes and held ''study-ins'' yesterday to protest what they call the failure of their schools to hire enough faculty members from minorities.


Corel Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corel Systems
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
7,192,366
2,487,091
Net inc
1,571,432
b231,828
Share earns
.15
.04
Shares outst
10,647,299
5,940,501
b-Included tax credits of $97,000.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


After 21 Seasons, Evans Fears Career Is Over
LEAD: He has played 21 years in the major leagues and hit 414 home runs, more than any other player scheduled to open this season.
But yesterday, Darrell Evans said he feared his season would not open and his career had come to an end now that he has been released by the Atlanta Braves.


Board of UAL Meets To Study Unions' Offer
LEAD: The board of the UAL Corporation met late into the evening yesterday to consider a bid for United Airlines of about $200 a share, or a total of $4.36 billion, by the airline's three unions, which would end up owning 75 percent of the company.


New York Tries to Attract 1992 Democratic National Convention


Review/Film;   Peter Greenaway's Elegant and Brutal 'Cook'
LEAD: If the most crass and sadistic people gained power, what would happen to the social order, to art and, above all, to love?
This is the question Peter Greenaway explores in his elegant, stylized and brutal new film. ''The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover'' may sound like another civilized marital minuet.


Deal-Making in Israel Spurs Demands for Reform
LEAD: Their voices are difficult to hear above the din of promises, threats and warnings that characterize politics here, but the Israeli people are once again demanding that their Government reform itself.


Country Lake Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Country Lake Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
40,561,000
36,982,000
Net inc
798,000
819,000
Share earns
.18
.18
Yr sales
154,611,000
146,545,000
Net inc
3,453,000
3,890,000
Share earns
.78
.98


Computer Consultant Named Wharton Dean
LEAD: Thomas P. Gerrity, a consultant on information technology who once taught at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has been named dean of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, one of the nation's top business schools.


Former Savings Executive Sentenced to 30 Years in Jail
LEAD: In the harshest punishment for any executive convicted of fraud in the collapse of a savings institution, the former chairman and chief executive of the Vernon Savings and Loan Association was sentenced today to 30 years in prison.


Review/Film;   Kevin Kline as an Amorous Pizza Maker
LEAD: Kevin Kline received one Oscar for ''A Fish Called Wanda.'' If rewards always matched the services rendered, he deserves at least two for his tour de force in Lawrence Kasdan's new comedy ''I Love You to Death.''


Tranquilizers Form Part Of Addiction Complex
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alpnet reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpnet (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,400,000
6,300,000
Net loss
1,000,000
4,000,000
Yr rev
22,700,000
23,900,000
Net loss
1,400,000
5,900,000


Why Protect Inept Corporate Managers?
LEAD: The greed that drives hostile corporate takeovers repels much of the nation.
It also gives cover to state legislatures to serve their own interests -at the expense of the rest of the nation - by passing anti-takeover legislation.
That is exactly what happened this week in the Pennsylvania.
The House approved a bill, previously passed by the


Monkey Virus Infects 4 Workers But None Are Sick, U.S. Reports
LEAD: Four animal handlers have become infected with a virus carried by laboratory monkeys but none have become sick, Federal health officials said today.


JAPANESE PLEDGE TO LOWER BARRIERS TO TRADE WITH U.S.
LEAD: In a sweeping agreement with Washington to reduce trade barriers, Tokyo pledged today to take actions intended to make it easier for foreigners to invest in Japan and do business there.


Pinnacle Unit Sells Resort to Japanese
LEAD: The Pinnacle West Capital Corporation said its Suncor Development Company subsidiary had sold an Arizona resort to a Japanese company for $70 million.
Suncor said that Kabuto International Phoenix Inc., a subsidiary of Kabuto Decom Inc. of Japan, had purchased the Wigwam Resort and Country Club in Litchfield Park, Ariz.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Condominium Conversions;   New Jersey Developer Offers a Lease-Purchase Plan
LEAD: The soft New Jersey real estate market has led the sponsors of a condominium conversion to offer potential buyers a lease-purchase program, which state officials say might set a trend.
Although many publicly financed projects offer similar programs, the Commons at Princeton Landing in Plainsboro Township is apparently the first privately financed condominium development in the state to offer such terms.


High-Detail TV Faces Fund Cuts
LEAD: The Defense Department has quietly proposed diverting $20 million of the $30 million intended for research on high-definition television, a technology that has become a symbol in the debate over how the United States can best compete with the Japanese.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
Sax by Sonny Rollins


American Bank of Conn.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bank of Conn.  (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,530,000
1,364,000
Per share
.70
.63
Shares outst
2,175,400
2,169,800


Upheaval in the East;   Romania Colonel Tells Of Attacking Protesters
LEAD: An army colonel told a court today that demonstrators were shot and dragged down dark alleys by men in civilian clothes during the December uprising against the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu.


The Lamentation And the Joy: Music for Easter
LEAD: THE relationship between music and religion goes back further than can be traced, except through legend and surmise.
It has not always been an easy marriage: from at least the time of Pope Gregory the Great, in the late sixth century, churches have periodically issued decrees that defined the kinds of music appropriate for both sacred and secular use.


Quadrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quadrex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,497,000
9,094,000
Net loss
b5,312,000
c2,292,000
Yr rev
40,598,000
38,447,000
Net loss
b12,981,000
c6,789,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $350,000 for the quarter and $3,013,000 for the year.


Thumb Injury For Newman
LEAD: Johnny Newman, the Knicks' backup small forward, has a fractured right thumb, but it is not expected to affect his availability for the game tonight against the Philadelphia 76ers at Madison Square Garden.


Canadian Natural Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Natural Resources
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,202,020
3,033,490
Net inc
1,707,939
b2,362,700
Share earns
.10
.20
Shares outst
15,900,329
11,853,051
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $2,167,716, or 19 cents a share.


Teachers Union Chief Vows Fight on Layoffs
LEAD: The president of the public school teachers union in New York City said yesterday that her members would ''fight to the death'' any attempt to lay off teachers as a means of reducing spending by the Board of Education.


CPI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPI Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 3
1990
1989
Sales
101,268,000
98,801,000
Net inc
10,653,000
c12,408,000
Share earns
.69
.75
Shares outst
15,496,000
16,471,000
Yr sales
350,502,000
318,105,000
Net inc
b28,670,000
c30,317,000
Share earns
1.83
1.81
Shares outst
15,698,900
16,726,000


Guardian Capital reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardian Capital
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,793,000
10,647,000
Net inc
568,000
b2,334,000
Share earns
.10
.40
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $753,000, or 13 cents a share.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


ENVIRONMENT BILL SENT TO THE HOUSE
LEAD: After agreeing on the difficult issue of how to curb acid rain, the House Energy and Commerce Committee voted tonight to recommend sweeping legislation to strengthen the Clean Air Act.
The vote was 42 to 1.


Dionne Textiles reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dionne Textiles
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,200,000
12,500,000
Net inc
132,000
625,000
Share earns
.03
.16
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


China Seals Off Beijing Square
LEAD: The authorities sealed off Tiananmen Square again today, the second time this week, to prevent people from holding quiet rallies to remember the pro-democracy protesters killed by army troops in June.
Today was Tomb-Sweeping


Lectures on the History Of Maritime New York
LEAD: ''The Archeology and History of Maritime New York,'' the 10th annual symposium presented by the Professional Archeologists of New York City and the Museum of the City of New York, will take place tomorrow at 1 P.M. in the museum auditorium, Fifth Avenue at 107th Street.


Menu for Newspaper Editors: Criticism and 60's Headliners
LEAD: The nation's newspaper editors have received a thorough scolding at their annual convention here this week, most of it self-administered.


USX Expects To Top Ichan
LEAD: The chairman of the USX Corporation, Charles Corry, said today that he was confident that he would win a proxy fight with the financier Carl C. Icahn for control of the company's destiny.


Cooper Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
10,255,000
14,887,000
Net inc
b3,800,000
c4,100,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
23,674,000
23,387,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $6,152,000, or 26 cents a share, from the purchase of the company's 10 5/8- percent convertible subordinated reset debentures due 2005.


Winged Rocket Launched Into Orbit by Plane
LEAD: A winged rocket built by a private company was launched into orbit from a B-52 aircraft over the Pacific Ocean today, marking an important step in the nation's efforts to develop a low-cost and reliable way to send small satellites into space.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the reasons for tax rioting in London on Saturday omitted the definition of homeless people used by Shelter, a British organization for the homeless.


Our Towns;   A Family Bakery Finally Gets Its Pie in the Sky
LEAD: rrKimberly Sunkins has the same problem every time at Mendoker's bakery. ''It's hard to think about everything so fast,'' she said.
She was fluctuating between a banana cream pie and a chocolate seven-layer cake.
She motioned toward the banana cream, the counter woman moved that way and Ms.
Sunkins shouted, ''Wait!


Card Tel Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Card Tel Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,705,386
225,293
Net loss
1,536,487
7,376,336
The company said the reduction in loss for 1989 is a result of an increase in revenues, an extraordinary gain on the extinguishment of debt of $291,547, or 4 cents a share, with various unsecured creditors, and a reduction in the number of employees, professional fees and other expenses.


Jeffrey Nussbaum Is Wed To Dr. Joan Feigenbaum
LEAD: D. Joan Feigenbaum, the daughter of Joyce and Harry Feigenbaum of Valley Stream, L.I., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Nussbaum, a son of Dorothy and Eli Nussbaum of New Hyde Park, L.I.
Rabbi Lawrence Pinsker officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents.


American Greetings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Greetings Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
337,727,000
313,463,000
Net inc
18,876,000
b14,275,000
Share earns
.59
.45
Shares outst
31,966,000
32,153,000
Yr sales
1,286,853,000
1,252,793,000
Net inc
72,177,000
b44,274,000
Share earns
2.25
1.38
Shares outst
32,030,000
32,147,000


Cuomo and Top Legislators Agree on Delaying Tax Cut
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders said today that they had agreed on a tentative plan to postpone an income tax cut scheduled for this year and then phase it in over the next three years.


Mandela and de Klerk Announce Agreement on New Date for Talks
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela agreed today to reschedule formal talks between the Government and the African National Congress on a political settlement on South Africa's future.


Car Import Sales in Japan
LEAD: Sales of imported vehicles in Japan surged more than 60 percent in March from a year earlier, to a record of 25,943, the Japan Automobile Importers Association said today.
West German manufacturers continued to lead in overall sales among importers, the association said.
Volkswagen A.G. and its Audi subsidiary scored the biggest total, selling 7,264 cars in the month, up nearly 40 percent from a year earlier.


Upheaval in the East;   U.S.-SOVIET SUMMIT IS PLANNED MAY 30 WITH BUSH AS HOST
LEAD: President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union will hold a five-day meeting in the United States beginning on May 30, the White House and the Kremlin announced today.


Tandem Shares In 17% Tumble
LEAD: The stock of Tandem Computers Inc. tumbled after the company said early indications for the quarter ended March 31 are that its revenues and earnings will be above the previous quarter but below the company's operating plan.
Tandem's shares dropped $4.625 today, to $22.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


A Streamlined Morgan Stanley
LEAD: Its Wall Street competitors may be suffering - laying off thousands, reporting huge losses and even collapsing altogether - but at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company the tune is strikingly upbeat.


People
LEAD: *
Linda C. Seale has joined Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising as executive vice president and human resources director for North America.
Perry Davis, the agency's director of technology management, has been appointed a senior vice president.


John J. Fisher 3d, 39, Writer and Editor, Dies
LEAD: John Jacob Fisher 3d, a writer and editor in the child-development field, died of AIDS-related illnesses Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 39 years old.


Southwestern Public Service Co. reports earnings for 12mo Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Public Service Co. (NYSE)
12mo Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
810,805,000
781,627,000
Net inc
124,235,000
100,530,000
Share earns
2.85
2.27


France Offers NATO Model for United Germany;   Silesian Expulsions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alatenn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alatenn (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
49,551,000
35,298,000
Net loss
b8,551,000
c303,000
Share earns
-
.13
Yr rev
161,451,000
163,269,000
Net loss
b7,718,0900
c2,480,000
Share earns
-
1.09


Nsanje Journal;   Torrent of Refugees: Will Malawi Shut Its Door?
LEAD: This small country, lush with green hills but struggling to feed its own malnourished people, is host to nearly 800,000 refugees, the largest concentration in Africa.


Yanks Try to Relieve Feelings in the Bullpen
LEAD: The Dave Righetti-Greg Cadaret bullpen situation did not get much better today, but the Yankees tried to defuse things.


Review/Film;   An Officer Becomes The Other
LEAD: From the opening sequence, ''Impulse'' is so generic you can practically sing along.
This is the one about a sexy-looking but emotionally repressed detective who works undercover disguised as a prostitute.
She walks those just-rained-on streets that seem to exist every night in grade-B movies.


Quarterly Net Loss For Businessland
LEAD: Businessland Inc., the computer retail chain, said it would announce lower-than-expected earnings and revenues for the quarter ended March 31.
The company expects operating income to be at break-even, creating a net loss, and to report revenues of about $320 million, compared with $293.3 million in the similar period last year.


$200 Million in Notes Offered By Private Export Funding
LEAD: The Private Export Funding Corporation, which is owned by a number of commercial banks involved in export financing, industrial companies exporting United States products and a few financial service companies, is offering $200 million in secured notes that are due 1996 through underwriters led by Citicorp Securities Markets


Mackie Puts Fun Back in the Mix
LEAD: For a while it looked as if the fun had gone out of fashion.
Everybody was so serious.
Retailers, many in bankruptcy court, wanted a warranty that the clothes they ordered would be sure to sell.
Designers were sticking mainly to what they considered safe styles.
So there were lots of neat suits, short evening dresses and easy coats.


Jury Rejects Complaint Against Paul Newman


Baby and 3 Men Shot to Death In Manhattan
LEAD: A two-year-old infant, his father and two other men were found shot to death early this morning in the La Guardia Houses on Manhattan's lower East Side, the police said.


Bethlehem Steel Penalized $1 Million on Benzene Fumes
LEAD: The state has fined the Bethlehem Steel Corporation $1 million and ordered it to end benzene emissions from its coke ovens here by August, officials said today.


S. Gershon Levi, 81, A Former President Of a Rabbis' Group
LEAD: Rabbi S. Gershon Levi, a former president of the Rabbinical Assembly and a former editor of the quarterly publication Conservative Judaism, died of heart failure yesterday at his home in Jerusalem.
He was 81 years old.
Rabbi Levi, an ardent Zionist who retired to Israel in the mid-1970's, was a translator of Yiddish and Hebrew classics, among them ''Gates of Bronze'' by Haim Hazaz (The Jewish Publication Society, 1975).


Petroleum Prices Decline On Worry About a Surplus
LEAD: Petroleum futures prices fell sharply yesterday, for the third straight day, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
The declines have come amid perceptions that supplies of gasoline and crude oil are outstripping demand.


Interand Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interand Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
127,923
322,877
Net loss
1,468,500
1,794,771
Yr rev
1,656,320
3,409,720
Net loss
5,991,915
b5,133,408
b-Included restructuring charge of $1,365,140.


Treasury Prices Dip in Slow Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped in sluggish trading yesterday.
Dealers sold securities after a rumor that swept the credit markets on Wednesday - that a major Japanese institution would disclose serious liquidity problems when trading began in Tokyo - proved to be unfounded.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:
Reprising 'Young Guns'


Review/Theater;   Cosmic Meditations in the Path of Halley's Comet
LEAD: According to ''Paradise for the Worried,'' a new dance theater piece presented by Music-Theater Group at St.
Clement's, the Upper West Side was in a state of cosmic unrest when Halley's comet streaked through the cosmos on May 10, 1910.
Rumors spread that the comet could alter the magnetic field and electrocute bystanders.


Mestek Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mestek Inc. (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
186,000,000
164,000,000
Net inc
8,574,000
7,534,000
Share earns
.89
.79


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The cordial nature of the discussions and the concessions that had been made by both sides gave us the impression that we are correct in sitting down with the Government.''
- Nelson Mandela, after his meeting with President F. W. de Klerk.
[A1:6.]


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Research!America, a new organization formed to educate the public about medical research, to Sutton Communications.


G.M.A.C. Prices A 10-Year Issue
LEAD: The General Motors Acceptance Corporation a unit of the General Motors Corporation, priced a $300 million issue of 10-year notes through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation yesterday.


Rocking Horse Child Care Centers of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocking Horse Child Care Centers of America Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,580,214
4,242,280
Net loss
1,362,087
17,889
Yr rev
25,226,248
14,443,627
Net loss
833,547
b508,138
Share earns
-
.05
b


Weekend Film Times
LEAD: The 1990 Documentary Festival of New York continues at two places - the New York Shakespeare Festival Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, and the May Theater, the New School for Social Research/ Parsons, 66 Fifth Avenue, at 13th Street.
Tickets to each screening are $6 ($5 for students and the elderly).


France Offers NATO Model for United Germany;   The Two Neisse Rivers
LEAD: To the Editor:


When We Awake From Our Dream World
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kaifu Praises Trade Deal But Sees Some Difficulties
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu pleaded today for popular support of the changes his Government agreed to in trade talks with the United States, saying that they would eventually benefit Japanese consumers.
But he acknowledged that the economic shifts would be ''painful'' and that he faced a potentially tough political battle to put the measures into effect.


RHNB reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RHNB
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b1,264,687
c390,000
Per share
-
.17
Year net inc
b435,262
1,876,011
Per share
.20
.82
b-Included income tax credit of $774,128 for the quarter and year.
c-Net income


Notebook;   A 90-Minute Test for 3-Year-Olds
LEAD: Is Mr.
Frisky for real?
Has surgery restored Rhythm?
Are there any decent 3-year-olds left in Florida?
The answers will emerge during a 90-minute stretch of major Kentucky Derby prep races around the country tomorrow.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It looks as if we have spent the peace dividend.''
- Senator Larry Pressler, on the cost of the savings-and-loan bailout. [1:2.]


Simon Lemaire Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Simon Lemaire Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
33,118,751
28,323,616
Net inc
25,887
346,973
Share earns
.01
.11
Results are in Canadian funds.


Lotus Plans $1.5 Billion Novell Link
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation, which is known for its popular 1-2-3 spreadsheet, and Novell Inc. announced yesterday that they had tentatively agreed to a $1.5 billion merger in an effort to deliver a competitive blow to the Microsoft Corporation, the leader in personal computer software.


Harry Goodridge, 74, Seal Trainer in Maine
LEAD: Harry Goodridge, whose friendship with Andre the seal captivated a wide audience for 25 years, died Wednesday at a hospital here.
He was 74 years old.


Review/Television;   How the Schools' Failure Is a Business Crisis, Too
LEAD: If good intentions could do the job, ''Our Future at Risk: The Education Crisis'' would be exemplary television; but, then, if good intentions could do the job, there would be no crisis.
The nine educators and corporation executives gathered Monday night at 8 o'clock on Channel 9 concentrate on the failure of America's schools to teach young people to read, spell, add and speak English well enough to staff America's businesses.


N.H.L. Suspends 2 Islanders and Fines Team
LEAD: After an investigation into what it termed the ''disgraceful'' conclusion to Thursday night's Stanley Cup playoff game between the Islanders and the Rangers at Madison Square Garden, the National Hockey League yesterday fined the Islanders $25,000, fined Coach Al Arbour $5,000 and suspended two of


Reliable Life Insurance reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reliable Life Insurance
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
11,245,804
10,781,909
Share earns
3.97
3.66


Corrections
LEAD: A short Company News article in Business Day yesterday misstated a request by a group of Lionel Corporation shareholders.
The shareholders, led by Trendex Capital Management, are asking the board to examine the propriety of the sale of a block of Lionel stock in January to a separate investor group with ties to Lionel's management.


U.S. Is in Middle of 33 Nations in Death Rates
LEAD: The United States ranks in the middle of 33 developed nations in terms of life expectancy and death rates, according to new figures from the Federal Centers for Disease Control.


Harold L. Stults, Lawyer, 84
LEAD: Harold Leland Stults, a retired partner in the law firm of Curtis, Morris &amp; Safford in New York, died of cancer last Saturday at his home in Short Hills, N.J.
He was 84 years old.


A Plan to Save the Peabody
LEAD: Leaders of the Maryland Legislature reached agreement today on a plan to provide $5.4 million in the next year to end the financial crisis that has threatened the Peabody Conservatory's existence.


Valdez Sister Ship Grounded
LEAD: A sister ship to the tanker Exxon Valdez, carrying more than 1.2 million barrels of crude oil, ran aground in Long Beach Harbor on Thursday, but no oil was spilled.
The 950-foot Exxon Long Beach was refloated and taken to a harbor anchorage, where a diver found no damage to her hull, the Coast Guard said.


Hitachi-Motorola
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd. said today that it was eager to reach an out-of-court settlement in its patent infringement suit with Motorola Inc., but the United States company appears to be unwilling to settle.
A Hitachi spokesman said, ''Settling out of court would be best for our customers, but we can't seem to get Motorola to the table,'' adding that the judge had asked the companies to settle amicably.


Upheaval in the East;   Anxiety Rises in Eastern Europe Over Safety of Nuclear Reactors
LEAD: The spread of democracy in Eastern Europe has combined with memories of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster to produce a surge of popular anxiety about the safety of the region's mainly Soviet-designed reactors.


Patents;   A Detergent to Prevent Wrinkles in Clothes?
LEAD: Laundry detergents already include bleaches and fabric softeners.
Now Procter &amp; Gamble has patented an experimental silicon-based additive that would prevent wrinkles in clothes.
Officials said the compound was still being investigated.


Nancy Lady Keith Is Dead at 73; A Socialite Known for Her Wit
LEAD: Nancy Lady Keith, a legendary beauty and participant in the social scene of New York and Hollywood, died of heart failure yesterday at New York Hospital.
She was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Mining Rights In Venezuela
LEAD: Venezuela began to open mining to private investment today, and it expects to attract $140 million from foreign and domestic sources.


Bitterness Lingers Over Treatment of LaFontaine
LEAD: After spending a night in Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan with what team officials called a moderate concussion, Pat LaFontaine of the Islanders returned home to Long Island today.
But his participation in Saturday night's second playoff game against the Rangers was in doubt.


Preferred Homecare reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preferred Homecare
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
812,768
344,333
Net loss
715,516
c45,402
Yr rev
2,991,140
1,012,156
Net loss
b810,605
c30,441
Share earns
-
.01
b-Included one-time charge of $145,833 related to preferred stock dividends and accretion.


Family Looked Typical, But the Drug Lab Didn't
LEAD: Max and Liza Marx unlocked the door of their house in the hills of Westchester County last fall after two years overseas and stared in dismay.
Paint spattered the floors, new electrical outlets studded the walls, and the tap water smelled.
The furnace had been disconnected.
Black gook oozed across the yard.


A Jump on Garden Bugs
LEAD: Even though they are not easily seen, they are there: eggs of psylla, mites, scales and aphids, clinging to twigs and tucked into the crevices of the bark of trees and bushes.
Now is the time to get rid of them, and the easiest and safest way is to spray them with dormant oil, available at garden and hardware stores.


Pan Atlantic reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pan Atlantic
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
4,970,000
429,000
Shares outst
2,272,817
3,471,767
Yr net loss
7,526,000
2,497,000
Shares outst
3,123,891
3,692,230


Capriati Reaches Semifinal, But Not Without a Fight
LEAD: Nothing magical happened for Jennifer Capriati on the tennis court at the Family Circle Cup today: the winning shots she likes to flash past her opponents like yellow missiles were unreliable, so she had to rely on a much plainer weapon, a fighting spirit.


Patents;   Using Superconductors For Circuits on Chips
LEAD: Two professors at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have patented an approach for making switches with high-temperature superconductors, which could prove useful in making ultra-miniaturized circuits.


Major Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Major Realty (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
25,255,000
1,017,000
Net loss
b449,000
2,584,000
Shares outst
6,895,000
7,305,000
Yr rev
34,745,000
4,545,000
Net inc
2,091,000
c5,888,000
Share earns
.29
-
Shares outst
7,216,000
7,314,000


MOSCOW REPORTED TO YEILD ON NEUTRALITY OF GERMANY; NO BREAKTHROUGH ON ARMS
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union have significantly narrowed their differences over the place of a united Germany in Europe but have apparently failed to make much progress on major arms control issues, the two sides indicated today.


Circuit City Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circuit City Stores Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
691,115,000
563,481,000
Net inc
35,913,000
30,228,000
Share earns
.78
.66
Shares outst
46,124,000
45,747,000
Yr rev
2,096,588,000
1,721,497,000
Net inc
78,100,000
69,475,000
Share earns
1.70
1.52
Shares outst
46,037,000
45,545,000


Asset Investors Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Asset Investors Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
178,647,000
188,424,000
Net inc
b5,207,000
7,517,000
Share earns
.37
.54
Yr rev
737,566,000
717,217,000
Net inc
b20,446,000
35,656,000
Share earns
1.47
2.69


Army in Nepal Opens Fire, Killing Demonstrators
LEAD: The Nepalese Army and police opened fire Friday on a procession of 200,000 pro-democracy demonstrators.
Hospital officials said that at least nine people were killed and several hundred wounded as crowds tried to surge past police cordons toward the royal palace.
Witnesses and other reports said the death toll was much higher.


Man in the News;   A Visionary as Planner: Richard Lance Schaffer
LEAD: As a member of the baseball team at West Orange High School in New Jersey, Richard L. Schaffer played third base, the acknowledged hot corner of the infield.
Later, as a varsity player at the University of Pennsylvania, he became a pitcher.


If It's Legal, City May Try Complex Bond Refinancing
LEAD: New York City hopes to help plug an unexpected gap in its current budget with a highly technical financial maneuver intended to free up excess money that has accumulated since early in this century to pay off rapid transit bonds.


Granada Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Granada Foods Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
40,718,000
42,269,000
Net inc
79,000
239,000
Share earns
.03
.10
Yr rev
134,865,000
125,772,000
Net inc
94,000
b3,948,000
Share earns
.04
1.79


Chartwell's Stock Moves Upset Avon
LEAD: Avon Products Inc., which late last month reached a truce with the investor group Chartwell Associates L.P., said Chartwell's recent additional purchases of its stock were inappropriate.
The Avon board responded to Chartwell's stock purchases by voting on Thursday to amend its share rights anti-takeover plan.


Copper Rallies Before Prices Ease a Bit on Profit Taking
LEAD: Copper futures rallied sharply yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York as traders worried about the continued strike at mines in Peru and declining supplies, but profit taking trimmed prices near the close of trading.


Istec Industries &amp; Technoloies Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Istec Industries &amp; Technoloies Ltd.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,830,204
1,298,882
Net loss
b191,933
4,578,104
b-Included income of $1,130,344 from issuance of shares by a subsidiary.
Results are in U.S.


4 in Texas Accused of Using Bus Crash to Get Law Clients
LEAD: Three lawyers and an employee of a law firm were indicted today on charges that they illegally sought clients at hospitals and funeral homes after a school bus wreck killed 21 high school students and injured 60 last fall.


Albany's Budgetary Fig Leaf
LEAD: After months of political posturing - and with revenue forecasts darkening - New York's Governor, Mario Cuomo, and legislative leaders appear to be moving toward a new budget based on postponement of the state's planned income tax cut and a new corporate tax surcharge.


Jurors' Vanity Press Review: Publisher Defrauded Authors
LEAD: Never mind that their books had titles like ''The Sex Life of a Football Referee,'' ''Letters I Wish I'd Mailed to the Man Who Divorced Me to Marry a Waitress'' and ''Sunday and Monday Were Cold Chicken Days,'' one man's memories of his mother.
All they were asking for, the authors of Vantage Press said, was a chance to be treated as any writer should be - granted, for a fee.


Islanders Never Did This Stuff
LEAD: Back when the Islanders were the Islanders, they didn't have any Vukotas or Baumgartners lurching onto the ice to start fights after the game.


Giants, A's and a Quake
LEAD: The earth shook the last time the Giants and the Athletics met at Candlestick Park, and it rattled again this evening.


Arafat Meets With Pope to Discuss Middle East


In France, Day Care Is Every Child's Right
LEAD: Ten years after the U.S. started talking about ''family values,'' many wonder why we are still unable to provide decent education, health care and opportunity for all of our children.


New Dessert Is Introduced
LEAD: Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Inc. has introduced a new cholesterol-free frozen dessert that it says tastes like premium ice cream but has only a fraction of the fat and one-third fewer calories.


Over All, Drug Trade Makes Colombia Poor
LEAD: To the Editor:


More Drug Charges in the Texas Campaign
LEAD: Two Texas newspapers today reported accusations that State Attorney General Jim Mattox, who is running for governor, smoked marijuana on at least two occasions in the 1970's.


Ex-Bank Officer Says He Got Marcos Interest
LEAD: A former Philippine bank official who had testified on Thursday that Imelda Marcos's personal secretary had withdrawn as much as $14.5 million in cash from the New York branch of the Philippine National Bank, said today that he was given the interest on two bank accounts held by the secretary as perquisites.


A Nervous Cincinnati Awaits Exhibit Today
LEAD: This city is bracing nervously for the opening on Saturday of a museum exhibit of photographs that have been branded obscene by the local law-enforcement authorities.


School's Negligence Is Held Responsible In Death of Climber
LEAD: A jury has found a private school negligent in the death of a teen-age student during a school-sponsored climb of Mount Hood in 1986 that took nine lives, and said it should pay the boy's father $500,000.


Waterhouse Investor Servces Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waterhouse Investor Servces Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
5,617,379
5,009,717
Net inc
b24,242
301,738
Share earns
.01
.12
6mo rev
11,036,060
8,878,198
Net inc
337,651
326,180
Share earns
.14
.13


Wisconsin Southern Gas reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Southern Gas (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
38,615,118
36,511,177
Net inc
b2,247,003
1,901,298
Share earns
2.38
2.01
Shares outst
942,282
934,150
b-After a credit of $307,064 from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Barringer Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barringer Resources
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
8,720,000
7,770,000
Net loss
b448,000
b2,282,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $325,000 and $234,000 for the latest year and year-earlier periods, respectively.


Bush to Formalize Shield for Chinese in U.S.
LEAD: President Bush said today that he would issue an executive proclamation to formalize and broaden the measures he ordered late last year to help Chinese students extend their stays in the United States.


First Interstate
LEAD: First Interstate Bancorp said its California subsidiary, First Interstate Bank, would begin offering annuities for sale by branch managers and banking officers.
The move comes in the wake of Proposition 103, a voter initiative approved in 1988 that allowed California banks to sell insurance products.


Upheaval in the East;   Western Historians Join Russians to Dissect Past
LEAD: With the official history of the last 70 years now discredited as a pack of Stalinist lies, the Soviet academic establishment this week took the unusual step of inviting about 50 leading Western Kremlinologists and historians to come and help them wrestle with the truth.


Shaver Victory By Windmere
LEAD: A Federal jury today awarded about $100 million to the Windmere Corporation in an antitrust suit that accused NV Philips of monopolizing the rotary shaver market.


Patents;   Switches Improved In Optical Computers
LEAD: Researchers at Bell Laboratories obtained a patent this week on a key feature in the light-activated switches used in the company's recently introduced optical computer.


Marble Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marble Financial Corp.
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b1,679,000
1,566,000
Share earns
.52
.48
Shares outst
3,235,472
3,259,546
b-After an extraordinary tax loss carryforward of $543,000, or 17 cents a share.


42 Warrants For Owner Of Fire Site
LEAD: The owner of the building that housed the Happy Land Social Club was wanted by the police on 42 separate arrest warrants charging with him with serious building violations at a dozen Manhattan locations, including the sites of three social clubs, city officials said yesterday.


Lawsuit Mixes Cash, Concrete, Koch and, Yes, McGovern
LEAD: A businessman who was trying to win an exclusive New York City contract to produce concrete asserts that he gave $10,000 in cash to former Senator George S. McGovern in 1985 to be passed on to city officials as a campaign contribution to Mayor Edward I. Koch.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Outdoor Music
LEAD: Now that spring is here, it's time to take music outdoors.
The ways are many: pocket portables with headphones, ''boom-box'' portables with speakers, temporary hookups to indoor stereos and permanent outdoor installations.


Paloma Petroleum reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paloma Petroleum
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
16,665,716
16,641,538
Net inc
1,931,036
3,289,214
Share earns
.19
.33
Results are in Canadian funds.


Creaky I.R.S. Is at a Crossroads
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service is enjoying what it calls a ''highly successful'' filing season, with taxpayers filing earlier and their returns containing fewer mistakes than in the past.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Islanders Draw Fines And Suspensions for Melee


Phonetel Technologies reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phonetel Technologies
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,224,455
2,246,397
Net loss
1,310,731
783,114
Shares outst
2,899,875
2,675,002


Commodity Trader Plan
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission proposed a rule today that would require traders to disclose any informal relationships among one another on the floor of the nation's futures exchanges.
Under the plan, traders who work with each other, even if informally, would have to register as ''broker associations.


Patents;   Using an Ion Beam To Paint Car Pinstripes
LEAD: M.I.T. researchers also recently patented a method of painting customized pinstripes on automobiles by bombarding metallic paint with ion beams.


Buffett Acquires 5.8% Rorer Stake
LEAD: Warren E. Buffett, the billionaire investor, disclosed he had amassed a 5.8 percent stake in Rorer Group Inc., a pharmaceutical concern based in Fort Washington, Pa., for a total purchase price of $143 million.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Buffett said he had purchased the


Roderic Swenson, 71, Retired Bank Executive
LEAD: Roderic Burwell Swenson, a former vice president of Citibank in Manhattan, died of kidney disease on Thursday at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 71 years old and lived in Ridgefield, Conn.


Club Survivor Recalls Dash Into Flames
LEAD: Nightmares jolt Ruben Valladarez awake in his hospital bed, images of friends who died in the Happy Land Social Club fire two weeks ago. ''I feel better,'' he said in an interview at Bronx Municipal Hospital yesterday. ''Only I got a little bad dreams.'' Mr.
Valladarez, the disk jockey at the illegal club, is one of six survivors of the arson fire that killed 87 people March 25.


3 Elderly People Die And 21 Are Injured In Miami Beach Fire
LEAD: At least 3 people were killed and 21 injured early today as a fire destroyed a residential hotel filled largely with elderly retired people.


Your Money;   Extra Time to File 1989 Tax Returns
LEAD: For the millions of taxpayers who have waited until the last minute to wrestle the beast to the ground, a visit to the public library is in order.
It's the place most likely to have income tax forms, and Form 4868 for an automatic four-month filing extension, along with the equivalent state form, is not in the packets mailed out by the I.R.S.


Sports People: BASEBALL;   Cubs' Sutcliffe Goes On 21-Day Disabled List
LEAD: Rick Sutcliffe, who has pitched five straight home openers at Wrigley Field for the Chicago Cubs, will not be doing it this year.
The 33-year-old right-hander has an inflamed right shoulder, and though he will not have to undergo surgery, he was placed on the 21-day disabled list yesterday, retroactive to March 31.


Floyd Decides to Test Himself And Answers by Taking Lead
LEAD: The second round of the Masters belonged to two men chasing the past.
One wants to recapture it, the other to restage it.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Religion Notes column on March 10 about rating movies summarized incorrectly the listing for the film ''Cinderella'' from Ted Baehr's ''Christian Family Guide to Movies and Videos.'' The book says the film is ''recommended with the caveat that children need to be informed that Jesus is the answer to evil, not Prince Charming nor a fairy godmother.


Science Management reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Science Management (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,404,000
21,911,000
Net loss
b9,637,000
c223,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
2,799,000
2,852,000
Yr sales
74,830,000
75,651,000
Net loss
b10,333,000
c627,000
Share earns
-
.22
Shares outst
2,793,000
2,797,000


Simone, L.J.  Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Simone, L.J.  Inc.
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,046,000
5,219,000
Net inc
b2,231,000
c820,000
Share earns
.71
-
Shares outst
3,148,000
2,937,674
9mo rev
14,941,000
14,542,000
Net loss
b734,000
964,000
Shares outst
3,148,000
2,937,674


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the annual meeting of the American Society of Newspaper Editors misidentified the editor of the Journal-News in West Nyack, N.Y.
He is Paul Janensch.


Museum Visitor Damages a Rembrandt
LEAD: An unemployed man sprayed ''The Night Watch,'' the 17th-century Rembrandt masterpiece, with an unidentified chemical today, but an official at the Rijksmuseum said the damage did not ''seem to be too bad.''


3 Senators Offer Campaign Financing Bill
LEAD: Three Democratic Senators have introduced a bill that would extend public financing of Presidential campaigns to Congressional races.


Upheaval in the East;   Divisions Bedevil Hungary Parties
LEAD: As the Hungarian elections enter their final round on Sunday, the two main political parties, once allied in opposition to the former Communist Party, find themselves far apart, separated by clashes in style and personality that have long echoes in Hungarian history.


Sports People: PRO BASKETBALL;   Tarpley Suspended
LEAD: The Dallas forward Roy Tarpley was suspended indefinitely without pay for missing practice and a daily counseling session yesterday morning.


Move by Savings Agency
LEAD: The Government agency charged with selling failed savings and loan associations has adopted a policy requiring its employees to maintain a log of all telephone inquiries made by or on behalf of public officials.
The Resolution Trust Corporation action was announced on Wednesday in response to policy directives in the savings and loan bailout legislation enacted by Congress last August.


Dow Slips 4.05 in Sluggish Trading
LEAD: Stock prices fell yesterday and the Dow Jones industrial average lost 4.05 points to end the day at 2,717.12.
For the week, the Dow was up 9.91 points.


Bridge
LEAD: A traditional trick question is to ask a man: ''Have you stopped beating your wife?
Answer yes or no.'' Substitute ''mother'' for ''wife,'' address the question to Jill Blanchard of Manhattan, and the answer would be an unhesitating negative.


Conceived to Save Her Sister, a Child Is Born
LEAD: A baby girl was born Tuesday to a couple who conceived the child to serve as a bone marrow donor for their cancer-stricken daughter.


Czech-U.S. Trade Pact Set; Accord With Soviets Seen
LEAD: The United States has concluded a trade agreement with Czechoslovakia's new democratic Government that would cut tariffs and increase business ties and tourism between the two countries, the United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said today.


Vitran Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vitran Corp.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
25,000,000
11,800,000
Net inc
720,000
218,000
Share earns
.13
.04
The company said gains from the sale of property in the latest quarter equaled 5 cents a share.
There were no similar gains in year-ago period.


BNH Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BNH Bancshares Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b1,510,926
b2,356,628
Share earns
.35
.55
Shares outst
4,303,596
4,299,405
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $206,930 for the latest year and $55,900 for the year-earlier period.


AFGHAN CEREMONY ENDS IN BLOODSHED
LEAD: Afghan rebels turned a reconciliation ceremony into a deadly ambush today, killing at least 10 people, including 2 generals, and wounding many other Government officials, witnesses said.


Come Back and Let's Try to Work It Out
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mixed Signals
LEAD: While the unemployment rate dipped in March, the number of private-sector jobs fell for the first time in four years.
Page 9.


Bronx Twins Charged In Second Theft Case
LEAD: Twin sisters who earlier this week were charged with bilking a blind man of his life savings were arrested yesterday on charges that they stole from a second disabled man, the police said.


Nets Voyage to the Bottom of the League
LEAD: Harry Weltman, the Nets' general manager, was in Portsmouth, Va., tonight, scouting talent for this year's National Basketball Association draft.
Weltman was lucky.
He did not have to watch the first half here.


Review/Film;   Ernest Again, Invulnerable To Life's Inanimate Objects
LEAD: Any adult who fidgeted through the inane ''Ernest Goes to Camp'' and ''Ernest Saves Christmas'' had reason to fear the news that those children's films made truckloads of money.
It was almost too painful to think about a sequel, much less wonder why Ernest had become a movie star.
This is the irritating, rubbery-mouthed character who became famous pitching appliances, mattresses and soft drinks on television commercials by yelling ''Hey, Vern!


Lawrence Stayer, 49, Met Auditions Director
LEAD: Lawrence F. Stayer, the executive director of the Metropolitan Opera National Council Auditions, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 49 years old and lived in Manhattan.


New Odors From the H.U.D. Swamp
LEAD: Maybe there's something in the water at the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Or maybe it's in the air.
Whatever and wherever it is, it seems to make the agency peculiarly susceptible to cronyism and conflicts of interest in contract awards.
And it doesn't seem to matter who is in charge.


Knicks End Sixers' Streak and Clinch
LEAD: The Knicks clinched a playoff berth last night, which had been expected.
More important, after a disastrous month of March, in which they went 4-12, the Knicks have discovered new life and may be a team to be reckoned with in the post-season.


Patents;   Tube Device May Replace Insulin Shots
LEAD: To free diabetes patients from the need to inject themselves with insulin each day, a surgeon in Texas has invented what amounts to a drug factory that could be inserted into a vein.


Dollar Off as Trading Slows In Advance of Paris Talks
LEAD: The dollar ended the week slightly lower in subdued action yesterday as traders moved to the sidelines on the eve of a weekend meeting of world finance ministers.


Laser Photonics Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laser Photonics Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,815,366
12,598,314
Net loss
978,330
b1,395,961
Share earns
-
.36
Shares outst
3,473,119
4,025,703
b-Net income


Columbia Students End Sit-In
LEAD: Columbia Law School students yesterday ended an overnight sit-in at the dean's office to protest a lack of diversity on the faculty.
The sit-in ended after the students presented Dean Barbara Black with a ''Blueprint for Diversity,'' recommendations for increasing the number of female, minority and gay professors.


Slaying Suspect Saw 2 Choices, Doctor Testifies
LEAD: A psychiatrist testified today that John E. List saw only two choices when financial and health problems burdened his family in 1971: go on welfare, or kill his wife, his three children and his mother and send their souls to heaven.


Horn &amp; Hardart Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horn &amp; Hardart Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
144,413,000
138,596,000
Net loss
b3,873,000
c1,080,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
14,142,401
14,273,422
Yr rev
537,716,000
499,037,000
Net loss
8,959,000
d32,501,000
Shares outst
14,145,416
14,200,779


NEPAL: At a Glance
LEAD:
Government


Cheni Gold Mines reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cheni Gold Mines
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
26,674,000
-
Net inc
4,002,000
-
Share earns
.36
-
The company began commercial production March 1, 1989.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


More Trade With Japan, Maybe
LEAD: The new trade agreement between Japan and the United States is promising.
Japan pledges to reduce its barriers to imports and foreign investment.
America says it will become more competitive.
Neither will happen overnight, and some undertakings won't be fulfilled.
But the fact of a broad understanding may help calm the two nations' increasingly contentious relations.


Jury Supports Genentech In Patent Infringement Case
LEAD: In an important victory for Genentech Inc., a jury in United States District Court in Delaware ruled today that the company's patents for tissue plasminogen activator, or T.P.A., its main product, were valid.


New Style In Transit: Stooping To Conquer
LEAD: On a recent tour of subway and bus centers in Brooklyn, Alan F. Kiepper, the new president of the Transit Authority, did something so unusual that it generated stares from some passengers waiting for the A train - he picked up litter and a penny on a subway platform.


At Foundations, the Voice of Women and Minorities Remains Faint
LEAD: Although securing a bigger role for women and minorities has been a professed goal in the philanthropy field, most boards of American foundations continue to be dominated by white males.


Viratek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Viratek Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
1,212,000
1,438,000
Net inc
182,000
440,000
Share earns
.02
.05
The year-ago quarter reflected $2 million one-time gain related to reduction in anticipated costs associated with completion of certain studies.


Brendle's reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brendle's (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 3
1990
1989
Revenue
131,959,000
113,481,000
Net inc
8,781,000
4,928,000
Share earns
1.10
.61
Yr rev
277,416,000
261,324,000
Net inc
3,431,000
1,268,000
Share earns
.43
.52


Ferry From Norway Catches Fire; 150 Are Missing and Feared Dead
LEAD: About 150 people were missing and feared dead after a ferry caught fire in the North Sea today, the Norwegian rescue service said.


Sports People: COLLEGE BASKETBALL;   Coach Quits Oklahoma
LEAD: Valerie Goodwin-Colbert, the Oklahoma women's basketball coach, resigned yesterday, a day after university officials, pressured by fans and legislators, announced that they would reinstate the program, which was dropped last week.(AP)


Doctorow's 'Bathgate' Wins Faulkner Award
LEAD: ''Billy Bathgate'' by E. L. Doctorow won the 10th annual PEN/Faulkner Award as the best work of fiction published in 1989.
The announcement was made this week by the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, which administers the $7,500 prize.
The presentation will be made at the Folger Library on


U.S. Indicts Iraqi In Plot to Kill 2
LEAD: A former driver for the Iraqi Mission to the United Nations in New York has been indicted on charges of plotting with an Iraqi agent to kill two opponents of the Iraqi Government who were in the United States, Federal prosecutors announced today.


Mortgage Rates Are Up
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 10.26 percent, up from 10.22 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.56 percent this week, unchanged from the previous week.


Social Club Landlord Named in Other Cases
LEAD: Alex DiLorenzo 3d, the owner of the building that housed the Bronx social club where 87 people died in a fire last month, surrendered in Criminal Court in Manhattan yesterday on 42 separate arrest warrants.


M'Lord, In the Library
LEAD: House buyers around Washington want libraries.
It was in one of the papers down there: ''Home library is hot new real-estate item.''


G.M. a Good Neighbor in North Tarrytown
LEAD: To the Editor:


Upheaval in the East;   D'AMATO STOPPED AT POLISH BORDER
LEAD: Soviet border guards refused today to allow Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato to enter Lithuania, which has been locked in a war of wills with the Kremlin since declaring independence on March 11.


Teller's Charges Discredited Oppenheimer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Covenant House Needs Its Board to Stay On
LEAD: To the Editor:


L.I. Youth Stabbed to Death
LEAD: A 15-year-old boy was killed and his 12-year-old sister seriously wounded after being stabbed numerous times Friday night in their home in the upper-middle-class community of Herricks, L.I., the Nassau County police said.


Books of The Times;   Lawyers' Goal: Victory or Morality?
LEAD:
Moral Vision and Professional Decisions
The Changing Values of Women and Men Lawyers
By Rand Jack and Dana Crowley Jack
218 pages. Cambridge University Press. $24.95.


Practical Security For Europe
LEAD: East and West are flailing around for a European security system that can transcend the cold war balance of terror without falling back into the dangerous prewar national balance of power.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
3-7
Differences over German unification have been significantly narrowed by the United States and the Soviet Union.
But talks between the two nations apparently failed to make much progress on major arms control issues.
Page 1
News analysis: High-level talks between the Soviet Union and the United States this week appear to have opened the door at least part of the way for what Secretary of State Baker calls a ''new architecture'' for Europe.


Court Counters Irish Policy On Extraditions to Britain
LEAD: In a decision that seems further to undermine the Irish Government's policy of turning over accused terrorists to the British, the Irish Supreme Court ruled unanimously today not to extradite a man to face weapons-possession charges in Northern Ireland.


Judge Releases Man in Killing Of an Intruder
LEAD: An East Harlem man charged with killing a man who the police said was threatening a pregnant woman with a knife was released without bail yesterday as the woman wept with joy and called him ''my good Samaritan.''


Dairy Mart Convenience reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dairy Mart Convenience (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 23
1990
1989
Revenue
133,711,000
124,327,000
Net inc
b343,000
c427,000
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
4,297,000
4,183,000
Yr rev
536,290,000
519,876,000
Net inc
d682,000
d4,106,000
Share earns
.16
.94
Shares outst
4,304,000
4,376,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: BJORN BORG, the five-time Wimbledon champion, has been ordered to pay up to $2 million to Swedish creditors of his failed retailing business.
A Stockholm court said yesterday that half the estimated total of $1.65 million to $2 million must be paid by June 1.


Debt Seen as Negating Gains in United Deal
LEAD: United Airlines has been looking for a way to recapture the No. 1 position in the domestic airline industry from American Airlines.
But industry experts think the tentative agreement reached yesterday for an employee buyout will not by itself be the answer.


U.S. Issues Steady After Early Moves
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities made a series of sharp moves early yesterday on a mixture of conflicting economic news and rumors, but ended the day basically unchanged.


BARRY WELCOMED BY BLACK MAYORS
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry of Washington briefly stole the show from the Rev.
Jesse Jackson today when he walked into an anti-drug meeting and was given a standing ovation while Mr.
Jackson was speaking.


Digital Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Communications (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
40,624,000
50,307,000
Net inc
b9,447,000
7,283,000
Share earns
.64
.49
Shares outst
14,712,000
14,888,000
9mo sales
149,728,000
154,186,000
Net inc
b28,775,000
c10,108,000
Share earns
1.94
.68
Shares outst
14,829,000
14,881,000


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.25
9.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.77
7.75
8.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.75
7.75
8.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.60
8.60
9.38
30-YR.


White South African Wins Political Asylum


Review/Theater;   Distillation of 'A Tale of Two Cities'
LEAD: In what is perhaps the most familiar opening paragraph in all English literature, Charles Dickens observed that the best and worst of times just preceding the French Revolution ''was so far like the present period that some of the noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only.


With Spring Comes Pollen, And Inaccurate Spore Counts
LEAD: Dr.
Harriet A. Burge has been counting pollen for about 25 years, but it was not until 1987 that she began looking closely at the American Academy of Allergy and Immunology's annual statistical report.
She realized then, she says, that the profession was doing a poor pollen-count job.


Pacesetter Business Prop.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacesetter Business Prop.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,122,000
2,890,000
Net loss
930,000
607,000
Yr rev
8,461,000
13,029,000
Net loss
3,446,000
1,774,000


Allied Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Research Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,520,000
1,365,000
Net loss
3,277,000
6,951,000
Yr sales
44,809,000
34,187,000
Net loss
7,457,000
8,589,000


Measurement Specialties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Measurement Specialties (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,113,765
3,518,472
Net loss
97,478
b604,178
Share earns
-
.23
9mo sales
4,925,000
13,993,650
Net loss
1,283,575
b2,257,892
Share earns
-
.85


OWNER BACKS SALE OF UNITED AIRLINES TO WORKER GROUP
LEAD: Directors of the parent of United Airlines agreed yesterday to sell the company to its employees for $4.38 billion, or $201 a share.
The agreement came nearly six months after a deal for the airline's pilots and management to buy the company collapsed for lack of financing, helping to touch off one of the biggest stock market plunges in history.


2 Arbitragers Found Guilty
LEAD: After a 12-week trial, a Federal jury convicted two Wall Street arbitragers yesterday of insider trading, fraud and other counts linked to the so-called Yuppie Five scandal.
Victor Teicher and Ross


South African Draft Evader Is Granted Asylum in U.S.
LEAD: A white South African, who has refused to serve in his country's military because it enforces the system of white minority rule, or apartheid, has been granted political asylum in the United States.


Richard G. King, 67, Educations Executive
LEAD: Richard Gordon King, an educator who helped to develop college financial aid procedures, died of a heart attack on Tuesday at St.
Joseph's Hospital Center in Milford, N.H.
He was 67 years old.


Beliefs
LEAD: One man, a President, topped the list of the Gallup poll's ''most admired men'' with the greatest frequency in the 1980's, but the names that followed his were almost all religious figures.


Ford and Fiat Discuss Farm Equipment Units
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it was negotiating with Fiat about possible ''worldwide arrangements'' involving their tractor and farm equipment operations.


Richard M. Lubell, 84, Former School Official
LEAD: Richard M. Lubell, a former deputy superintendent of the New York City schools, died of a heart attack on Thursday at his home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 84 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about a meeting between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, misstated the date of the Helsinki Final Act on European security and human rights in some copies.
It was signed in 1975.


Sports People: COLLEGE BASKETBALL;   Valvano's $1 Offer
LEAD: Jim Valvano volunteered yesterday to remain at North Carolina State and coach the men's basketball team for $1 next year, but the university refused the offer, one of Valvano's attorneys said.


With Nods to Rome, the Renaissance and the 60's
LEAD: At the climax of the Giorgio Sant'Angelo show, four models came out dressed like vestal virgins, in long liquid robes in flaming colors, ready to be included in some unknown primitive rite.
They were styles you might wear to be thrown into a volcano.


Transit Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transit Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,800,000
10,000,000
Net loss
1,206,244
b753,851
Yr rev
41,500,000
31,500,000
Net loss
1,473,867
bc1,674,428
Share earns
-
.67
b-After extraordinary credits of $84,000 for the quarter and $346,000, or 14 cents a share, for the year.


Anne R. Squiccimarro, Science Professor, 55
LEAD: Anne Rice Squiccimarro, a professor and an administrator of Mercy College in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., died of breast cancer on Thursday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 55 years old and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson.


Mattingly Talks Delayed for a Day
LEAD: On the last day of their lockout-shortened Florida camp, the Yankees lost one more exhibition game today before winging their way home for a weekend series with the Mets that opens at Shea Stadium on Saturday.
But they did not leave without making a bit more news.


Tele-Optics reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tele-Optics (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,800,000
7,000,000
Net loss
b487,000
c473,000
Share earns
-
.28
b-Resulted from a delay in Boresight shipments, a January 1990 cancellation of a $5 million contract for television sensor guidance systems and a writedown for obsolete inventory related to discontinued products.


Topics of the Times;   Mr. Nixon Tapes Again
LEAD: Former President Nixon has made another tape.
Driven from office by the Watergate secrets revealed by his Oval Office tape recorder, he has returned to the medium to record his new book, ''In the Arena.'' The book, Mr.
Nixon's eighth, is a memoir of the painful aftermath of his resignation and political humiliation.


4 Slain Execution-Style in Manhattan
LEAD: Three men and a 2-year-old boy were slain execution-style in an apartment living room in lower Manhattan late Thursday in what investigators believe was a drug-related robbery, police officials said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Abbott Laboratories Inc., Abbott Park, Ill., a maker of health and medical equipment, said a Cook County Circuit Court judge had granted a motion allowing it to proceed with the previously announced ouster of Robert Schoellhorn as its chairman.


Barringer Labs reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barringer Labs
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,719,000
5,367,000
Net loss
b221,000
b458,000
Shares outst
1,266,706
-
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $325,000 and $234,000 for the latest year and year-earlier periods, respectively.


Presidential Realty reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Presidential Realty (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,734,000
9,290,000
Net inc
b2,728,000
c6,965,000
Share earns
.83
2.14
b-Included a loss of $2,235,000 from writedown of loans and after an extraordinary net gain from sales of properties and investments of $146,000, or 4 cents a share.


Trade Pact Under Fire In Japan
LEAD: Some members of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu's Liberal Democratic Party said today that the party would have to brace for enormous political losses if it pushed through legislation to carry out the revisions in trade barriers sought by Washington and accepted by Tokyo on Thursday.


U.S. Jobless Rate Edges Down to 5.2%
LEAD: The unemployment rate edged down one-tenth of a point to 5.2 percent in March, but the number of payroll jobs in the private sector declined for the first time in four years, the Labor Department reported today.


Dylex Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dylex Ltd.
Year to Feb 3
1990
1989
Net loss
b60,700,000
c29,800,000
Share earns
-
.60
b-After a loss from discontinued operations due to a loss incurred by Foxmoor Specialty Stores Corp. of $77,800,000.
c-Net income and after a loss from discontinued operations of $9,500,000.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: YVES MONTAND, 69, whose companion bore his child last year, says that now many women are haunting him.
Mr.
Montand has been ordered by a French magistrate to submit to a blood test to determine whether he is the father of a 14-year-old girl.


Cutco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cutco Industries
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,075,000
3,125,000
Net inc
84,000
214,000
Share earns
.07
.19
Shares outst
1,129,529
1,118,106
6mo sales
8,062,000
6,139,000
Net inc
225,000
434,000
Share earns
.20
.39
Shares outst
1,125,330
1,118,106


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Two Olympic gold medalists, FLORENCE GRIFFITH JOYNER and her husband, AL JOYNER, are expecting their first child in November.
Ms.
Griffith Joyner, a sprinter, won three in 1988 and Mr.
Joyner won the triple jump in 1984. (AP)


Cuomo Aides Say Budget Gap May Hit $1.8 Billion
LEAD: Making a bad situation worse for weary negotiators, the $1.5 billion gap in the state's 1990-91 budget may grow to $300 million because of a continuing slump in tax revenues, state officials said today.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, APRIL 7, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


Cambodian Guerrillas Report Offensive to Retake Territory
LEAD: Thousands of Cambodian guerrillas staged major attacks today in a bid to recapture territory seized by Government forces in recent weeks, senior guerrilla officials said.


A Roundup for the Great Society
LEAD: They gathered tonight for what Lady Bird Johnson called ''a Texas-size roundup of the Great Society.''


Stake in Gallimard Is Sold; Fear of Takeover Revived
LEAD: The continuing power struggle within France's largest independent publisher took an unexpected turn today when a member of the family that controls the publisher, Editions Gallimard, announced that she was selling her shares to the Banque Nationale de Paris.


New Estimate on Savings Bailout Says Cost Could Be $500 Billion
LEAD: The cost of the Government's savings and loan bailout could grow to as much as $500 billion, roughly twice as high as previous official estimates, the head of the General Accounting Office said today.


Review/Film;   Dead Killer Who Keeps Cropping Up
LEAD: Somebody down there likes muscular, strong-jawed Patrick Channing (Jeff Kober), who is so good-looking that he could be an actor but has become a serial killer instead.
After he dies in the gas chamber, Patrick returns to his Los Angeles turf to carry on his work.


Stereotypes of Women Cloud Drug Discussion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cape Code Bank &amp; Trust Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cape Code Bank &amp; Trust Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,088,730
2,241,838
Per share
.47
.94
Shares outst
2,302,713
2,391,903


Oilers Defeat Jets in Overtime to Tie Series at 1-1
LEAD: Mark Lamb's goal 4 minutes 21 seconds into overtime gave the Edmonton Oilers a come-from-behind 3-2 victory over the Winnipeg Jets tonight, tying their Smythe Division semifinal series at one victory each.


I.B.M. Desktop Computer Growth
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said it expects the percentage rate of growth of the desktop computer market to register from single digits to the mid-teens in 1990, with I.B.M. sales growth at the high end of the range. ''Given a strong outlook worldwide, we may even be above the high end,'' the president of the I.B.M.


Puerto Rico Is Seen Facing Economic Troubles as State
LEAD: Puerto Rican statehood could undermine the island's economy and cost as many as 100,000 of its 900,000 jobs by the end of the decade, a new study by the Congressional Budget Office has found.


Review/Music;   Violinist in Philharmonic Debut
LEAD: Charles Dutoit's current subscription program with the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall - to be repeated tonight and Tuesday night at 8 - is newsworthy for the Philharmonic debut of Joshua Bell, the much-talked-about young violinist.
But yesterday afternoon's installment proved most appealing for its coherence and a terrific performance of Shostakovich's Symphony No.


The Invisible Man in 'A Chorus Line'
LEAD: ''Different'' is nice, but it sure isn't ''pretty.'' ''Pretty'' is what it's about.
I never met anyone who was ''dif ferent'' Who couldn't figure that out.
The man who wrote those crisp, telling lines for ''A Chorus Line'' is the Theatrical Invisible Man.
A private, publicity-shy person, he would cross a room to get away from a reporter or photographer.


2 Professors Awarded Bancroft History Prizes
LEAD: Columbia University awarded its 1990 Bancroft Prizes in American history on Wednesday night to the authors Dr.
Neil R. McMillen of the University of Southern Mississippi and Dr.
James H. Merrell of Vassar College.


Sports People: COLLEGE BASKETBALL;   Knight's Son a Hoosier
LEAD: One of the recipients of a basketball scholarship to Indiana University next year is Patrick Knight, a 6-foot-6-inch forward from the New Hampton School in New Hampshire, whose father just happens to be the coach.


Larry Lee, 48, Dies; Television Producer, Wrote Biographies
LEAD: Larry Lee, an award-winning television and radio producer and co-author of biographies of the writers Jack Kerouac and William Saroyan, died of AIDS on Thursday at Children's Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 48 years old.


Louis Nelson, 87, A Jazz Trombonist Of Preservation Hall
LEAD: Louis Nelson, a jazz trombonist who was the last surviving musician from the original Preservation Hall bands, died Thursday from injuries suffered in a car accident 10 days earlier.
He was 87 years old.


Facts About Jaguars
LEAD: To the Editor:


T/SF Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* T/SF Communications (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,522,000
19,036,000
Net loss
41,000
b497,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
5,790,000
4,195,000
Yr rev
74,273,000
57,653,000
Net inc
325,000
2,624,000
Share earns
.10
.36
Shares outst
5,059,000
4,195,000


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Celtics End Cleveland Drought
Kevin McHale scored 30 points and Larry Bird got his ninth triple-double of the season as Boston beat Cleveland, 109-104, tonight for their first road victory over the Cavaliers in four years.
The loss dropped Cleveland into a tie with the Atlanta Hawks for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.


Jay Johnson, 39, Dies; Specialist in Folk Art
LEAD: Jay Johnson, a Manhattan gallery owner and scholar of American folk art, died of AIDS on Thursday at his home in Piermont, N.Y.
He was 39 years old.


Prime Financial Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Financial Partners (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
2,419,397
b317,370
Share earns
-
.06
Yr net loss
3,842,931
199,865
b-Net income


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Banks and the Elderly
LEAD:
Many banks are trying to lure older Americans' deposits by offering a variety of benefits that are not available to the other customers.
Such depositors are viewed as a source of stable funds and a ready market for estate planning services.
Some banks require fairly large balances for these accounts; others set no minimum, but depositors have to pay monthly fees.


Topics of the Times;   A Sufficient Warning
LEAD: The recording industry has agreed to put a uniform warning label on potentially offensive records.


Techdyne Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Techdyne Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,864,398
15,518,154
Net loss
1,866,677
b1,628,210
b-Included pre-tax expenses of $717,581 incurred in plant closings.


Upheaval in the East;   Excerpts From News Conferences in Washington
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the news conferences today by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
SHEVARDNADZE STATEMENT


Cuba Upholds Prison Terms For Two Rights Campaigners
LEAD: Cuba's Supreme Court has upheld prison sentences against two human-rights campaigners jailed for discrediting the Cuban state by spreading false information, the Cuban press agency Prensa Latina said today.


Telequest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telequest Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,018,000
2,809,000
Net loss
281,000
1,282,000
Yr sales
5,017,000
8,581,000
Net loss
1,656,000
6,104,000


Dr. Norman T. Crane, Pediatrician, Dies at 88
LEAD: Dr.
Norman T. Crane, a New Jersey pediatrician for more than four decades, died of a blood clot on the brain on Thursday at a nursing home in Green Brook, N.J.
He was 88 years old and lived in Plainfield, N.J.


Review/Dance;   Fireworks From Soviet Georgia
LEAD: In the Rustavi Company, swordsmen clash and shout, dagger after dagger is thrown frenziedly into the ground and sparks fly accelerando through the air.
But this sensational new song and folk dance ensemble from the Soviet republic of Georgia has a range that goes beyond mere pyrotechnics.


William Boone Nauts, Banker, 87
LEAD: William Boone Nauts, a retired banker, died of pneumonia on Thursday at the Wolcott Hall Nursing Home in Torrington, Conn.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Devils Receive Scare, But Take It in Stride
LEAD: The Devils have made such a commitment to the Stanley Cup playoffs that not even a bomb threat prevented them from completing a day's work this afternoon.


Hugoton Sale Halted by Mesa
LEAD: Mesa Limited Partnership, the energy company headed by T. Boone Pickens, pulled its Hugoton Royalty Trust holdings off the market, saying prices were too low to sell the prime properties in the nation's largest natural gas field.
Mesa said in December that it would package its Hugoton holdings into a separate trust and sell shares.


Eastern Deal Advances
LEAD: The Transportation Department today tentatively approved the sale of several of Eastern Airlines' international routes to American Airlines.
The route sale is expected to bring Eastern about $350 million as it tries to consolidate its operations under bankruptcy protection.
Pan American World Airways and Eastern's unions are expected to express opposition.


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metall Mining
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b6,480,000
c17,455,000
Share earns
.17
.46
Yr sales
111,594,000
-
Net inc
b34,304,000
c42,144,000
Share earns
.91
1.12
b-After extraordinary credits of $1,385,000, or 4 cents a share, for the quarter and $2,501,000, or 7 cents a share, for the year.


About New York;   Odd Man Out: Helping Big Boys Feel Like Fathers
LEAD: ''I don't want her to call anybody else daddy, even if I despise the mother,'' Robert C. said. ''She's my kid.'' The teen-age father knows he will never have a future with his former girlfriend, but he wants to be a positive part of his daughter's life.
He plans always to have a couch where the child, or even her mother, might sleep if things get rough.


Symbolic Fight in Albany;   While Pursuing Victory on Income-Tax Cut, G.O.P. Agrees to $1 Billion in Other Taxes
LEAD: As impersonal and technical as it seems on paper, the state budget has very real and tangible consequences for the people of New York.
It determines what shape the roads will be in, how vigorously the pollution laws will be enforced, who will receive Medicaid benefits and how much it will cost to attend a public university.


U.S. to Look at Admissions at Berkeley Law School
LEAD: The Federal Department of Education has decided to investigate to determine whether certain admissions policies at the law school of the University of California at Berkeley violate civil rights laws, officials said yesterday.


Sports People: BASEBALL;   Postema Files Suit
LEAD: Pam Postema's bid to become the first woman umpire in the major leagues ended last winter when she was let go as a minor league umpire.
On Thursday in Los Angeles, she filed a Federal sexual discrimination in employment claim against the American and National Leagues with the United States Equal Employment and Opportunity


Beene, as Usual, Forges Fashion's Path
LEAD: What makes Geoffrey Beene great?
Is it the sophistication of his cut that makes the most bulky fabric seem airborne?
The curved lines that give a graceful femininity to clothes without dipping into banality?


National Income Realty Trust reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Income Realty Trust (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
28,717,000
28,373,000
Net loss
7,940,000
47,047,000
Shares outst
3,784,381
3,787,356
The company said it had a $1 million provision for losses in 1989, compared with a provision of $31.5 million in 1988.


Pristina Journal;   Albanians' New Way: Feuds Without Blood
LEAD: Libibe Dragacina extended his hand to Beslim Betushi, and when the handshake was concluded, a group of witnesses broke into happy applause.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MARGARET THATCHER has just become the least-popular British Prime Minister in 50 years.
A Gallup poll that appeared yesterday in The Daily Telegraph said that only 24 percent of the people interviewed were satisfied with her performance.


Poindexter Jury Is Still Out
LEAD: The jurors in the Iran-contra trial of John M. Poindexter completed their fifth day of deliberations today without reaching a verdict, and Judge Harold H. Greene ordered them to continue their deliberations on Saturday.
The eight women and four men on the jury will remain sequestered, as they have been since Tuesday after two jurors reported calls from news organizations.


Outline of a New Europe
LEAD: The talks between the Soviet Union and the United States this week appear to have opened the door at least part of the way for what Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d calls a ''new architecture'' for Europe.


But What About Your Insurance?
LEAD: The millions of Americans who change jobs each year are now entitled to medical and hospital insurance coverage for pre-existing health conditions, even if their new employer's plan does not cover those ailments.


Readers East and West
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Feb. 18 about the Whitney Museum misstated the number of works acquired during the time that Thomas N. Armstrong 3d served as director.
In that period, from 1974 to 1990, the collection grew from 6,702 objects to 8,936, not from 2,000 to 8,500.


Campus Life: U.S.C.;   A Bumper Crop Of Dented Fenders Brings Complaints
LEAD: In an area where almost no one goes without a car, students at the University of Southern California are complaining that because of university action their parked cars are going bump in the night (and day).
The cars are being dented and sideswiped with increasing regularity, they say, since the university narrowed the parking spaces to fit in as many vehicles as possible.


A SPECIAL REPORT: Numbers Please!;   Moving Targets
LEAD: The educational-industrial complex is regularly counting the students of America (and these days that's anyone between ages 3 and 93).


Amy Cohen Wed To David Bauman
LEAD: At the Westchester Reform Temple in Tarrytown, N.Y., Amy Grace Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Cohen of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to David Scott Bauman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Judah Bauman of Huntington, L.I.
Rabbi Jack Stern and Cantor Steven Merkel officiated.


SPECIAL TODAY
LEAD:
New York, New York, Magazine Pt.2
Education Life/Section 4A


Pinning Hopes On a Tower
LEAD: THE first new, privately financed downtown office building here in nearly a decade is under way, giving hope to local officials that a changing economy in the area - from rubber manufacturing to research and technology - will benefit the city's center.


A New Team Is Ready for Disasters
LEAD: WESTCHESTER has become the first county in the state to join with Federal agencies and a local private hospital in forming a Disaster Medical Assistance Team.
This team - volunteer doctors, nurses, technical staff and other health professionals - will be available to assist in rescue efforts in the county or anywhere in the United


Alfred L. Morse, 87; Headed Shoe Concern
LEAD: Alfred L. Morse, retired head of a chain of shoe stores, died of a heart attack Friday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 87 years old and lived in Cambridge.


U.S. and Allies Concerned by Yen's Fall
LEAD: The top economic policy makers from the United States and its six main industrial allies expressed concern today about the fall of the Japanese yen.
While leaving open the possibility of steps to bolster the yen's value, the officials announced no specific plans.


Managing;   'Courts' for Workplace Disputes
LEAD: At Honeywell Inc., a top-level department head who was fired alleged that his boss, a vice president, had dismissed him for reasons of personal animosity rather than performance.
A management appeal committee agreed with him, and reinstated him at another division.


A Change of Heart Leads to Lexus
LEAD: Put it down to weird-word mind glut.
I admit to confusion.
And if you are like me, Toyota and Nissan have a problem with their blockbuster entries in the luxury-car sweepstakes.


The Deadliest Of Weapons On Both Sides
LEAD: For nearly 20 years, the multiple-warhead missiles that are the subject of President Bush's proposal to the Soviet Union have been considered the most deadly weapons in the superpowers' nuclear arsenals and the most threatening to world peace.


Vladimir Pozner's School Days
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An artical last Sunday about William Belcom misidentified the singer who iis to play the female lead in the forthcoming opera. ''McTeague'' is Catherine Malfitano.


'Just Kidding' - But at Whose Expense?
LEAD: Orson Baldwin seems at first a charming straight-talker in a world of wimps.
Then his unpleasantness comes through - in the form of cryptically derogatory remarks about Jews and blacks, powerful suggestions of misogyny.
And yet, Baldwin's forthrightness has a seductive appeal, especially contrasted with the mealy-mouthed politeness of the other characters in ''Some Americans Abroad,'' Richard Nelson's spoof of American Anglophilia now playing at the Mitzi E.


Principal Pratfalls
LEAD: TROUBLED by soaring illiteracy rates and the unwillingness of many of the nation's 33 million elementary-school students to do assigned reading, some principals are resorting to this challenge: Do the reading, and you can watch your principal play the fool.


Miss Walters Wed To Steven Cohen
LEAD: Wendy Suzanne Walters and Steven Andrew Cohen were married yesterday at the Cliff Lodge in Snowbird, Utah.
The Rev.
Walter Ellingson, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Lawrence Siegel officiated.


BORSTAL GIRL
LEAD:
A WORLD LIKE THIS
By Helen Benedict.
194 pp. New York:
E. P. Dutton.
$17.95.


Trump's Taj - Open at Last, With a Scary Appetite
LEAD: All along there were doubters, Donald J. Trump recalled. ''Nobody thought it could be built.
That was the biggest risk - just getting it built.
But I love proving people wrong.''


All the Answers
LEAD: 1. Chaucer, prologue to ''The Canterbury Tales''


Bulb Placement Can Test the Memory
LEAD: THIS is a test.
How many can name the cultivar names of those marvelous little flowers - daffodils, early tulips, bulbous iris, scillas - the small flowers that are starting to bloom now in the garden?


PARITY JOINS '90 CART LINEUP
LEAD: The Championship Auto Racing Teams P.P.G.
Indy-Car series opens today with the Autoworks 200 at Phoenix International Raceway (ABC-TV, 4 P.M., Eastern time), and the 1990 lineup of cars and drivers looks fairly promising.


Argentine Chief Fights to Save Economic Program
LEAD: Fighting back against those who oppose his economic policies, President Carlos Saul Menem has set out to gather support both in the streets and the political backrooms.


BLACKBOARD
LEAD: Picture Postcards


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/NEW RELEASES: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
Look Who's Talking
1989.
RCA/Columbia.
No price listed.
Laser disk, $34.95. 1 hour 36 minutes.
Closed captioned.
PG-13.
''Cute is the operative word'' as little Mikey, a baby who uses the voice of Bruce Willis, looks for the right guy to serve as his father.
Kirstie Alley is his mother; George Segal is the caddish natural father who wants no part of him, and John Travolta, looking as if he's ''given up weight-lifting for ice cream sodas,'' plays a friendly cabbie who lends Ms.


Police Say Robbery Is Not Motive In Slaying of Long Island Boy, 15
LEAD: Nassau County detectives continued today to search for clues in the stabbing death on Friday of a 15-year-old boy at his home here.
The boy's 12-year-old sister was also seriously injured.


Social Events
LEAD:
Downtown Theater Benefit


Resurrecting a Pillar of British Music
LEAD: For several years, the enterprising partnership of Vernon Handley and the Ulster Orchestra (of Northern Ireland) has been exploring the symphonies of the Irish-born Sir Charles Villiers Stanford (1852-1924), once a pillar of the 19th-century British musical establishment.
Stanford's output included 9 operas, about 40 choral works, chamber music, 9 concertos for various instruments and 7 symphonies.


Mayhem on Ice: Is It N.H.L. or W.B.A.?
LEAD: Football, cold and methodical and filled with prediagramed collisions, produces more serious injuries.
Boxing, ''the sweet science,'' is clearly more dangerous, with constant punches to the head and body often damaging the vital organs.


POSTING: East Orange Plan;   Campus Link For Condos
LEAD: A 24-story rental apartment house near the campus of Upsala College in East Orange, N.J., is being converted into a condominium with an unusual amenity for buyers - access to the college's programs and facilities.
Of the 227 apartments in the building, 100 are vacant and available immediately at prices ranging from $64,500 to $199,000.


Data Bank/April 8, 1990


Access Roads
LEAD: PERSONAL computers can now be found in almost every school in the United States, the Government reports, although the ratio of students to computers varies widely.
Some elementary schools have only one; some universities thousands.
No matter how many computers a school has, however, almost everyone agrees that there are not enough.


A Campaign to Attract New Business
LEAD: FOUR prominent developers are asking the county to contribute funds to their $1 million marketing campaign to attract new businesses to Westchester.


Correction
LEAD: The New Jersey Q &amp; A column on March 25 about Ruth Campopiano's efforts to promote careers in teaching included an outdated reference to a state-sponsored program of college scholarships for high school seniors.
Funds for the Governor's Teaching Scholars Program were recently approved for next year.


19 Are Killed in Leftist Attack in Colombia
LEAD: Thirteen guerrillas and six policemen were killed in a clash today after leftist rebels attacked two villages in southern Colombia, the police said.


Morgan State Not So Offbeat
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrI read with a great deal of dismay the article about the Morgan State University lacrosse program (''Honors for Offbeat Team That Shook Lacrosse,'' The Times, Feb. 27).
It is true that the team won no national titles and lost in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic


Strikes Imperil the Economic Plan of Salinas, and Hurt a Rival, Too
LEAD: A series of strikes at several large companies has emerged as a major political and economic problem for President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and as an even greater challenge to the authority of one of his most bitter rivals, the head of the country's largest labor federation.


Priscilla A. Hook, Teacher, Is Wed
LEAD: Priscilla Ann Hook and Kevin Joseph Holleran were married yesterday at the Bryn Mawr (Pa.) Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
Stephen D. Michie performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Charles J. Sullivan, a Roman Catholic priest.


The Executive Computer;   Remember: Printing Requires Paper as Well as Hardware
LEAD: Some companies spend tens of thousands of dollars on powerful personal computers, high-resolution laser printers, advanced desktop publishing software, scanners and other high-technology printing components.
They invest countless hours of expensive staff time in training and countless more in designing attractive documents.


Residential Resales
LEAD:
Closings in the week ended March 24
MANHATTAN
Flatiron District
$455,000
12 West 18th Street
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar loft-condo; spiral staircase to private roofdeck, high ceilings, hardwood floors, three exposures; common charge $369, taxes $204 (Broker: Eychner &amp; Associates)


Marie E. Errico Planning to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Errico of Ridgewood, N.J., and Skaneateles, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Marie Elizabeth Errico and John Alexander Bicks, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David P. Bicks of New York and Castine, Me.


No, Doctors Are Not Just Like Auto Mechanics
LEAD: To the Editor:


TALKING: Home Work;   Guidelines For Condo Owners
LEAD: IN times past, anyone buying a suburban condominium could count on being in an exclusively residential complex in a relatively peaceful neighborhood.


Out of China
LEAD: Whatever the changes sweeping the rest of the Communist world, dissent for Chinese is best practiced at a distance.
Thus did Chai Ling, one of the top student leaders of the Beijing democracy movement a year ago, reportedly turn up in France last week.
She and her husband, Feng Congde, went underground 10 months ago when they and 19 others were accused of leading the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion,'' as the authorities called it, that ended bloodily in Tiananmen Square.


Deficits Imperil Northeast Governors
LEAD: The economic slowdown in the Northeast has rattled the region's politics, putting incumbent governors of both parties on the defensive and injecting a powerful element of uncertainty into this year's elections.


MICHAEL SWEENEY: THE $900 MILLION NOSE
LEAD: For most New Yorkers, a cab is a ride; for Michael Sweeney it's a fragrance experience - a revolting one.
Usually the problem sits right on the dashboard, in the form of a bottle of air freshener.
Sometimes the offender is a little cardboard Christmas tree swinging from the rear-view mirror.
Either way, it's bad news for the nose.


The Abortion Account
LEAD: When I was growing up my life was governed by nuns and priests.
Don't scratch in public, Sister said.
Don't roll your skirt up, Sister said.
Don't whisper in class.
Don't gossip.
Don't cheat.
The priests were always more remote.
What I remember best is the outline of their profiles against the confessional screen, and the low murmur as they repeated the words of absolution while I said my act of contrition.


Question of the Week;   What Is Wrong With The Knicks?
LEAD: Maurice Cheeks: Good ballplayer; best years behind him.


Alomar Is Top of the Crop
LEAD: A half a dozen or so rookies are expected to appear in opening day lineups tomorrow and Tuesday, but none will command more attention than Sandy Alomar Jr., who, according to some baseball people, was the best catcher in the major leagues the last two years, and he wasn't even in the majors.


Fringe Groups Swaying Athens Vote
LEAD: By one calculation, the balance of power in Greece after elections on Sunday could be held by a mix of ecologists and fringe groups that include Pavlov's Dogs (anti-vivisectionist), Flowers of Evil (anarchist) and a third faction pressing for transvestite rights.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: IN 1988, the average time students took to earn a Ph.D. was 10 1/2 years after receiving a bachelor's degree, the longest time ever.
Education majors took the longest time, getting their Ph.D.'s an average of 17 years after receiving an undergraduate degree.
Doctorates in the physical sciences, such as math and computer science, were earned in the shortest time, an average of 7 1/2 years.


Peru Votes for President Today; Polls See a Runoff
LEAD: Mario Vargas Llosa, the internationally known novelist, has long enjoyed a commanding lead in the campaign for elections on Sunday in Peru, where voters are to select a new president and Congress to guide their fragile democracy.


Review/Dance;   Dreamlike Happenings In Odd Places
LEAD: A man hunched himself up and gazed downward as if lost in thought.
Later, he tenderly embraced a woman.
In themselves, those actions would not have been unusual.
What made them so was the fact that they were performed on a trapeze in ''Threshold,'' the choreographic fantasy that Nadine Helstroffer presented Monday night at the RAPP Arts Center.


Curbing Alcohol at Children's Parties
LEAD: A SIGN-A-PLEDGE program designed to curb children's use of alcohol is growing across Long Island as parents try to pressure their peers for closer supervision of teen-agers.


DAN KLORES: THE MAN BEHIND THE IMAGES
LEAD: You know how they say that you must have a light on in the room when you're watching television?
Well, the expert who first declared that was not an ophthalmologist, but Edward Bernays, ''the father of public relations,'' who was representing General Electric light bulbs at the time.
He told me so himself, and he wasn't confessing, he was bragging.


Review/Music;   Chinese Tradition Preserved
LEAD: The National Taiwan Academy of Arts established a Chinese-music division in 1971 to keep performance on traditional instruments alive.
An outgrowth of the division is the Chinese Orchestra, a student ensemble of about 40 players, which made its New York debut at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday evening.


Township Uses Videotape in Fight Against Drunken Driving
LEAD: OFFICER ROBERT LAWSON watches television in his squad car at night.


WHAT MAKES NEW YORK WORK, REALLY!
LEAD: This issue of New York, New York is not about the Trumps or the Tisches, the Rockefellers or the Rohatyns.
It is not about how politicians get elected, how large corporations get larger or how slow-grinding bureaucracies get slower.


Jacqueline W. Bernstein, Writer, 73
LEAD: Jacqueline Wolf Bernstein, a writer and a member of the board of the Citizens Committee for Children of New York, a child-advocacy group, died of cancer on Thursday at her home in Rye, N.Y.
She was 73 years old.


No Asterisks For Pitchers
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrWhile reading Dave Anderson's ''Ryan Would Strike Out Asterisks,'' (The Times, March 25), it was with much chagrin that I learned of Orel Hershiser's request to institute the three-inning victory rule during the first two weeks of the 1990 major league season.
Such a move would be an act of baseball heresy.


Polly Mirsky and Matthew Krupnick Are Wed
LEAD: Polly Jane Mirsky and Matthew Eric Krupnick, graduates of the University of Pennsylvania and students at Thomas Jefferson Medical College, were married last evening at the Metropolitan Club in Manhattan.
Rabbi Ely Pilchik officiated.


Fresh Faces but Still Same Old Turmoil
LEAD: Only the Yankees could pack three months worth of turmoil into three weeks of spring training.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: TWO college students in five say they consider religion to be very important in their lives and just about as many say they consider religion to be somewhat important, according to a survey conducted last year by the Gallup Organization for the Christian Broadcasting Network.
Over half the 539 undergraduates surveyed said they attended religious services at least once in the previous month.


Green Haven in New Orleans
LEAD: CAN suburbia be lovable?
Earnest urbanists assure us it cannot.
Its main features, after all, are negative.
No dirt, no noise, no undesirables - scarcely the stuff of romance.
In spite of this, Americans' love affair with the suburb of their dreams glows warm as ever.
New suburbs disappoint, but rarely disenchant us: because we can dream it, a truly lovable suburb must exist somewhere.


Healing Buckeye
LEAD: A tumor the size of a large egg that was discovered two weeks ago in X-rays has been removed from the right hip of Carlos Snow, the tailback on the Ohio State football team.
Snow, who led the Buckeyes in rushing the last two seasons, should be as good as ever when he returns to the team after a year's recovery, said Dr.


N.C. State Pays Valvano to Leave
LEAD: Jim Valvano is out as North Carolina State's basketball coach.
Five weeks of negotiations ended today when North Carolina State and Valvano, the school's coach for the last 10 years, reached a settlement that could ultimately yield Valvano more than $600,000.


Economic Impact Of Older Consumers
LEAD: ''Older Consumer Habits Alter Business Patterns'' (March 18) points up the powerful impact Long Island's burgeoning 50-plus population is having on business and industry.
Known as ''active affluents,'' they have the highest disposable income in the United States, $45,000 per household, and the most discretionary spendable monies of any age group.


UNSETTLING THE OLD WEST
LEAD: Richard Bernstein's ''Unsettling the Old West'' (March 18), certainly unsettled me.
It seems that Ms.
Limerick and her colleagues are demolishing a straw man.
Few who have paid attention to American history view the settling of the West as a pageant of unalloyed loveliness.
Even Hollywood, accused as the purveyor of an idyllic myth, has provided some very ugly and arresting vignettes of frontier life.


Lifestyle;   The Summer Renter Now Prefers A Swing Set to the Swinging Set
LEAD: The summer folk are often familiar these days, if perhaps a bit more mature.
In the 1970's, they summered with friends and significant others in popular resort areas like Fire Island, Ocean City and Old Saybrook.
Now they arrive with children in tow.


Review/Music;   Doleful Songs by Michael Penn and Toad
LEAD: In folk-rock's latest resurgence, being earnest is more important than ever.
Michael Penn and Toad the Wet Sprocket, two California-based acts that performed on Monday night at the Bottom Line, offered a double bill of tuneful, solemn songs: morose ruminations about love from Mr.
Penn and doleful, lonely tidings from Toad the Wet


Flying Couriers Earn Low Fare
LEAD: A RUTGERS junior, Elizabeth Maggio, flew to London on a one-week round-trip ticket at the end of March for $250, plus $50 for a registration fee as a courier.
A Barnard sophomore, Claudia Bestor, flew to Milan and back in December for $50, plus the $50 fee.
David Alexander Williams, a retired bank employee in Port Washington, L.I., got two weeks in Italy last summer by serving as a courier to Milan.


Out of Jail
LEAD: Ivan F. Boesky is out of jail, but he is not quite out of trouble.
The former Wall Street wheeler-dealer, who was fined $100 million and sentenced to three years in prison after pleading guilty to securities fraud in 1987, was paroled last week with time off for good behavior.
But Mr.
Boesky has not yet made the last payment on his debt to society.


On Language;   Screwing Up
LEAD: AFTER THESE PIECES are written, a researcher in Washington laboriously checks the facts and grammatical judgments; then a copy editor in New York, eyes narrowed and fine-toothed comb in hand, sifts and weighs each word, checks every spelling and challenges every controversial usage for style, taste and libel.


Ann Thoke Marries
LEAD: Ann Elisabeth Thoke, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick H. Thoke of Skaneateles, N.Y., was married yesterday to Bowers Wood Espy, the son of Mrs.
Bowers W. Espy of Altamonte Springs, Fla., and the late Mr.
Espy.
John Dolaghan, a retired Navy chaplain, officiated at the Ponte Vedra (Fla.) Inn and Club.


The Vatican
LEAD: To the Editor: The Travel section has had some interesting articles on Rome and particularly the Vatican.
In those articles reference was made to the Sistine Chapel and a suggestion to visit the small Pauline Chapel.


Day Care Bill Marks a Turn Toward Help For the Poor
LEAD: A SWEEPING child care bill has nearly made it through Congress, and it is tempting to see in this some impulses from the Great Society.
The House's 265-to-145 vote last week at least marked a sharp departure from the trends in domestic spending during the 1980's.


Men's Style;   SINCERELY YOURS
LEAD: ''BILL ROBINSON HAS GONE soft.
And we think not a moment too soon.'' A half dozen years ago, that declaration might have caused the fashion world to blush.
But recently, when it was circulated by Robinson's publicists as an unabashed assertion of the designer's creed, no one raised an eyebrow.
Least of all, Bill


Long Island Journal
LEAD:
Rape Prevention


Evening Hours;   Rites of Spring, New York Style, Mean Dancing
LEAD: On the benefit circuit last week, sitdown awards dinners gave way to a series of evenings that brought guests to their feet to usher in the new season.
On Wednesday the PEN American Center held its annual fund-raising event at Roseland.
Fifty-five writers and poets shared their tables with the society partygoers, but the guests barely let Jules


IN SHORT: SCIENCE BOOKS
LEAD:
THE NATURE FAKERS: Wildlife, Science &amp; Sentiment.
By Ralph H. Lutts. (Fulcrum, $22.95.) Can a beaver bandage the stump of its own amputated leg?
Could a fox ride on the back of a sheep in order to elude the hounds?
In the March 1903 Atlantic Monthly, the naturalist John Burroughs harshly criticized the contemporary rash of nature books as being overly sentimental, inaccurate and written ''simply to satisfy a market created by an eager and uncritical public.


Smokers Should Not Have to Hide
LEAD: To the Editor:


Van Gogh
LEAD: To the Editor: I read with interest the item on this year's celebration of Van Gogh (Travel Advisory, Feb. 18).
I had signed up for a July tour sponsored by the 92d Street Y (1395 Lexington Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10128; 212-415-5599), and after reading your description of the Chrysler Museum's trip, I thought your readers would like to know more about the one from the Y.


Assassins Wiping Out Colombia Party
LEAD: Beguiled by his ringlets, droopy mustache and premature jowls, supporters nicknamed the 36-year-old presidential candidate ''Garfield,'' after the cartoon cat.


Dairy Farmers Face A 'Roller Coaster' Year
LEAD: AFTER reaching record high levels, the price of milk received by dairy farmers in Connecticut is falling sharply.
But that decline has not yet been reflected in prices to consumers.


Dr. Audrey F. Jakubowski Weds Dr. Gerald Lazarus
LEAD: Dr.
Audrey F. Jakubowski, the director of regulatory affairs of pharmaceuticals and imaging agents at E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company in Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday to Dr.
Gerald Sylvan Lazarus, the chairman of the department of dermatology at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center in Philadelphia.


Social Security Still Beats Privatized Schemes;   Let the Buyer Beware
LEAD: To the Editor:


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   How Can The N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


SHACKLEFORD SPEAKS ON FIX ALLEGATIONS
LEAD: Charles Shackleford of the Nets has been under intense scrutiny the past few months, just like his collegiate coach, Jim Valvano.
And changing his usual position of no comment, Shackleford talked today about the point-shaving allegations that have haunted him since late February.


Design;   THE GOOD EGGS
LEAD: Eggs - their shape is universal.
So is their symbolism - renewal and fertility, purity and spring. ''Eggs are the single most collected object in the world, followed by the box,'' says Peter Schaffer, an owner of the Fifth Avenue gallery A La Vieille Russie. ''They've been used as popularity around the world as the heart.


Campanella Released
LEAD: After three months of treatment for pneumonia and a variety of other ailments, Roy Campanella was released Friday from the Northridge Hospital Medical Center in Los Angeles - and it couldn't have come at at better time.
The Hall of Fame catcher is scheduled to join fellow Brooklyn Dodger Hall of Famers Don Drysdale, Sandy Koufax and Duke Snider for the ceremonial first pitch tomorrow when Los Angeles opens its season at home against San


FEATHERS AND ALL, MOLIERE GETS HIS DUE
LEAD: Every now and then some praiseworthy musical group decides to call attention to the neglect of French Baroque opera by presenting a concert version of a work by Rameau, say, or Lully.
Often as not, the casual listener goes away vaguely dissatisfied, perhaps wondering if the work really deserves its high reputation among musicologists.


Theodore Roosevelt's Gun Stolen
LEAD: A .45-caliber Colt revolver carried by Theodore Roosevelt in the Rough Riders' charge up San Juan Hill in 1898 was reported stolen yesterday from the Sagamore Hill National Historic Site, President Roosevelt's home, in Oyster Bay, L. I. Raymond Bloomer Jr., chief ranger and head of visitor services at the historic site on Cove Neck Road, said the gun was last seen Thursday afternoon in its display case at Sagamore Hill's Old Orchard Museum.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The paint on one wall of our house has developed blisters and cracks.
This is an outside wall, and the problem is only in the area where the chimney is.
There is no evidence of staining that would indicate a leak, and this problem occurs no place else.
The chimney was cleaned and covered last spring, and the bricks on the outside were repointed.


Hemlocks Threatened By Insects
LEAD: IF you spot snowlike sprinkings on a hemlock tree, you are spotting trouble.
These are the egg sacs of the hemlock woolly adelgid, an insect that has been spreading through Connecticut for the past several years, killing trees.


Rachel Blinken to Marry Rony Herz
LEAD: A June wedding is planned for Rachel Jeanne Blinken and Rony Herz, the prospective bride's parents, Robert J. Blinken of Bedford Hills, N.Y., and Jeanne Atkinson of New York and Westport, Conn., have announced.
Mr.
Herz is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yehuda Herz of New York and Tel Aviv.


Government Opens Inquiry On the Greyhound Shootings
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms has opened an inquiry into more than two dozen incidents of gunfire aimed at buses owned by Greyhound Lines since drivers went on strike a month ago.


PUTTING THE BLACK EXPERIENCE CENTER STAGE IS HER LIFE'S WORK
LEAD: The pressures of living as a black man in America are the subject of a new dance to be performed by Philadanco, one of the country's major black modern-dance companies, in a New York debut season that opens on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater.
Another dance to be performed by the Philadelphia-based troupe offers a look at the street behavior of today's teen-agers.


Ms. McFarland Wed in Buffalo
LEAD: Kathryn Joan McFarland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James T. McFarland of Buffalo, was married there yesterday at the Central Park United Methodist Church to Roger Ashby Munford, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Munford of Derby, England.
The Rev.
David E. Durham performed the ceremony.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: When a player's strengths are not in evidence, he cannot be expected to make an impressive showing against the second strongest player in the world.
The final world championship candidates' match in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, which ended March 26, reiterated the point.


Still Serving The Children
LEAD: Maria H. O'Connell, in her article ''Recognizing Old Age When It Rounds the Corner'' [Westchester Opinion, March 4] , mentions having known in the 1930's of a child-care institution established by the philanthropist John E. Andrus.
We would like your readers to know that the Julia Dyckman Andrus Memorial, established as a tribute to Mr.


LOVE AMONG THE INSECTS
LEAD:
SONORAN DESERT SUMMER
By John Alcock.
Illustrated by Marilyn Hoff Stewart.
187 pp. Tucson:
The University of Arizona Press. $19.95.


Peace With Japan, Before It's Too Late
LEAD: Are we going to risk letting resentment and emotion, rather than a commonsense understanding of our national interest, govern our critically important relationship with Japan?


FLASHCARD
LEAD: PROFESSORS at Indiana University have reported that the written vocabulary of children in grades 1 through 8 was two and a half times larger 40 years ago than it is today.
An analysis of more than 4,000 compositions written by elementary school students ages 6 to 14 nationwide found just over 10,000 different words.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Three decades ago most major national team titles were won by players from the East Coast.
They usually had strong, noisy personalities, and their successes were due to psychological pressure rather than to comprehensive partnership agreements.
The late John Crawford was the norm, and the late B. Jay


Why Can't Johnny Speak Japanese? (It's Not Impossible.)
LEAD: ONE day, a father mouse and his school-age son were strolling through an alley when an unfamiliar cat spied them and immediately began to give chase.


VENUS WAS A GIBSON GIRL
LEAD:
FLING
And Other Stories.
By John Hersey.
207 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


BUSINESS DIARY
LEAD:
COMPANIES
UAL: The Employees Have It


POINDEXTER IS FOUND GUILTY OF ALL 5 CRIMINAL CHARGES FOR IRAN-CONTRA COVER-UP
LEAD: John M. Poindexter, the enigmatic rear admiral charged with deceiving and lying to Congress as part of an effort to conceal the Reagan Administration's actions in the Iran-contra affair, was convicted today of all five criminal charges against him.


Parental Roles: Proper Subject
LEAD: The observation that ''growing numbers of Long Island school districts are incorporating parental education into their curriculums on elementary, junior high school and high school levels,'' (Pupils Learning About Parental Roles,'' March 4) leads one to hope that within a couple of years one can write that ''all Long Island districts currently mandate parenting education at all grade levels.


Cleaning Blinds and Shades
LEAD: SPRING cleaning traditionally calls to mind beating carpets and clearing attics, but sprucing up Venetian blinds and window shades is probably a more common activity.


Campus Life;   The Idea of Coeducational Fraternities Is Catching On in the Northeast
LEAD: Virginia Bledsoe is president of the Delta Kappa Epsilon chapter at Trinity College in Hartford.
But she is not recognized by DKE's national organization.


Islanders Lash Out At League
LEAD: Bill Torrey, the general manager of the Islanders, yesterday criticized as unjust and arbitrary the National Hockey League's decision to fine the team and Coach Al Arbour, as well as suspend a pair of its players for their role in the melee that concluded Thursday night's Patrick Division playoff opener at Madison Square


Legalizing Drugs: Other Viewpoints
LEAD: While Bill Mathesius is correct in supporting individual rights, he fails to consider how drug use violates the welfare of others.
Has he thought about the children of drug-using parents?
This would be a sizable population.


Currency;   April in Paris for the Yen
LEAD: The weak yen gained a little ground last week as traders waited for the results of the Saturday meeting in Paris of the finance ministers from the United States and its economic allies in the Group of Seven.
The dollar was little changed against other major currencies.
The impact of the meeting - the group's other members are Japan, West Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada - will be tested as foreign exchange markets open today in New Zealand (in the early afternoon hours, New York time) and then in Tokyo.


Cleaning Blinds and Shades
LEAD: SPRING cleaning traditionally calls to mind beating carpets and clearing attics, but sprucing up Venetian blinds and window shades is probably a more common activity.


Dr. Tutino to Wed V. F. Martusciello
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Dino Tutino of the Bronx have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Dr.
Jody Maria Letizia Tutino, and Vincent Francis Martusciello, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul F. Martusciello of Brooklyn.


How Love Came to Simone de Beauvoir
LEAD: During the winter of 1928, a harassed Simone de Beauvoir decided that she was ''confined to home and library'' like ''a rat on a treadmill'' and had to do something to break free of the demoralizing circumstances of her life.
Everything seemed beyond her control.
A daughter of the bourgeoisie, she had become increasingly rebellious in the past few years.


Campus Life: M.I.T.;   Fraternity Ousts Members; Accusations Fly
LEAD: The national organization of a fraternity founded by Jews has ousted most of its members at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The organization cited repeated violations of insurance rules, including the use of alcohol.


BEST SELLERS: April 8, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum. ((Random House,
$21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to inflitrate the ruthless Medusa
Bridage as part of a plot to trap his archenemy, Carlos the
Jackal.
2
2
7
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO!


Folk Dancing in Eastern Europe: What Lies Ahead?
LEAD: The Hungarian State Folk Ensemble is not your everyday folk-dance troupe from Eastern Europe, it is one of the best - an impression that was more than confirmed on its recently concluded American tour and its spectacular performances in this country in 1987.


Dropouts Now Drop In
LEAD: ADAMS Junior High School in Los Angeles and Chicago Vocational High School, in Chicago, both run first-period contests called the ''homeroom attendance challenge.'' To the winners go early lunch passes.


Jennifer A. Leahy Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Jennifer Anne Leahy, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Vincent Francis Leahy of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday to Ronald Joseph Kim, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hyung Rin Kim of Glens Falls, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Peter Fiore performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius of Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Chestnut Hill,


THE AUTHENTIC CID
LEAD:
THE QUEST FOR EL CID
By Richard Fletcher.
Illustrated.
218 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Review/Pop;   Building On The Roots Of Country
LEAD: More than any other pop genre of today, country music remains infatuated with the 1950's.
Both the O'Kanes (the popular singing and songwriting duo of Jamie O'Hara and Kieran Kane) and Mary Chapin Carpenter, who shared the bill at the Bottom Line on Tuesday evening, make music that is strongly rooted in song forms and arranging styles that look back 40 years or more.


IN THE REGION: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bayville
$340,000
4 Willow Street
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; den, basement, beach and mooring rights, water view; taxes $6,300.
Bohemia
$170,000
24 Willowview Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 13-year-old ranch; den, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.


New York's Bind Shows How to Put a Budget in the Red
LEAD: AS an introduction to state budget-making, there is no more useful guide than New York State's school aid formula.


Shopping list for a nuclear bomb
LEAD: Armed with the knowledge that designing an atomic bomb is possible, drawing the plans is not the hard part; in fact, a junior at Princeton once created a workable plan as a homework assignment in a physics class.
The hard part is assembling the ingredients.
Fuel


Pollution From Storm Runoff Threatens Huntington Ponds:


TEST YOUR TECHNOLOGICAL LITERACY
LEAD:
LEVITATING TRAINS AND KAMIKAZE GENES: Technological Literacy for the 1990s.
By Richard P. Brennan. (John Wiley &amp; Sons, $18.95.) A layman's survival guide to our high-technology world is one of those things you don't know you're missing until you hold it in your hands.
In fact, it is long overdue.


Review/Music;   A Composer's 12-Part Story of Counterpoint
LEAD: David Borden seems to be an amiable man, and he writes amiable music.
For better or worse, however, he aspires to more than amiability, more than the pleasant popsiness to which his idiom might seem best suited.
Tuesday night at Town Hall, Mr.
Borden presented the first complete performance of what has been called his magnum opus, a 12-part, three-and-one-half-hour (with two short intermissions) score called ''The Continuing Story of Counterpoint.


Legalizing Drugs: Other Viewpoints
LEAD: I applaud Bill Mathesius's statement that money used in the prison system should be redirected toward education, rehabilitation and treatment as opposed to incarceration.
But I disagree with his view that legalization of illegal drugs is the answer to the current drug problem.
Society's inability to cope with abuse of legalized substances, like alcohol and tobacco, is well documented.


THE PEOPLE WHO GREASE THE WHEELS
LEAD: People often get overlooked in New York, especially the ones behind the scenes.
Consider the 2,098 who tend to the ups and downs of 46 city-owned bridges; the 340 who collect coins from 64,000 parking meters; the 10 who inspect all 56,000 elevators; the 16 who put chlorine in the 73 city pools.
The 128,000 who work in hospitals and the 32,400 who assist in doctors' and dentists' offices get little glory.


U.S. Doubts on Gorbachev
LEAD: Moscow's hard line in Lithuania and tough arms-control stance in last week's talks have revived doubts in Washington about Mikhail S. Gorbachev's future.
News analysis, page 15.


Gathers Had Some Choices
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Nancy Lynn Zajac Marries Peter Hancock Simpson
LEAD: At St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York, Nancy Lynn Zajac, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Zajac of Lavallette, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Hancock Simpson, the son of Frank H. Simpson of Lancaster, Pa., and the late Mary McKenna Simpson.
The Rev.
John Clermont performed the ceremony.


Defense Industry Goes Hustling To Make a Buck Without the Bang
LEAD: THE scientists at the heart of the military-industrial complex are getting in step with the times, trying to promote their research as a boon to civilian health, wealth and adventure.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: TWO-THIRDS of the Americans interviewed recently by the Gallup Poll said they thought drug use in public schools would increase if drugs were legalized.
Three in five Americans said that educating young people about the dangers of drugs was the most deserving or second most deserving activity of the Federal Government in its fight against drugs.


Libya
LEAD: To the Editor: I was delighted to read James Blachowicz's article ''A Tour of the Ancient World in Syria'' (Travel, March 4) and would like to recommend another country rarely visited by Americans that is rich in archeological sites: Libya.


Lithuania Is Not Tiananmen Square
LEAD: Has President Bush made a mistake in setting a date for a summit meeting with President Gorbachev?
Will Mr.
Gorbachev take this as a blanket endorsement and thus a blank check to crush the Lithuanian independence movement?


THE PRISONERS OF TIANANMEN SQUARE
LEAD: A MOTORIST TAKING THE SINGLE NARROW ROAD LEADING TO the front gate of Qincheng Prison comes upon a strangely tranquil scene: above the low surrounding walls rise the tops of trees within the compound, and, beyond them, the gentle, rolling slopes of distant mountains.
But those who have been inside, or who know people who have been imprisoned there, can scarcely mention the name of the prison without a quiver in their voice.


NEPAL OPPOSITION REJECTS OVERTURE
LEAD: The opposition rebuffed an offer by Nepal's new Prime Minister to start a political dialogue today as troop carriers trundled through the capital a day after security forces opened fire on pro-democracy demonstrators.


Review/Music;   The Atlanta Symphony Shows Itself Off
LEAD: When the Atlanta Symphony came to Carnegie Hall with its new music director on Wednesday, there was an air of demonstration and display to the proceedings.
It was as if this program of Barber, Brahms and Stravinsky had been calibrated to show an orchestra and its conductor (Yoel Levi) at their most effective.


Huntington Is Facing Deadline on Housing
LEAD: HUNTINGTON is facing a deadline to begin building ''affordable'' housing on a rocky site now occupied by 500 commuter parking spaces.


THE DIFFERENTS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE
LEAD: Who are the eccentrics of New York?
You know who you are - everybody, in a way.
The alien gravity of eccentricity is always at work in New York.
It is a force that skews behavior, bends thought and pulls people in unexpected directions, not all of them bad.
New York is an eccentricity machine.


Linda Saxl Weds Timothy Minton
LEAD: Linda Ruth Saxl, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sherman Joel Saxl of New York, was married last evening to Timothy Harris Minton, a son of Lynn Minton and Stuart Minton Jr., both of New York.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.


Searching for the Survivors in Tokyo World Markets
LEAD: In the rubble of the Tokyo stock market - now down 24.8 percent for the year - there are stocks that are doing well.
They resisted the downturn and some of them, especially electronics stocks, are now recommended by analysts in Tokyo and elsewhere as the way to beat an otherwise miserable market.


Q and A
LEAD:
Closing a Vault


This Drug Treatment Works
LEAD: There may be no more effective way to contain heroin abuse than methadone, a drug that blocks an addict's craving.
Yet new efforts to expand use of methadone have inspired new attacks on it, attacks that defy common sense.


Painful and Light Moods Collide in Bensonhurst Jury Selection
LEAD: There were times during jury selection for the Bensonhurst murder trial last week, when Justice Thaddeus Owens's Brooklyn courtroom filled with the spirited sounds of strangers meeting for the first time.
Sometimes, the gathering of more than a hundred potential jurors seemed too light-hearted to be about the killing of a 16-year-old boy on a summer night.


VERNA GILLIS: THE MUSE OF THE MELTING POT
LEAD: Verna Gillis, the closest thing the decade-old genre known as world music has to a doyenne, needs no alarm clock.
Nearly every morning a fax machine, beeping with the latest request from overseas, summons her from the bedroom of her Greenwich Village loft to the business desk some 50 feet away.
And before Europe and Africa have finished beseeching Ms.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: MORE than a third of high school football players are injured at least once while participating in the sport, according to a recent report by the National Athletic Trainers' Association.
The three-year study conducted from 1986 through 1988 concluded that 6 in 10 injuries happen during practice,the rest during the games.


Question of the Week;   What Is Wrong With The Knicks?
LEAD: What's wrong with the Knicks?
Lack of leadership.
Specifically, Rick Pitino's leadership.
Pitino's ability to get the most out of his players and teams made him a natural for this still young Knick team.
Without him, the Knicks seem lost on the court.
JAMES W. McRAE
Kew Gardens Hills, Queens


Exxon Study Says Spill Poses No Long-Term Risk to Fish
LEAD: A study commissioned by the Exxon Corporation has found that the Exxon Valdez oil spill is unlikely to cause long-term harm to fish and other organisms in Prince William Sound, and has drawn immediate fire from Alaskan officials.


It's Women's Turn In Politics
LEAD: THIS will be the decade of women in American politics.
Historically only marginal participants in the political process, women are now on the verge of complete integration into power politics and demanding recognition.


Peter Wolfe Dies at 53; A Bank Vice President
LEAD: Peter J. Wolfe, a senior vice president of the Chase Manhattan Bank, died of a heart attack on Thursday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 53 years old and lived in Pompton Plains, N.J.


Question of the Week;   What Is Wrong With The Knicks?
LEAD: This team doesn't play defense, individually or collectively.
They never stay with their man.
There's no switching, no blocking out, no jumping to block or harass shots.
Practically all the Knicks are faked out of their pantaloons.
They have no basketball savvy, poor passing, no back-door plays and minimum movement.


New York Ethics Law Limiting Lobbying Is Upheld
LEAD: New York State's three-year-old ethics law, which restricts many former state employees from lobbying the agencies they had worked for, was upheld by the state's highest court this week.


Gloria Joseph Becomes the Bride of Basil Maher
LEAD: Gloria Joseph, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Joseph of Hammond, Ind., was married yesterday to Basil Maher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael E. Maher of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Florence Pert performed the ceremony at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York.


With Deregulation, Everybody Gains
LEAD: One of the most enduring policy debates of the 1980's concerns the wisdom of deregulating the airline industry.
Although more than a decade of evidence is in, the jury is still out.
Last month the debate was rekindled by a blast from the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal research organization in Washington.


Putnam Valley
LEAD: To the Editor:


Diana L. Peyton Plans to Marry
LEAD: Diana Louisa Peyton and Eric John Kollevoll plan to marry in October.
Miss Peyton, 25 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray S. Peyton of Pennington, N.J.
The prospective bridegroom, 28, is a son of Mrs.
Bernard R. Deschaine of Easton, Pa., and Olav B. Kollevall of Easton.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/NEW RELEASES: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Floyd Leads Masters By 2
LEAD: Raymond Floyd, armed with his old short game and a new attitude, today took a two-shot lead going into the final round of the 54th Masters with a fist-pumping back nine.


Bargaining With Sponsors:


Beating Time Warner at Its Own Game
LEAD: I didn't have any money,'' said Robin Wolaner. ''I thought, 'Who would invest in me?
I don't even have an M.B.A.' I had never heard the term venture capital.
My husband said, 'So what that you don't have any money?.' ''


END PAPER: Student With a Cause;   It Started With a Call
LEAD: I became an advocate for children with AIDS for anything but altruistic reasons.


A First for Libraries: Rallying for Aid
LEAD: NEARLY 500 sign-carrying demonstrators and chanting students gathered at the County Center last weekend to ask Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for more state funds for libraries.
It was the first such politically inspired rally to be organized by the Westchester Library System in its 30-year history.


No Headline
LEAD:
LOVE AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES
A Memoir.
By Molly Haskell.
302 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


The Interest-Rate Forecast Is Wrong
LEAD: A number of economists are now betting that interest rates will come down.
They cite the weakening of the domestic economy and the possibility of a recession later in the year.
But companies and investors that heed this advice are in for a shock.
The 1990's will see global interest rates climb for reasons that most economists have ignored.


Spawning Grounds
LEAD: VIVIAN PALEY'S research is about as fundamental as education research gets, and original enough to win her a MacArthur Foundation grant, the so-called genius awards: she is trying to teach children to think - to come up with an idea and develop it in a logical way.


Sacred Music Celebrating Holy Week
LEAD: AMONG the composers whose works will be performed in churches around the state this week in celebration of Easter are many Americans.
Their names may not resonate with the historic timbre of a Bach, Handel, Purcell, Telemann, Vivaldi, Schutz, and so on down the list of mostly German, English and Italian composers who wrote for the church before the 19th century.


All the Money In Westchester Buys Little Hope On Homelessness
LEAD: AT last count Westchester County, the 11th wealthiest county in the country, had 4,373 homeless people, more per capita than New York City.


A Theatrical Family Faces the End of a Line
LEAD: In 1974, a few months before ''A Chorus Line'' opened at the Public Theater, a member of the original cast named Wayne Cilento announced in rehearsal that his wife was expecting a child.
The cast, which had been together for several months and had begun to think like a family, exploded: ''We're going to have a baby!


Raging Inequality
LEAD: MTUNZINI primary school in Mamelodi, South Africa, a black township east of Pretoria, the capital, is rich in its children and poor in just about everything else.


Then There Is the Other Side Of Misha Dichter
LEAD: Whatever self-image an artist may hold privately or attempt to project to the world, the public will ultimately form its own image of that artist, which may be entirely different.
This appears to have been the case with the pianist Misha Dichter.
Many, including this writer, have tended to see Mr.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''There's no question that even being charitable to Admiral Poindexter, he did it because he wanted to protect the political viability of Ronald Reagan.


Trading Away the Trade Deficit
LEAD: Last month's announcement by the Commerce Department that the trade deficit narrowed to $113 billion for 1989 sparked a sense of euphoria.
It is true that the deficit was 11 percent less than the $127 billion recorded in 1988, but even with this modest improvement, the current account deficit is still running in excess of $100 billion.


Auto Bumpers And Consumers
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrI was pleased to read ''Testing the 'Bump' in Bumpers,'' (The New York Times, March 18).
The high cost of repairing cars with inferior bumpers is a great burden to drivers and is a major factor in the rising cost of insurance.


Literary Logistics
LEAD: I HAVE always been someone who learned things the hard way.
It took running over my ski instructor to convince me that stopping was an essential part of skiing.
When it came to my driver's license, it wasn't until I'd backed into a mailbox with the examiner in the car that I began to see the hidden potential of my rear-view mirror.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a review of Joan Quigley's '' 'What Does Joan Say?': My Seven Years as White House Astrologer'' on March 18 misstated the affiliation of the reviewer, Molly Ivins.
She is a columnist for The Dallas Times Herald.


A Flawed Retrospective for a 'Peasant Mondrian'
LEAD: Giorgio Cavallon is the kind of painter that art institutions have a hard time with.
He was not a revolutionary.
He did not have the ferocity and ambition of other first-generation Abstract Expressionists, like Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning.
He did not have the kind of pictorial imagination that knocks you off your feet with its invention and sweep.


Commercially Explicit
LEAD: To the Editor:


He Builds Readers
LEAD: WHEN Perry Wilson flunked fifth grade he went home and, with his father's encouragement, built an orange playhouse, escaping the ridicule of classmates who called him stupid. ''In some weird way, building that playhouse made my struggle complete,'' said Mr.
Wilson, who is 31 years old and lives in Somerville,


Amy Binder, Teacher, Wed To R. A. Scher, Prosecutor
LEAD: Amy Jeanne Binder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Binder of Miami Beach, was married last evening at her parents' home to Robert Allen Scher, a son of Myra Waldman of New York and Dr.
Irwin Scher of Mahwah, N.J.
Rabbi Rex Perlmeter performed the ceremony.


Lieutenant Boruvka Returns
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Haverford;   Rockwell's Son Shuns Americana For Gargoyles
LEAD: If you expected that pug nose, freckle-faced boy on The Saturday Evening Post covers to grow up to produce the same art as his father, you'd be wrong.
While Norman Rockwell, the illustrator, created familiar scenes from hometown America, his son, Peter, currently artist-in-residence at Haverford College, goes beyond the familiar.


Corrections
LEAD: A short caption last Sunday about the movie ''I Love You to Death'' incorrectly described Tracey Ullman, who appears in the film.
She has previously appeared in the feature films ''Plenty'' and ''Give My Regards to Broad Street.''


A SPECIAL REPORT: Numbers Please!;   Body Heat
LEAD: PUBLIC SCHOOLS in Buffalo are so overcrowded that until the city gets the money to build additional space, teachers must conduct classes in auditoriums, cafeterias, gymansiums, storage spaces and rooms leased from nearby Roman Catholic schools.


B. D. Butler Wed To Rosana Rappa
LEAD: Rosana Rappa, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicolo Rappa of East Elmhurst, Queens, was married at the Plaza last evening to Bradley David Butler, the son of Abbey Butler of Westhampton, L.I., and Barbara Butler of New York.
Rabbi Martin Zion officiated.


Curtains For a Grand Screen
LEAD: The 1944 comedy short titled ''Movie Pests'' proposes punishments for some of the worst moviegoing offenders of its time.
The couple who change seats too often ought to be chained together; the woman with a feather in her hat deserves a quick fashion makeover with the help of a sharp scissors.
Equally harsh treatment is advised for the man eating peanuts, the one who whispers to his companion, the one who crosses his legs and accidentally kicks another seat.


POSTING: Greenwich Renovation;   A Freshened Face for Fawcett Building
LEAD: The former headquarters of Fawcett Publications - a onetime publisher, printer and distributor of magazines and books in Greenwich, Conn. - is being renovated into an office and retail building.
The four-story structure at the corner of Fawcett Place and Greenwich Avenue will contain 66,000 square feet of office space and 8,000 square feet of retail space when the $20 million project is completed this


County Faces Fine for Routing Sewage Into Hudson
LEAD: WESTCHESTER has deliberately routed large quantities of raw sewage intended for the Yonkers Sewage Treatment Plant into the Hudson River, county officials conceded last week.


Foundation Names 143 To Receive Fellowships
LEAD: The John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation has named 143 artists, scholars and scientists as winners of its 66th annual competition for awards totaling $3,783,000.


Syracuse Beats Hofstra by 20-9
LEAD: With Gary Gait, the all-America midfielder, leading the way once again, the Syracuse lacrosse team defeated Hofstra today, 20-9, for its fifth straight victory this season.


Boy, 3, Is Placed in Pot On Stove With Gas On
LEAD: A man has been charged with stuffing his girlfriend's 3-year-old son into an empty pot on a stove and turning on the gas, the police said.


Starting Over
LEAD: It's the homestretch, educationally speaking.
Spring semester is near its end; graduation is almost at hand.
But along with the flowers, venturing out in the last of the cold, comes seasonal advice on using tax laws when donating to schools, legislation on adult literacy, a renaissance of laboratory schools, and students hitting local stores in a spring fling of consumerism.


Rebecca F. Wade To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jeptha H. Wade of Bedford, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Rebecca French Wade to Nyr Indictor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Indictor of New York.
A June wedding is planned.


The Death of a Child
LEAD:
WHAT LISA KNEW
The Truth and Lies of the Steinberg Case.
By Joyce Johnson.
303 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Norwalk, Conn.
$205,000
5 Noah's Lane
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; energy efficient fireplace, hardwood floors, 1/3 acre; taxes $2,378.
Glastonbury, Conn.
$311,000
72 Clove Hill Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; oversized kitchen, family room, screened porch, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,734.


Throngs Rally in Lithuania To Back Independence Call
LEAD: At least 200,000 people crowded into a city park today in the Lithuanian capital, Vilnius, to back their Parliament's defiance of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, witnesses who saw the rally in the neighboring republic said.


Angola Says It Will Begin Talks With Rebels Soon
LEAD: Leaders of the Angolan Government said today that they would soon begin peace talks with rebel forces in an effort to end 15 years of civil war.


T. S. Moran to Wed Catherine Stack
LEAD: August wedding plans for Catherine Mary Stack and Thomas Stephen Moran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Moran of Massapequa Park, L.I., and North Palm Beach, Fla., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Donald Stack of Tokyo and Vienna, Va.


Is It True What He Says About Dixie?
LEAD: ''GOOD GOD,'' SAID LEWIS GRIZZARD AS HIS 225-pound co-star waddled into a television studio near downtown Atlanta. ''It's a real hog.
This is the most bizarre thing I've ever seen.
Where'd y'all get that hog?
Do hogs bite?'' No answer, certainly none from the year-old sow, which apparently found a pile of graham crackers on a desk where Grizzard is typing more interesting than one of the South's best-read writers.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Steeplechase Racing
16-1 Shot Wins Grand National: Mr.
Frisk, a 16-1 shot, held off Dunham Edition by three-quarters of a length yesterday to win the Grand National Steeplechase in Liverpool, England, in the record time of 8 minutes 47.8 seconds.
The 11-year-old gelding was ridden by Marcus Armytage, the first amateur jockey to win the four-and-a-half-mile race since 1982, and broke the race record by more than 14 seconds.


Ms. Ozelli Weds Daniel Schiffman
LEAD: Nancy Ann Ozelli and Daniel Schiffman were married last night at the Metropolitan Opera House during the opera's Annual Ball by Judge Jane S. Solomon of Civil Court in Manhattan.
The bride is a daughter of Leo Goldschlager of Brooklyn and Sally Robbins of Miami Beach.
The bridegroom is a son of the late Jacob Schiffman and the late Eva


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
'COTTAGEY'


Officials Ponder Future Role for Troopers in Cities' Drug Fight
LEAD: GOV.
WILLIAM A. O'NEILL said he will decide this week whether to continue sending in state troopers to patrol high-crime areas in Connecticut's three largest cities, after he receives an evaluation of the three-month-old pilot program from the state's top police official, Public Safety Commissioner Bernard R.


LITTLE HOUSE IN THE BIG CITY: SMILING THROUGH
LEAD: I'm from Minnesota, not brought up to be a complainer, so even when I do see something in New York that doesn't work, I try to make the best of it.
The tin loudspeakers in subway stations, for example, that make the train announcements sound like somebody sawing a piece of sheet metal.
You stand in the dismal dank of the subway, water dripping, rats scurrying across the tracks, and you listen for the distant screech of the C train, and 15 uneventful minutes pass, and a transit employee turns on the P.A.


Owner of Fire Site Is Being Sued by Brother and Sister
LEAD: The landlord of the Happy Land Social Club is being sued by his brother and sister, who claim that he is running one of New York City's biggest real-estate fortunes into the ground with bad investments, borrowing huge amounts of money to speculate in commodities and deliberately squandering his father's billion-dollar estate before his younger brother can gain control of a portion of it.


NOTES ON REVOLUTION
LEAD: ''Notes on Revolution,'' by Adam Michnik (March 11), should encourage all people who wish to see not only the death of Communism but also the birth of a genuine democracy.
In asking his fellow Europeans to replace ''the totalitarian dogmas of Communism with an attitude that presupposes a critical distance toward oneself and .


Reviews/Music;   Met Audition Winners in Concert
LEAD: A funny thing happened to the Korean soprano Young Ok Shin on her way to her New York debut recital.
About two weeks before the March 31 event, she learned that she would be appearing in the Metropolitan Opera National Council Winners Concert on April 1, and she canceled her recital.
So instead of singing ''Ah!


Out of Answers
LEAD: The modern statesman can no more do without a press secretary than a pig farmer can do without a shovel.
Recognizing that need, Mikhail S. Gorbachev appointed the first Soviet presidential press secretary last week.
The job went to Arkady Maslennikov, a 58-year-old former Pravda correspondent who promptly demonstrated the fine sense of candor required for the sensitive job.


Bridget Maloney Engaged to John Bush
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Maloney of New Hartford, N.Y., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Bridget Kristine Maloney and John Kenneth Bush, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alton K. Bush of Little Rock, Ark.


... AND THE BESS MESS
LEAD:
WHEN SHE WAS BAD
The Story of Bess, Hortense, Sukhreet &amp; Nancy.
By Shana Alexander.
305 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.
QUEEN BESS
An Unauthorized Biography of Bess Myerson.
By Jennifer Preston.
Illustrated. 385 pp. New York:
Contemporary Books. $19.95.


Bulb Placement Can Test the Memory
LEAD: THIS is a test.
How many can name the cultivar names of those marvelous little flowers - daffodils, early tulips, bulbous iris, scillas - the small flowers that are starting to bloom now in the garden?


Campus Life: UC, Irvine;   What Do Students Want to Learn? Check the Returns
LEAD: It is one of the best-kept secrets in higher education, and perhaps the last word in student power: At the beginning of next month, students at the University of California at Irvine will vote on the subjects they want the school to offer.
And a student committee will recommend lecturers to teach the subjects.


THE HERO IS A MOUSE
LEAD:
BARKING MAN
And Other Stories.
By Madison Smartt Bell.
230 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.
A COLLECTION of short stories that work well together has the effect of stranding the reader in a world he recognizes but is no longer on comfortably familiar terms with. ''Barking Man,'' Madison Smartt Bell's second collection of stories and seventh book, satisfies this standard with unwavering compassion.


REBEL FREED FROM MANILA JAIL
LEAD: Masked rebel soldiers stormed the Manila city jail today and freed Lt.
Col.
Billy Bibit, who is charged with helping to lead last December's failed coup, the police said.
The Young Officers' Union, a shadowy group linked to the failed coup against President Corazon Aquino, took responsibility for the jailbreak.


NEW YORK STORIES: HELL'S KITCHEN KILLERS ...
LEAD:
THE WESTIES
Inside the Hell's Kitchen Irish Mob.
By T. J. English.
384 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95.


Everglades Sentinel on Watch at 100
LEAD: She lives in a region that has often symbolized glitz and the American dream of endless growth.
But on her 100th birthday today, Marjory Stoneman Douglas is more than ever a living testament to a different ethic.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
London to Get New Area Codes As of May 6


Arthur B. Singer, 72, Artist, Dies; Painted 50 State Birds on Stamps
LEAD: Arthur B. Singer, a naturalist and painter whose watercolors of birds of the 50 states were affixed to letters mailed by hundreds of thousands of Americans in the 1980's, died of cancer of the esophagus yesterday at his home in Jericho, L.I.
He was 72 years old.


Review/Dance;   Improbable Romantic Duo Grapple Over the Rainbow
LEAD: Accion Colectiva, based in Caracas, Venezuela, is a company of enormously likable performers and good movers.
But its American debut program, seen on Thursday at La Mama's Annex Theater, suggested that the group could use some slightly more sophisticated and fresh choreography.


Review/Music;   A Marlboro Veteran Joins Young Players to Form a String Quintet
LEAD: The Musicians from Marlboro chamber-music series, now in its 25th year, blends young artists with veterans in a kind of public master-class laboratory.
For its current tour, the organization has assembled a particularly polished quintet of string players.
The group appeared Thursday night at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and will repeat its program Wednesday night at Alice Tully


A Sweet Deal and a Sponsor Dropout
LEAD: THE downturn in the co-op and condominium market in recent months has given tenants in some buildings going through the conversion process the sort of leverage that has resulted in some pretty sweet deals.
But in other proposed conversions, the soft market has been a spoiler.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester;   Skirting the Potholes on Renovation Road
LEAD: IN spring, many a homeowner's thoughts turn to remodeling the kitchen, enlarging the deck or adding a great room.
And so it was in 1987, when Peter and Mary Gilman hired Lawrence Williams, a home-improvement contractor, to build an addition to their Wilton home and make some repairs to the house itself.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: ''Marianne de Bicentenaire'' has joined a dozen of her sisters, also named Marianne, as the symbol of the republic on French definitive stamps.
The newest Marianne is very modern, some say too modern, and at least one commentator has labeled her ''Mission Impossible Marianne.''


Corrections
LEAD: An article on March 25 about Federal approval of a genetically engineered enzyme used in making cheese misidentified the enzyme.
It is rennin.


PERSPECTIVES: Transitional Housing;   The New Shelters for Homeless Families
LEAD: THE problem of homelessness in American cities has given birth to new housing forms, mainly in New York City.
The latest, on Powers Avenue in the South Bronx, is a structure built for permanent use as temporary housing for families, usually mothers with young children.
It is as solidly designed and built as a public school or a small hospital.


'Anything Goes,' in Elmsford
LEAD: WHEN the opening of ''Anything Goes'' at the Darien Dinner Theater was followed by the opening of ''Anything Goes'' at An Evening Dinner Theater just three nights later, the question was inevitable.
Which is the ''Anything Goes'' of choice?
Obviously, both productions are prompted by the recent closing of the successful 1987 reconstruction of Cole Porter's 1934 musical at the Vivian Beaumont Theater in Lincoln Center.


A.L. West: A's Ready for a Fall, but Don't Count on It
LEAD: The American League preview was reported and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are listed in the order of predicted finish, with the Yankees picked for second in the East.


Self-Inflicted Wound
LEAD: To the Editor:


De Klerk and Mandela Plan May Talks
LEAD: The South African Government will hold its first formal meetings with the African National Congress on May 2, 3 and 4, the Government announced today.


Campus Life: UMass;   Students Uncover Violations of Rules On Divestment
LEAD: The University of Massachusetts administration last week began selling its stock in companies that operate in South Africa after students found that the university was violating its divestment policy.


Outdoors;   A Debate on Atlantic Salmon
LEAD: Should game-fish status be sought for the Atlantic salmon in Canada, which, if achieved, would protect that highly prized species from commercial netters?


To Help Save the Oceans, an Artist Turns Junk to Jewelry
LEAD: IRENE NEAL'S basement looks like an imaginative recycling center.
Frayed tennis rackets, old inner tubes and cracked scuba-diving masks dangle from the walls as elegant sculptures.
Hubcaps discarded from a local body shop pose as giant beetles, plastic trash bags as gold-colored bikinis.


UNSETTLING THE OLD WEST
LEAD: As a young man growing up in both Nebraska and Colorado, I was told stories about my great-grandfather who was a silver miner in Leadville, Colo., in the 1880's.
His life was hard and dirty; just living was a chore.
Law and order meant being faster with your pistol than the other guy.
The settlement of the American West was a test of the survival of the fittest, to whom glamour and romance were low on the list of priorities.


Country-Western Songwriter Transplanted to the Island
LEAD: HUGH PRESTWOOD does not call record producers; they call him.
Ah, what a couple of hits will do for the career of a country-music songwriter.


Ms. Vlasin Weds James B. Martin
LEAD: Celia Ann Vlasin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond D. Vlasin of East Lansing, Mich., was married yesterday in Washington to James Benjamin Martin, a son of Mrs.
John McKenzie Martin of Wilmington, Del., and the late Mr.
Martin.
The ceremony was performed at the Presbyterian Church of the Pilgrims by the Rev.


Before Definition Gets High, It Strives to Improve
LEAD: Pending the arrival of high-definition television (HDTV) - later in this decade, with luck - a number of video manufacturers have resorted to interim measures to improve the picture.
Among several admittedly halfway approaches, designed to fill in until the real thing comes along, IDTV is a current favorite.


Serfdom and 'Soviet Women'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transit Authority Sued on Work Conditions
LEAD: The New York State Attorney General is suing the Transit Authority, accusing it of endangering 1,800 subway cleaners who routinely come in contact with hypodermic needles, syringes, blood and human waste.


Acting Adult
LEAD: SOBERED by declining enrollment, The Learning Annex, the largest and one of the oldest for-profit education businesses in the nation, is changing its image.
Gone are the breezy self-awareness and interpersonal discovery classes that built its reputation, replaced by practical courses on computers, business and careers.


THERE ARE 8 MILLION STORIES IN JOHN ZORN'S NAKED CITY
LEAD: Like a car radio stuck on scan mode, John Zorn's ''Naked City'' (Elektra/Nonesuch 79238; all three formats) skips unstoppably from style to style.
Country twang, noise, arena rock, New Orleans R &amp; B, reggae, polka, hard-core rock, bossa nova and Mr.
Zorn's sentimental favorite, greasy organ-combo themes of detective shows and films noirs with throbbing saxophone solos - they all turn up in segments that might last 30 seconds (if they're lucky) before the next jolting genre hop.


Question of the Week;   What Is Wrong With The Knicks?
LEAD: Why is anyone surprised at the Knicks' collapse under a coach who has had no previous head coaching experience and a general manager who evaluates the talent of Mark Jackson and Rod Strickland and decides Strickland is the one to trade, who thinks the ever-injured Kiki Vandeweghe is worth a first-round draft choice and Sidney Green, and decides Greg Butler's bench warming is more valuable than Pete Myers's defensive intensity?


A Matter Of Entrances And Exits
LEAD: It's not ''Bambi 2,'' but Disney's ''Little Mermaid'' is being treated in much the same way as the 1942 Disney classic.
Next month the studio will release ''Mermaid'' on videocassette at the collectible price of $26.99.
At about the same time - Disney won't give a precise date - ''Bambi'' will be withdrawn from the video market, where it has spent a profitable seven months to date, and put back into the studio's vaults for seven years.


THE BODY AND SOUL OF THE CITY MACHINE
LEAD: Some people (tourists, mostly) believe that a city can be seen as the sum of its landmarks - Paris, for example, as the Eiffel Tower, the Louvre and Sainte Chapelle.
New Yorkers know that alongside the World Trade Center and Times Square there exists a metropolis that is rarely observed although it is forever on view, one that shapes the character of New York


Cleaning Blinds and Shades
LEAD: SPRING cleaning traditionally calls to mind beating carpets and clearing attics, but sprucing up Venetian blinds and window shades is probably a more common activity.


Campus Life: Rutgers;   After 117 Years, New Verses For Alma Mater
LEAD: Singing the praises of alma mater used to be simple.
They could include a verse about hallowed halls and ivy-covered walls, another about a nearby hill, valley, river or lake and a refrain that hails the school's stalwart sons or daughters.


AIDS STRUCK HOME
LEAD:
THANKSGIVING
An AIDS Journal.
By Elizabeth Cox.
230 pp. New York:
Harper &amp; Row. $18.95.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
A Mother by Any Other Name?


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-17


Cleaning Blinds and Shades
LEAD: SPRING cleaning traditionally calls to mind beating carpets and clearing attics, but sprucing up Venetian blinds and window shades is probably a more common activity.


Yanks, Mets Snowed Out
LEAD: Baseball's short spring grew even shorter yesterday when the exhibition game between the Mets and the Yankees at Shea Stadium was snowed out.
But with a promise of more seasonal weather, their final exhibition game of the spring will be played as scheduled at 1:35 this afternoon in Yankee Stadium.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
ORNAMENTATION ON VIEW


The Response From Philadelphia On Penny-Stock Questions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:
Civil War Re-enactments


The Eternal Italian Garden
LEAD: ONE'S idea of the Italian garden may have been formed by studies of the Villa Lante or Villa d'Este, but it is the terraces, courtyards and backyards of the small towns and villages that often provide the core qualities of spatial elegance, sensuality, light and shade that we have come to recognize as essentially Italian.


Legalizing Drugs: Other Viewpoints
LEAD: In response to the replies of Bill Mathesius, Mercer County Executive, in the New Jersey Q &amp; A on March 4 (''Favoring the Legalization of Illicit Drugs''):


Meeting the Challenge of a Dessert for the Passover Meal
LEAD: PASSOVER begins tomorrow evening with the festive and commemorative seder dinner.
The eight-day holiday, strictly limiting what foods may be eaten and what ingredients may be used in preparation, is always a challenge to the cook.


A Chilling Voice Emerges From Argentina
LEAD: To the Editor:


Robert Frederick Woolworth Marries Sarah E. Mleczko, Fellow Art Dealer
LEAD: Sarah Elizabeth Mleczko and Robert Frederick Woolworth were married yesterday in New York at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest by the Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.
Robert M. Peet of Hanover, N.H., and the late Stanley S. Mleczko of Wilton, Conn.
The bridegroom is a son of Mrs.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Middletown, Del. Annexing Farmland
LEAD: THIS dairy-farming and agricultural town dating from the 17th century has annexed four farms totaling about 500 acres where development could triple the current population of 3,700.


Greater Threats From Lesser Powers
LEAD: WITH the Soviet military threat receding, the spread of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons to the third world is fast emerging as the greatest danger to stability in the world.
In the Middle East, where the race to acquire weapons of mass destruction, and the means to deliver them, is continuing, a flurry of disturbing developments has occurred in recent weeks.


Lisa M. Peters Is Married
LEAD: Lisa M. Peters, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew J. Peters of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married yesterday in New York at St.
Patrick's Cathedral to Barry W. O'Brien, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William O'Brien of Topsfield, Mass.
Msgr.
James P. Cassidy officiated.


Technicolor Dreams
LEAD: ONE of my high school teachers asked his students if they dreamed in color or black and white.
What sounded simple was not.
It wasn't until some time later that I realized I do dream in color.
I awoke one morning with vivid visions - I'm not sure if it was strawberries, a blue sky, or a bouquet of flowers.


Busy Young Director Sees Lean Years Vanish
LEAD: GORDON EDELSTEIN, the newly appointed associate artistic director of the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, was recalling the lean years, when he was a struggling director ''waiting tables, doing word processing and ready to give up.''


Fashion;   For Fall, Fashions That Make One Statement: Wearability
LEAD: There are clothes that make news and clothes that women want to wear.
Some designers manage to do both while others just concentrate on making wearable clothes for real women, as do many designers who showed their fall collections last week.
And the world of fashion could not go on for long without them.


Fashion: On the Street;   In a Raincoat, Staying Dry Isn't the Point
LEAD: The sun may not have come out much in the last week or so, but a lot of legs did - from under the lively, ultrashort raincoats that are making a splash this wet spring.
These coats may not be the most practical item in anyone's wardrobe, but after enduring winter does anyone really want to be practical?


Fashion;   BLUES IN THE NIGHT
LEAD: Just when it seemed as if black had completely eclipsed every other color for evening, little shoots of navy blue began sprouting up at parties.
When you think about it, there's a reason.
Deep blue has the plus of black in that it is a dense defusing shade making, every size of woman look a little smaller.


'Oh, Give Me a Home...'
LEAD: IN CALIFORNIA, WHERE THE ANTELOPE play is mostly in the state's northeast corner, though that wasn't always so.
And since 1982, the state's Department of Fish and Game has been working to insure that it won't always be.
This winter, the agency continued its effort to relocate many pronghorn antelope to former habitats.


ARSON SUSPECTED
LEAD: Fire broke out aboard a North Sea ferry off Norway yesterday, killing at least 110 people and forcing hundreds of terrified passengers to flee through smoke-filled halls into lifeboats, the authorities said.


The Seasonal Glitch
LEAD: MOST people look at a calendar to determine the start of the seasons.
In my house we check the doors.
I know it sounds strange, but it's quite accurate.


Threats of Arms Jolt a City
LEAD: JUST when the term ''black militant'' was beginning to seem quaint comes Alderman Michael McGee of Milwaukee.
In a stunning reminder of the country's continuing racial and economic divisions, Mr.
McGee announced last week that he was forming an armed black militia that would take unspecified violent action unless the city committed $100 million to improve the lot of poor blacks.


Railways Revisited In Wine Country
LEAD: A CENTURY ago, when hides and prunes rivaled grapes and wine as the leading products of California's Napa and Sonoma Valleys, a busy network of railroad lines linked the region's small towns with each other and the rest of the world.
Today prune orchards and cattle ranches have mostly given way to vineyards, and the railroads are long gone as a means of transport.


Astrodome Turns 25
LEAD: Come rain, snow or sleet, a gala 25th anniversary party will be observed in grand Texas style tomorrow night in Houston, when the Astrodome will be a quarter of a century old.
The world's first domed stadium opened on April 9, 1965, with the Astros defeating the Yankees, 2-1, in an exhibition game before 47,876 fans, including President and Mrs.


All About/Hotel Marketing;   After a Decade of Growth, Far Too Much Room at the Inn
LEAD: With development costs rising, buildings aging and the room glut worsening, the troubled hotel industry has hit on a new set of responses: ''It's gotten gimmicky,'' said Darryl Hartley-Leonard, president of the Hyatt Hotels Corporation. ''Suites, frequent-traveler programs, discounting, free food, free breakfast, free liquor.


A JOLLY GOOD FELON
LEAD:
DROWNED HOPES
By Donald E. Westlake.
422 pp. New York: The Mysterious Press. $18.95.


N.L. East: Title Comes Down to Arms and the Mets
LEAD: The National League preview was reported and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are listed in the order of predicted finish, with the Mets picked for first in the East.


John Villa to Wed Ellen A. Edwards
LEAD: Ellen Ann Edwards, the deputy editor of the Style section of The Washington Post, and John Kazar Villa, a lawyer in Washington, plan to marry in June.
Miss Edwards is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jesse E. Edwards of St.
Paul.
Her fiance is a son of John J. Villa of Birmingham, Mich., and the late Susie Hoogasian Villa.


Reach Out And Touch A Course
LEAD: IT IS EARLY afternoon at the University of Pennsylvania and registration for summer and fall classes is in full swing.
Yet on a day when thousands of course schedules are being compiled and career decisions are being made, the campus grounds in Philadelphia are desolate.


N.L. WEST: PADRES SHOULD POWER THEIR WAY TO THE TOP
LEAD: The National League preview was reported and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are listed in the order of predicted finish, with the Mets picked for first in the East.


Review/Dance;   In a Crannied Landscape, A Passion for Ambiguity
LEAD: It is always tempting to describe as pretentious what one doesn't understand.
But Linda Mussmann's ''Little Stumps: The Deal,'' presented by her Time and Space Limited company on Tuesday at the Merce Cunningham Dance Studio, did seem a slender vehicle for the transportation of so much baggage.


Question of the Week;   What Is Wrong With The Knicks?
LEAD: Simple.
An All-Star point guard has been turned into a bench-warmer.
Mark Jackson must realize what it takes to win over the fans of this city: shoot at your wife and check into the Smithers Center.
The Garden fans don't deserve this fine, role model of a young man.
NEAL J. EZRA
New York


Painter Organizes A Landscape Show
LEAD: IF the Bronx ever becomes a Barbizon, its Council on the Arts should get some credit, because of the Bronx Recognizes Its Own grants that it dispenses - 12 of them each year.
Krasdale Foods should also go down in art history for contributing to these awards and for instituting two more - for painting and sculpture respectively.


Knicks Snapping Back After Monthlong Slump
LEAD: With eight games remaining in the regular season, the Knicks may not win 50 games, nor are they likely to win the Atlantic Division championship or have the homecourt advantage in the playoffs.


U.S. Suspends Bell Atlantic Corp. From Bids on Government Work
LEAD: The Treasury Department has temporarily barred the Bell Atlantic Corporation, one of the seven regional telephone companies, from doing business with the Federal Government, accusing a Bell Atlantic subsidiary of including ''misleading information'' in a bid for a $100 million contract.


Why the Sitcom Of the Renaissance Still Entertains
LEAD: A wheezy old geezer, more a threat to himself than to the ladies he imagines he attracts, fingers the well-worn purse that hangs from his belt and talks of ''amore.''


Fran Meiner Wed To Seth Kaplan
LEAD: Fran Ellen Meiner, the daughter of Norma Meiner of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Jerome Meiner, was married last evening to Seth David Kaplan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan S. Kaplan of Oyster Bay Cove, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik officiated at the Water Club in Manhattan.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: A RECENT report from the Economic Policy Institute says the United States spends less on primary and secondary education than most other industrialized nations.
The institute, a research organization in Washington, D.C., compared the percentage of national income spent during 1985 on education from preprimary through high school in 16 nations, including most of Western Europe, Japan, Australia, Canada and the United States.


Soviet Cartoons: They Cry So Hard You Could Laugh
LEAD: PROOF that glasnost is real - not just the careful and orderly openness sought by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev but a gutsy freedom of expression directed at the Government and Communism's sacred cows - can be found in the new Soviet political cartoons.


Good, Evil and Lyndon Johnson
LEAD: To the Editor:


Putnam Valley
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Last week I saw something I thought had gone the way of the dodo bird: a Disc camera.
Remember them?
Probably you do, since Kodak sold millions of them not so long ago.
You may even still have one.
More's the pity.


At Last, Small Stocks May Be Ready to Party
LEAD: As Wall Street kept its cool and Tokyo's market fought one rumor-driven panic after another, the United States last week added a few percentage points to its thin lead in the worldwide game of stock-market supremacy.


Stars of Stage, Screen - and Video
LEAD: Hollywood's off-and-on love affair with Broadway has been heating up again over the last few seasons as movie versions of a variety of stage successes have gone before the cameras.


Lifestyle: Easter Sunday Dining;   Elegant Settings, With Rabbits in Many Forms
LEAD: This is a listing of Manhattan restaurants that have been reviewed by Bryan Miller in The New York Times and are recommended for Easter Sunday dining.
Early reservations are suggested.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have ratings.


Army Coach Leaves
LEAD: Citing a desire to pursue other career interests, Les Wothke resigned as basketball coach at Army yesterday.
Wothke, who coached at Army for eight seasons, came to Army in 1982 after three seasons at Western Michigan.
During his tenure, his Army teams went 92-135.
The 92 victories rank third on Army's career coaching list, behind only Leo Novak (1927-39) with 126 and Bob Knight (1965-71) with 102.(


FLASHCARD
LEAD: IN 1985, 5 percent of the United States population was enrolled in some form of higher education, at least twice the percent of any other industrialized nation except Canada.
- Economic Policy Institute


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: The recent cold, rainy weather, even snow in some regions, have discouraged many gardeners from going outside to finish their early spring chores.
But nature won't wait.
Catch up.
Rake the lawn; feed it.
Spread lime, if needed.
Prune roses.
Mend fences.
Use dormant oil sprays.
Indoors pot seedlings individually so they are strong enough to be planted outdoors in May.


Bulb Placement Can Test the Memory
LEAD: THIS is a test.
How many can name the cultivar names of those marvelous little flowers - daffodils, early tulips, bulbous iris, scillas - the small flowers that are starting to bloom now in the garden?


FLAMES BOUNCE BACK AT HOME
LEAD: Doug Gilmour, the scrappy, hard-skating center for the Flames, had two goals and an assist Friday night as Calgary beat the Los Angeles Kings, 8-5, to tie their Smythe Division semifinal playoff series at one game each.


CRIME
LEAD: How do I kill thee?
Let me count the ways. . . .
Well, in Robert Ferrigno's first novel, THE HORSE LATITUDES (Morrow, $18.95), there's death by castration, death by bench press, death by Mayan ritual torture and death by wild boar.
Among the characters bent on dispatching one another in such melodramatic fashion are a mad scientist in pursuit of eternal youth and a cruel goddess of a woman whose fondest sexual memory is of making love on a bed of purple orchids and hundred-dollar bills.


Steven Russ Wed To Miss Brokaw
LEAD: At the Princeton University Chapel, Katherine A. Brokaw, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Caleb Brokaw of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Steven J. Russ, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence G. Russ of Melvin Village, N.H.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Frank C. Strasburger, the Episcopal chaplain at Princeton, and the Rev.


SPYING FOR HANOI
LEAD: I was a Time magazine correspondent in Vietnam for 18 months in 1969 and 1970.
Thus I read with interest Morely Safer's article ''Spying for Hanoi'' (March 11), about my former colleague Pham Xuan An.
I am shocked to learn that Mr.
An all along had been a spy for North Vietnam.
Worse, I am embarrassed that I trusted Mr.


Country Sound Touches Island's Roots
LEAD: ANYONE who doubts the popularity of country music, especially on Long Island, need only take a second look.


Winners Of Rome Prize
LEAD: The American Academy in Rome, a multidisciplinary scholarship center and artists' colony since 1894, announced the 25 recipients of its 1990-91 Rome Prize fellowships on Wednesday.


Minutes From Paris, a Place of Peace
LEAD: THE Paris suburb of St.-Cloud stands on a high escarpment overlooking the Seine at the great bend of the river about six miles west of Notre Dame, near the old porcelain factory at Sevres.
It has two great attractions: a spectacular view of Paris, and its park, with its 17th-century landscaping, ponds and fountains.


I RM, NO VU
LEAD: There is an old joke about a farmer coming to the big city for the first time and checking into a hotel.
He is told the room will cost $20, and is led by the bellboy into the elevator.
As the door closes, the farmer looks around and mutters to the bellboy, ''This is an awful small room for $20.''


CD PLAYERS LIFT ENGINEERING (AND PRICES) TO NEW HEIGHTS
LEAD: Sir Edmund Hillary climbed Mount Everest, he said, ''because it's there.'' A CD player whose price is almost as high as the mountain claims attention for the same reason.
In addition, it raises questions of relative value, which will be addressed here by comparison with another model that is $5,950 cheaper but sounds much the same.


Hers;   Love With a Proper Stranger
LEAD: I NEVER THOUGHT OF myself as particularly vampish until I met my husband, or, more specifically, until I met my mother-in-law.
English to the roots of her ash-brown hair,she gazed at me as though I were naked.
Or, perhaps, as though I were a clothed woman denying the nakedness beneath.
One thing seemed clear in her mind: I had triumphed over her son through the guiles of womanhood, guiles forbidden to mothers.


Rising Iron Curtain Exposes Haunting Veil of Polluted Air
LEAD: In the depths of a salt mine in Poland, men, women and children lie in bed, bundled in coats and tugging at heavy blankets.
In an upside-down world, they have come to this underground clinic to breathe clean and healing air.


A SPECIAL REPORT: Numbers Please!;   Parental Discretion
LEAD: WHEN THE letter came saying that Pamela Stafford, after all her part-time study at night, had been accepted at the age of 34 as a full-time student by the University of California at Berkeley, her two teen-age sons leaped into the air, slapped palms in a high-five and shouted:


Charity Begins At Home
LEAD: ''PLANNED GIVING'' used to be a euphemism used by college fund-raisers when they asked elderly alumni to name the beloved alma mater in their wills.
Then endowment managers waited a few years for nature to take its course.


Looking for Gorgas
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lucas's Latest Crusade
LEAD: WHEN George Lucas finished ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade,'' he said he would next turn his movie company's technical wizardry to educational projects.
Last month, San Francisco's 18 middle schools began using the first product of that effort, a multimedia journey through American history produced by Lucasfilm Learning Systems in collaboration with the National Geographic Society and Apple Computer


READ ALL ABOUT IT ... IN ANY LANGUAGE
LEAD: Ying Chan does not wear a press card in her hat.
Nor does she chase around New York threatening to ''blow the lid off this town.'' Yet in many respects she is a newspaperwoman straight out of ''The Front Page.'' In 14 years as a journalist for Chinese-American publications in New York City, Ms.
Chan, 42 years old, has been threatened by angry gang leaders and warned to stay out of Chinatown.


Single and Proud in a Postfeminist Era
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oil Spills and Smokestacks Draw Protesters to Arthur Kill Area


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transcription error, an article last Sunday about New York City's ownership of some buildings that house illegal social clubs misstated the role of the city's Housing Authority.
There were no Housing Authority projects on the list of illegal social clubs on which the article was based.


BIG SCIENCE IN THE SKY
LEAD:
THE SPACE TELESCOPE
A Study of NASA, Science, Technology, and Politics.
By Robert W. Smith.
Illustrated. 478 pp. New York:
Cambridge University Press. $39.50.


Campus Life: Bryn Mawr;   Disputing the Idea That Women Just Aren't Funny
LEAD: Women just aren't as funny as men, a former editor of The Harvard Lampoon once told Karen Tolchin.


Beneath the Beehive Lurks a Cultural Icon
LEAD: Joan Didion, a connoisseur of subtle neuroses and oppressive social customs, has never made a shrewder observation of failure than this, from her novel ''Play It As It Lays'': ''Maria could never keep up her end of the dialogue with hairdressers.'' For every woman who has entered a beauty salon hoping to find Warren Beatty fresh from ''Shampoo,'' there are scores who would rather go to the dentist.


INSIDE
LEAD:
2 Votes: Hints of Malaise


A Quartet Of Choices: Handel To Jazz
LEAD: CONCERT goers may encounter a brief hiatus over the Easter and Passover holidays, but the schedule is still full today.
It begins at 2 P.M., with a Baroque outing by Philharmonia Virtuosi.
The group will offer works of Handel, Vivaldi, Corelli and others, at the Westchester Community College in Valhalla (693- 5595).


A.L. East: Imperfect Blue Jays Best in a Weak Division
LEAD: The American League preview was reported and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are listed in the order of predicted finish, with the Yankees picked for second in the East.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: The deadline for filing Federal income taxes is but a week away and some of us are scrambling to find a few more dollars.
But one man, a century ago, discovered a near-perfect way to pay bills - he painted his own money.


Style Makers;   Bradley Bayou, Painter of Clothes
LEAD: Bradley Bayou has been a painter in New York, a real-estate developer in Dallas and an actor in Los Angeles.
At the age of 33, he has now embarked on a career as a fashion designer.


Review/Music;   Soloists Team Up in the New York Rock and Soul Revue
LEAD: At a time when rock concerts are putting an increasing emphasis on spectacle and choreography, it is refreshing to attend a show at which genuine interplay among musicians is the main attraction.


Question of the Week;   What Is Wrong With The Knicks?
LEAD: The Knicks must have sat in on my kindergarten class this week when our lesson was ''Me, I'm special.'' I better invite them back gain for the next lesson: ''Sharing.''
NORMA FRIEDMAN
The Bronx


POSTING: Higher Limits;   Mortgage Pool
LEAD: Some New Yorkers shopping for their first home who have been unable to buy because they could not meet the qualifications for mortgages may benefit from significant relaxations in income and purchase-price limits put into effect this month by the State of New York Mortgage Agency, which issues bonds to generate a pool of money for mortgages.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: 55 Wall Street;   Foreign Buyers Get a Costly Piece of Americana
LEAD: AS the central meeting place of New York's business leaders, as the United States Custom House and as headquarters of the National City Bank (forerunner of Citibank), 55 Wall Street has always commanded attention.
Today is no different.
It has just been sold to foreign investors, including the Japanese, for $69.1 million.


Review/Music;   The Two Faces of Pianism
LEAD: The piano recital at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night seemed like two separate ones, each half played by a different artist.
There was only one pianist for this evening of Beethoven and Liszt sonatas, however.
He is Robert Benz, a West German who once studied at the Juilliard School and who was being sponsored by that institution on this occasion.


2 Derby Favorites Gain in Stature
LEAD: Mister Frisky and Summer Squall emerged from yesterday's round of prep races as stronger favorites than ever for the Kentucky Derby May 5, even though only one of the two colts went to the races.


Is It Time to Put the Pop Back in Jazz?
LEAD: In the late 1940's jazz stumbled and never recovered.
After conceding its position as America's pre-eminent dance music to R &amp; B groups and pop crooners, it lost much of its financial and social power, metamorphosing, unwillingly, from a popular music into an art music.
Suddenly, jazz musicians and fans found themselves underdogs on the cultural scene.


Erika Kossmann to Wed B. M. Miner
LEAD: June wedding plans for Erika Smyth Kossmann and Brewster Morey Miner, the son of Doris W. Miner of Manhasset, L.I., and the late James V. Miner, have been made known by her father, Dr.
Richard J. Kossmann of Englewood, N.J.


Sarah Humphrey, Copywriter, Weds
LEAD: The wedding of Sarah S. Humphrey and Anthony J. DeCamello took place yesterday at St.
Michael the Archangel Roman Catholic Church in Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
Manuel Espinosa officiated.


Lisa Poulin Weds Clayton J. Kloehr
LEAD: The Church of the Annunciation in Washington was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Lisa M. Poulin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Normand Poulin of Potomac, Md., to Clayton J. Kloehr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
H.
Kloehr of Tulsa, Okla.
The Rev.
Michael Quill performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


IN SHORT: SCIENCE BOOKS
LEAD:
CURRENTS OF DEATH: Power Lines, Computer Terminals, and the Attempt to Cover Up Their Threat to Your Health.
By Paul Brodeur. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) The thesis of ''Currents of Death'' is that electrical technology is filled with hidden dangers for human health: power lines induce cancer; electric blankets cause miscarriages; computer terminals are slowly making us blind.


Czyz-Grant Not a Joke
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrI am writing in response to an article (''Sports People,'' The Times, March 25) that reduces a 10-round fight between a former light-heavyweight champion and the world's sixth-ranked fighter to the status of an episode of the ''The Gong Show.'' To liken 29 minutes (yes, it should have been 30) of such a well- and hard-fought contest to a silly game show exhibits a lack of respect for both fighters.


Lifestyle;   This Show Won't Rest Just on Laurel
LEAD: Dark-green curtains and ''please pardon our appearance'' signs covered the six Macy's windows along Broadway last week.
Instead of canvas canopies, the windows wore awnings of laurel leaves.
Inside, the store was growing greener every day as midnight gardeners with rough boots and gentle hands landscaped the ledges of showcases.


Capriati To Meet Navratilova In Final
LEAD: On the eve of her semifinal encounter with Natalya Zvereva today, Jennifer Capriati dreamed about a matchup with Martina Navratilova, ''a legend,'' in the Family Circle Cup final, and once again the 14-year-old phenomenon used her tennis game to make her dreams come true.


GOTTI AND THE MOB ...
LEAD:
GOOMBATA The Improbable Rise and Fall of John Gotti and His Gang.
By John Cummings and Ernest Volkman.
Illustrated. 289 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.
By Marcia Chambers BOOKS about the Mafia tend to fascinate because they satisfy our curiosity; they promise to reveal a hidden, secret world.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Nashville
LEAD: Nashville runs headlong into spring with outdoor activity, as it preens under the primary blue of the sky and the greens, yellows, fuchsias and whites of the season.
Residents savor this precious time outside, before the colors harden against the heat and humidity of the impending summer sun.


A ONCE-IN-A-LIFETIME CONJUNCTION OF STARS
LEAD: There are paintings that make us wonder, to our dying day, what happened next.
One of them is ''The Fortune Teller'' by Georges de La Tour (1593-1652), which was bought by the Metropolitan Museum in 1960 and has been a prime favorite ever since.
Though normally hung with the Met's French 17th-century paintings, it can be seen through April 22 as the uncatalogued and luxuriant coda to a show that was devised primarily to bring together two versions - one from the Hermitage in Leningrad, the other lately rediscovered - of Caravaggio's ''Lute Player.


A Renaissance Masterpiece
LEAD: IN Italy, motorists of an older generation still trade stories about driving, two decades or more ago, from Rome to Florence.
They recall the sometimes dramatic struggle over the Radicofani pass, then the relief of arrival in Siena, knowing the worst was behind them.
And, more serenely, they reminisce about the first part of the journey, winding along the Via Cassia through the towns of Lazio: Sutri, Vetralla, Viterbo, Montefiascone, Acquapendente: Etruscan land.


About Long Island;   Winning, Losing and Learning in Little League
LEAD: UNDER the Adelphi University motto, ''The truth shall make us free,'' 125 Little League coaches were being told that winning was not important. ''What you should be trying to do,'' said C. Roger Rees, a sports sociologist and Adelphi professor, ''is provide a positive experience for a maximum amount of people.


Atlanta
LEAD: To the Editor: Recently we were in Atlanta and intended to lunch at the Atlanta Fulton Library, following a visit to the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library and Museum.
However, delayed by the excellence of the Carter exhibitions, we decided to stay on at the Carter Museum and try the cafeteria there.


24 HOURS: KEEPING THE CITY ALIVE
LEAD: A middle-aged man in a black tuxedo staggers into the emergency room at New York Hospital drenched with sweat, complaining of a gripping chest pain that started during a banquet at a nearby hotel.
The words ''chest pain'' open doors in hospitals, and he is whisked past the dozen people in the waiting room into the acute-care area, followed by a trail of physicians and nurses.


Court Ruling Raises Questions On Notification Of Taxpayers
LEAD: A RECENT court ruling that gives New Jersey homeowners who work in New York the right to deduct their property taxes on state income tax returns has raised questions about the extent to which the State Division of Taxation should publicize rulings that could mean tax savings for residents.


Helen Young Wed to Henry Savage Jr.
LEAD: At Trinity Presbyterian Church in Atlanta, Helen Elizabeth Young, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Cass Young of Fripp Island, S.C., was married yesterday to Henry Lyttleton Savage Jr., a son of Mary Radclyffe Savage of Princeton, N.J., and the late Dr.
Savage.
The Rev.
Allison Williams performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


She's Filming Her Movie, Twice
LEAD: Catchy, compelling, topical ideas for movies - what Hollywood calls ''high concepts'' - are a precious commodity.
That is one reason why Coline Serreau, the French writer-director, is in demand.
Her 1985 French hit ''Three Men and a Cradle,'' the story of three swinging bachelors forced to raise a baby girl, was bought by Disney Studios and turned into an Americanized version, ''Three Men and a Baby,'' that grossed more than $200 million.


Miss Ash Is Wed To A. J. Rudick Jr.
LEAD: Jennifer G. Ash, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarke B. Ash of Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
Albert J. Rudick Jr., a son of Eleanor M. Rudick of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Albert J. Rudick.
The Rev.
Leo Ambrust performed the ceremony at St.
Edward's Roman Catholic Church in Palm


MORRIS BENEFITS FORM COMFORTS OF HOME
LEAD: The fear of living away from his home near Boston prompted Jon Morris to quit hockey several times.
But the 23-year-old center with the remarkable stick-handling ability has been feeling right at home with the Devils the last two months, thanks to the delicate treatment of his case by the team.


Young Patients Find Healing in Artwork
LEAD: The painting is named ''Protecting Mother,'' but at Harlem Hospital Center they call it Abraham Daniel's ''Liberation Painting.''


Her Slip Is Showing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Giants' Mitchell Hurts Wrist
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics returned to Candlestick Park on Friday night and picked up where they left off in the four-game World Series sweep last year.
The Athletics routed the San Francisco Giants, 9-2, on a night when there were mild earth tremors across the bay.


2 Ulster Prisons: Near, Yet So Far Apart in Ideas
LEAD: Only four miles separate Maze and Maghaberry prisons, which house hundreds of veterans of Northern Ireland's sectarian fighting.
But the two prisons seem a world apart.


Food;   CULTURED COOKING
LEAD: YOGURT HAS BEEN FLAVORED, FROZEN, gelatinized and emulsified in countless ways, and the resulting products have been given more winsome monikers than a team of Saturday night TV wrestlers.
What was once an exotic health food became a multibillion-dollar snack in this country in 1947; that was when the Dannon Company, then in


STREETSCAPES: Bronx Borough Hall;  $711,000 to Revive a Grand Stairway to Nowhere
LEAD: OVER the years the Board of Estimate - which can veto or modify landmark designations - has seemed both the last hope for developers and a dreaded hurdle for preservationists.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
SCOTTISH PAINTING


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Within View of the Big Silver Birds, a Place for Cardinals and Cormorants
LEAD: One of the prime bird-watching spots on the East Coast is a small spit of land on an island off Queens, sandwiched between Kennedy International Airport and Floyd Bennett Field.


Social Security Still Beats Privatized Schemes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Has Catholicism Lost A Chance to Be Our Moral Clearinghouse?
LEAD: NOT long ago, thinkers of various religious and political persuasions were hailing the coming of a ''Catholic moment,'' in which the church would help fill the moral vacuum left by the decline of mainline Protestantism and the rise of a secular liberalism that many Americans found arid and ineffectual.


Sacred Music Celebrating Holy Week
LEAD: SEVERAL American composers have distinguished themselves in church repertoire over the years, but now little-known composers are increasingly writing commissioned and self-inspired works for the church.


More Criminals Being Ordered to Pay for Jail Stays
LEAD: Responding to auidelines of the Federal Sentencing Commission, Federal judges around the country are increasingly ordering well-off criminals to pay the costs of their imprisonment.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Howell
$168,900
24 Sweet Briar Trail
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, eat-in kitchen, fireplace in family room; taxes $2,829.
Jackson
$125,000
171 Jackson Mills Road
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; deck, family room, pool, 1.2 acres; taxes $1,824.


Wisconsin Spring: New Fishing Season, Old Strife
LEAD: The ice is beginning to give way on the lakes of northern Wisconsin, and soon the Chippewa will renew a ritual as old as their ancestors' memories.
They will take to the water in boats to spear the fat walleyed pike that come to spawn each spring in the cold shallows.


Meeting the Challenge of a Dessert for the Passover Meal
LEAD: PASSOVER begins tomorrow evening with the festive and commemorative seder dinner.
The eight-day holiday, strictly limiting what foods may be eaten and what ingredients may be used in preparation, is always a challenge to the cook.


When 'Blue Velvet' Meets 'Hill Street Blues'
LEAD: The buzz of anticipation surrounding ''Twin Peaks,'' the rhapsodic murder mystery that will have its premiere tonight at 9 on ABC, can be largely traced to David Lynch, a film maker of renowned strangeness who will be making his commercial TV debut with this two-hour pilot. (The first hourlong episode of the seven-part series begins Thursday night at 9.) The thought that the writer-director of the art-house horror film ''Eraserhead'' and the more widely shown, if comparably twisted, ''Blue


Mutual Funds;   Modest Luster for High Tech
LEAD: Investing in high technology paid off for mutual fund investors last quarter.
The 23 science and technology funds returned an average of 2.7 percent, while all other stock fund categories combined lost 2.8 percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services, which tracks mutual funds.
In fact, the science and technology funds were the only ones in the 26 major groups tracked by Lipper - beside the


POSTING: Rising in Southampton;   Medical Offices
LEAD: Construction has started on a $4 million medical office building next to the Southampton Hospital in Suffolk County, L.I.
The 21,000-square-foot structure will be the fifth component in the Old Town Medical Village complex at the corner of Old Town Road and Meeting House Lane in Southampton.


In Stamford, Seafood on the Water
LEAD: WITH spring here and summer coming, the days of dining with water views are already anticipated.


Wall Street;   The Chaos in Tokyo's Market Begins to Hit Home
LEAD: You can run, but you can't hide.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: A Baltic Chill On Relations;   Momentum Is Slower In Superpower Talks
LEAD: During this week's talks between Soviet and American officials, the Kremlin's problems in Lithuania kept intruding on the discussions like an uninvited guest to a dinner party.
For a year United


Academic Left Finds the Far Reaches of Postmodernism
LEAD: THE ''erotic politics of the female body'' was a topic on the agenda, as was something called ''postmodern terrorism,'' along with ''resistance postmodernism,'' ''post-colonial body politics,'' and even ''postmodern feminism and Madonna,'' meaning, in this last instance, the actress and singer.


Fire I. Village Restricts Beach
LEAD: THE Fire Island community that banned pizza-eating in public has now banned the public from the ocean.
Last weekend Ocean Beach passed a law making its beaches private.


A 'Midnight Run' of Help and Discovery
LEAD: IT was a simple request.
My daughter's high school group needed a chaperone.
I'd done that lots of times, having raised five children, but this was different.
Dolly was my youngest, and this was 1989.
Something was happening to the ''me generation.'' This was not a field trip to a museum or a concert.


Castro's Friends and Enemies Hold 2 Rallies in Manhattan
LEAD: More than 1,000 supporters of President Fidel Castro of Cuba demonstrated in Times Square yesterday to protest United States policy toward Cuba, while about 600 Castro opponents waged a counter-demonstration a block north.


HEAVY METAL INVADES THE GARDEN
LEAD: Robustly sculptured stone and cast-metal lions, dogs, pigs, eagles, dolphins, cherubs and mermaids are proliferating in gardens and parlors across America.
The trend is part of the revival of interest in the heroic statuary, fanciful fountains, grandiose urns and weighty furniture produced on both sides of the Atlantic between the Civil War and World War


Hong Kong's Mystery Chicken
LEAD: THE classic recipe for Beggar's Chicken, a traditional Chinese dish as popular with tourists as with Far Eastern gourmets, calls for a chicken, two lotus leaves and ''six pounds of pond mud.'' And while the chicken is packed with a delicious stuffing, it is the lotus leaf and mud wrapping that makes this bird so tasty, tender and intriguing.


Novelist Uses The Island's Gold Coast As A Setting For A Clash of Cultures
LEAD: A NEGLECTED property next door, the nightmare of every suburban homeowner.
Imagine how much worse for John Sutter.


Karajan on Conducting: We Learn From Each Other
LEAD: In the 12 years prior to his death last July, the conductor Herbert von Karajan discussed the stages of his career and the various aspects of his profession in a series of conversations with Richard Osborne, a music commentator for the BBC.
The following article, in which Mr.
Karajan describes his own approach to conducting, touching upon the uses of experience and his relationship to the metronome, is adapted from Mr.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Collecting is not a simple matter, and many of the attendant peripherals have nothing to do with finances or knowledge.
In some cases, it's a question of whether something is a collection or merely an accumulation, and just the idea of the two being mentioned in the same sentence is enough to send shivers down a lot of spines.


World Cup Site Getting New Sod
LEAD: City officials have decided to re-sod a World Cup stadium before the start of the tournament in June.


Tamara Newell, A Writer, Weds
LEAD: Tamara Lee Blacklidge Newell, the daughter of Elizabeth Blacklidge Newell of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Charles Warner Newell, was married yesterday to Thomas F. Leddy of New York and Palm Beach, son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond E. Leddy of Haverford, Pa.
Valerie Salley, a notary public, officiated at the bridegroom's home in Palm


SPYING FOR HANOI
LEAD: Morley Safer is very intelligent in saying: ''I do not think of him [Pham Xuan An]  as a Communist, though he is still a loyal party member. . . .
No, An is a genuine patriot, I decide, one of the few I have known.''


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   A Two-Pot Dinner: Chicken and Vegetables
LEAD: Trying to cook as quickly as possible primes you to find short cuts that reduce the number of pots and pans needed to put a meal together and the number of steps required to make a dish.
For this meal, all the onion was cooked at one time and used in both dishes, and the carrots were cooked with the potatoes.


DATA UPDATE
LEAD:
*2*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*2*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Feb.90
Feb.89
Change
New York
179.9
311.0
-42%
New Jersey
129.6
155.4
-17%
Connecticut
64.4
60.9
+6%
*4*(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information)
*3*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Review/Music;   Adding Ethnic Insights To Bartok's 6 Quartets
LEAD: For many decades, the six string quartets of Bela Bartok were considered the most distinguished body of work in that medium since Beethoven.
Now their status has been challenged by the 15 quartets of Dmitri Shostakovich.
But it's a friendly challenge: any era that can produce two such masterly compendiums can hardly be dismissed as the wasteland some conservatives believe our century to be.


Question of the Week;   What Is Wrong With The Knicks?
LEAD: You have to build a team around Patrick Ewing, Charles Oakley, Maurice Cheeks, Kiki Vandeweghe and Gerald Wilkins.
This team needs players willing to be unselfish and show some pride in being a Knick.
KATHRYN LEWIN
New York


Amy Griswold Weds Timothy Curran
LEAD: Amy Hamilton Griswold, the daughter of John Hamilton Griswold of Clifton Springs, N.Y., and Mary Watson Griswold of Hammondsport, N.Y., was married yesterday to Timothy John Curran, a son of Barbara Shay MacDonald of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Edwin J. Curran of Syracuse.
The Rev.
Robert Aufieri officiated at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Roman Catholic Church in


U.S. and Soviets Differ Over Ban On Multiple-Warhead Missiles
LEAD: The United States last month secretly proposed a ban on land-based missiles with multiple warheads, but President Mikhail S. Gorbachev replied this week that the plan was too limited, Administration officials said today.


THE IRAN-CONTRA FIGURES AND THEIR STATUS
LEAD: Carl (Spitz) Channell - A conservative fund-raiser, pleaded guilty April 29, 1987, the same day he was charged, to one felony count of conspiring to defraud the Treasury of tax revenue by illegally using a tax-exempt foundation to funnel millions of dollars to the contras.
He was sentenced July 7, 1989, to two years' probation.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The paint on one wall of our house has developed blisters and cracks.
This is an outside wall, and the problem is only in the area where the chimney is.
There is no evidence of staining that would indicate a leak, and this problem occurs no place else.
The chimney was cleaned and covered last spring, and the bricks on the outside were repointed.


Review/Music;   Muzsikas, A Hungarian Folk Group
LEAD: Muzsikas, a folk group from Hungary that has been creating a minor buzz in world-music circles, came to the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity in Brooklyn Heights on Saturday night and delivered a surprisingly unacademic show, considering that the music consisted of re-creations of original folk material.


Marjory Douglas's Everglades
LEAD: ''There are no other Everglades in the world.''


Tilden Senior Receives M.V.P. in Kearny Relay
LEAD: Walter Glaspie of Tilden High School in Brooklyn was named the most valuable athlete, and Prospect Heights High School, also of Brooklyn, scored an impressive mile-relay victory today in the annual Kearny Relays.
The meet was run on the Kearny High School track in snow in the morning and cold temperatures in the afternoon.


Cincinnati Gallery Indicted in Mapplethorpe Furor
LEAD: As 1,000 protesters chanted ''Fascists!'' and ''Gestapo, go home!'' sheriff's deputies and Cincinnati police officers shut the Contemporary Arts Center for 90 minutes today and a grand jury indicted the gallery and its director on obscenity charges.


HOPPING MAD IN MONTREAL
LEAD:
SOLOMON GURSKY WAS HERE
By Mordecai Richler.
413 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


WARNING SIGNALS FOR BASEBALL
LEAD: Having frothed, we were all prepared to grovel back to baseball.
Admit it, we were.
However, Mother Nature retained her dignity and fired a couple of shots across baseball's haughty bow this weekend.


A June Wedding For Ms. Groves
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Steven H. Groves of Lexington, Mass., and Cape Coral, Fla., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Katherine Anne Groves, and Warren Meyer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Randall Meyer of Houston and Glenrock, Wyo.


Bulb Placement Can Test the Memory
LEAD: THIS is a test.
How many can name the cultivar names of those marvelous little flowers - daffodils, early tulips, bulbous iris, scillas - the small flowers that are starting to bloom now in the garden?


Campus Life: Minnesota;   Computer Dept. Torn by Strife Over Chairman
LEAD: The University of Minnesota computer-science department, which the provost compared to a kindergarten in February, was sharply rebuked last week by a faculty committee for behavior resembling feuding families.


Inequality, British Style
LEAD: MORE than three years after the British Government announced its plan to establish a group of experimental secondary schools called City Technology Colleges, which would emphasize the teaching of science and technology, the schools are still fledgling and now under fire.


WHEN THINGS DON'T WORK: WHO TO CALL
LEAD:
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS (718-257-6000) can be contacted about stray animals or an animal ambulance service, also for reports of cats trapped in trees, etc.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS CENTER (212-620-3435) provides advice on how to deal with interferance in television, radio and telephone reception.


Look And Listen
LEAD: TELEVISION AND BOOKS are more often considered contenders for children's attention than allies in education.
No one knows that better than Alan J. Shalleck, who began his career in television production 40 years ago at CBS and more recently has been developing animation techniques for children's books.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 8, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
104
THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berleley,
$4.50.) A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets
to the United States.
2
7
STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95) The crossed paths
of a man and a woman destined for stardom.


Tech Notes;   Doubling the Frequency of Light
LEAD: A research team at the University of Sussex has found a way to use a composite material to make light double its frequency.
According Paul Calvert, the materials scientist who initiated the research, the composite, which is made of crystals grown inside an organic polymer, emits green light when activated by an infrared laser.


A SPECIAL REPORT: Numbers Please!;   A House Divided
LEAD: HIGHER BIRTHRATES and a stream of new immigrants are driving up the number and proportion of black, Hispanic and Asian people in the United States so fast that soon after the year 2000 they will make up a third of the nation's students.


Nobody Is Perfect
LEAD: In offices all through George Bush's Administration are men and women totally committed to him, affectionate and admiring, but who yearn for him to take the one step that national leaders find most difficult of all.


AND NOW, AN ARCHITECTURAL KINGDOM
LEAD: Once upon a time there were buildings and there was architecture, and the two had very little to do with each other.
There was a great kingdom called Disney, and in it were many, many buildings, and while most of them were fun to look at, they were not architecture.
And then one day a new prince named Michael came to rule the kingdom, and he decreed that architecture could be just as much fun as buildings.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: THE first college controlled by an American Indian tribe opened in 1968 on Arizona's huge Navajo Reservation.
Today, 24 colleges founded and controlled by Indians serve their own communities in 11 states, scattered throughout the Midwest and West.
Last year, more than 4,400 students were enrolled in the tribally controlled colleges, up from 1,689 students in 1981.


AN ISLAND OF IDEALISM IN A SEA OF DISDAIN
LEAD: Roosevelt Island is like no other place in New York City, and like few others anywhere.
This island in the midst of the East River opposite the Upper East Side of Manhattan contains a couple of hospitals, some magnificent, deteriorating landmarks and a relic of the very best hopes of the 1960's: a ''new town in town'' that combines social goals with strong urban design, yielding a mixed-income neighborhood of genuine diversity that, 14 years after its first residents moved in, still works superbly.


Doctorow's 'Bathgate' Wins Faulkner Award
LEAD: ''Billy Bathgate'' by E. L. Doctorow has won the 10th annual PEN/Faulkner Award as the best work of fiction published in 1989.
The Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington administers the $7,500 prize.
The novel about a Bronx youth who at age 15 becomes a protege of the gangster Dutch Schultz has also won the National Book Critics Circle


GAY SOLDIERS: THEY WATCHED THEIR STEP
LEAD:
COMING OUT UNDER FIRE
The History of Gay Men and Women in World War Two.
By Allan Berube.
Illustrated. 377 pp. New York:
The Free Press. $22.95.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The paint on one wall of our house has developed blisters and cracks.
This is an outside wall, and the problem is only in the area where the chimney is.
There is no evidence of staining that would indicate a leak, and this problem occurs no place else.
The chimney was cleaned and covered last spring, and the bricks on the outside were repointed.


Campus Life: SUNY, Binghamton;   Fraternity Gains Limited Privileges After Suspension
LEAD: A fraternity at the State University of New York at Binghamton that recently filed a suit against the university to end a nearly yearlong suspension has been granted the right to resume some activities.


What the Supreme Court Considers to Be Obscene
LEAD: Beginning with the first obscenity case in the United States in 1815, when a Pennsylvania court ruled that it was a crime to exhibit a picture of a nude couple for profit, American courts have grappled with whether governments can suppress materials they deem obscene.


Tarpley Suspended
LEAD: If the Dallas Mavericks forward Roy Tarpley passes a mandatory drug test to stay in pro basketball, his suspension for missing practice on Friday without notification will last two games, team officials said yesterday.
Tarpley, the team's leading rebounder and third-leading scorer, was suspended from last night's game against the Chicago Bulls at Reunion Arena and tomorrow night's game at the Los Angeles Lakers.


Social Security Still Beats Privatized Schemes;   Difficult to Picture
LEAD: To the Editor:


Youth, 15, Falls Under Train At Queens Stop and Survives
LEAD: A 15-year-old Brooklyn boy fell from a Queens subway platform under an oncoming train early yesterday, lay between the rails as eight cars passed over him and survived, the transit police said.


Police Find 4th Body In Miami Beach Fire
LEAD: A fourth body was found today as the authorities continued a search of the three-story residential hotel that was destroyed by fire early Friday.


Quite Enough of Thatcher, or Just a Cyclical Setback?
LEAD: THE news last week in The Daily Telegraph, a bastion of support for the Conservative Party, seemed tantamount to kicking Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher when she was down. ''Labor's lead soars to 24 percent in Gallup poll,'' the front-page headline said. ''Thatcher's popularity rating the lowest ever recorded.


Meeting the Challenge of a Dessert for the Passover Meal
LEAD: PASSOVER begins tomorrow evening with the festive and commemorative seder dinner.
The eight-day holiday, strictly limiting what foods may be eaten and what ingredients may be used in preparation, is always a challenge to the cook.


CONGRESS HOLDS UP PART OF U.N. DUES
LEAD: Congress is withholding part of the United States' 1989 dues to the United Nations and its specialized agencies to offset emergency expenses caused by the California earthquake and Hurricane Hugo.
The delay comes despite President Bush's recommendation that Washington pay the dues in full.


Good News About the Bald Eagle, Except on the Great Lakes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fashion;   CLIMATE CONTROL
LEAD: Sure, raincoats serve a useful purpose: they do what they're supposed to.
But these days, they have evolved into more than bad-weather must-wear.
Because they are made of lightweight fabrics - usually resilient synthetics - they can be packed, rolled up, tossed around, sat on for hours and still spring back to stylish life.


Post Offices That Sell More Than Just Stamps
LEAD: POST OFFICES in Connecticut are becoming places to buy jewelry, T-shirts and stuffed bears.
As in many post offices around the country, they are selling a variety of items that feature stamp designs or other postal themes.
The items are intended to promote philately and raise revenue for the United States Postal


New Gallery at Fairfield Attempts a Definition of Modernism
LEAD: AT Fairfield University, art exhibitions, formerly displayed in the Financial Center, now have a place of their own, in the Thomas J. Walsh Gallery.
Together with a theater and a concert hall, the gallery is in the new Regina A. Quick Center for the Arts, a brick building that arrests attention with its oblique siting.


Wall Street;   A Paradoxical Anti-Takeover Bill
LEAD: How should investors in Pennsylvania's public companies react to the anti-takeover bill that is about to be signed into law in the Keystone State?


Aided by U.S. Waiver, China Launches First Foreign Satellite
LEAD: China launched a foreign telecommunications satellite tonight, setting off a national celebration to mark its entry into the international launching business.


Question of the Week;   What Is Wrong With The Knicks?
LEAD: The Knicks stand around on offense and don't move the ball, making it easy to double- or triple-team Patrick Ewing.
While other teams execute, the Knicks dribble the air out of the ball, get it to Ewing and then pull out the camera.
When was the last time they reversed the ball, set screens to create movement or hit the big man on a pick-and-roll?


The Bond Between Doctor and Patient
LEAD: THE influx of medical technology, combined with the high expectations of patients and the threat of malpractice suits, have placed unprecedented strains on the doctor-patient relationship in recent years.
To ease these tensions, says Dr.
Dale Matthews, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Connecticut School of


Shaking Up The Shakers And the Movers
LEAD: Last week, Sunday morning's longest running public-affairs programs targeted a typically timely assortment of issues, with seasoned reporters bearding more and less forthcoming officials and experts.
Meeting the press on NBC was William Reilly, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.


Campus Life: Princeton;   Arboreal Protest: Hug a Tree And Save a Forest
LEAD: Princeton University students embraced trees last week in a display intended to persuade the university to convert to the use of recycled paper.


Buds and Boys of Summer Hit by Old Man Winter


Emigres Contend With Culture Shock
LEAD: WITH freedom popping out all over the world, the immigrant story, one of the staples of American drama, is bound to suffer.


Roosevelt I. Tram Faces Money Woes
LEAD: King Kong ready to rip apart the Roosevelt Island tram may be a figment of creative imaginations at a theme park in Florida, but the real tram could be knocked off its cables by fiscal calamity.


Votes in Congress;   Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
Senate
1.
Clean Air: Vote on final passage of a bill that provides for the first revision of the Clean Air Act since 1977 and is intended to reduce acid rain, urban smog and toxic chemicals in the air.
Approved 89 to 11, April 3.
2.
Confirmation:: Vote to confirm T. Timothy Ryan Jr. as the top regulator of the savings and loan industry.


He's Got an Eye for the Prize
LEAD: In the mid-1970's, a shy, self-effacing Canadian financier named Jake Eberts took his first tentative step into the movie business.
In the celebrated tradition of the Hollywood angel, he decided to help finance an animated film called ''Watership Down.'' From, there, he joined forces with some of Europe's finest directors to help produce a series of films that won 15 Academy Awards: ''Chariots of Fire,'' ''Gandhi,'' ''The Dresser,'' ''The Killing Fields'' and ''Hope and Glory.


ON THE TRAIL OF EVERYBODY'S MOTHER
LEAD:
THE SEARCH FOR EVE
By Michael H. Brown.
Illustrated. 357 pp. New York:
Harper &amp; Row $22.95.


Romper Rooms
LEAD: THE PLAYROOM is a delightful new program for children from prekindergarten to second or third grade.
On one level it is a game; on another a toy, and on yet another an educational program that teaches pupils simple math, reading, time and reasoning skills.


DOES THE CREDIT GO TO THE KREMLIN?
LEAD:
THE AWAKENING OF THE SOVIET UNION
By Geoffrey Hosking.
182 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $19.95.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
PRIZZI'S GLORY, by Richard Condon. (Signet, $4.95.) In the final installment of a trilogy about a Brooklyn Mafia family, the Prizzis decide to franchise their various illegal operations and go after a more lucrative goal: the Presidency of the United States. ''The plot gives Mr.
Condon ample elbow room for political and social satire that is always funny,'' Vincent Patrick said here in 1988.


Pro-Libya Group Wants 2 Swiss Hostages Freed
LEAD: The pro-Libyan Fatah Revolutionary Council today urged fellow militants to free two Swiss hostages.


Lithuanians Want Sports Independence
LEAD: In the same way that Lithuania's political leaders are struggling to make Moscow and the rest of the world recognize their republic as an independent state, Lithuanian sports officials have engaged their Soviet counterparts in a fight for sovereignty.


Of Concerts And Consorts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Positively Unique
LEAD: To the Editor:


Michaela Murphy Planning to Wed
LEAD: September wedding plans for Michaela Margaret Murphy and Jay Crandall Hoag, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Hoag of Naples, Fla., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent B. Murphy Jr. of Bedminster, N.J.


The Awful Truth About Rotisserie League Baseball
LEAD: At the time most of you are reading this, I am confined in an airless room, sweating it out with nine other men.
Most of us are guys old enough to need reading glasses, but hey, who's complaining?
We have, after all, survived another off season.


Wave of Conversions Slows to a Ripple
LEAD: THE wave of conversions that moved across New York City in the 1980's and transformed some 300,000 rental apartments into cooperatives and condominiums has slowed dramatically.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A picture caption accompanying an article about Clinton South on April 1 gave an incorrect location for a hotel proposed by Mid-Town Limited Partnership.
The correct location is 11th Avenue and 36th Street.


Review/Music;   Modern Works for Brass By the Musica de Camera
LEAD: Musica de Camera, an organization that presents chamber concerts by Puerto Rican musicians, brought the Gabrieli Brass Quintet to Merkin Concert Hall on Thursday evening for its New York debut concert.
The quintet was formed in 1988, and its players - Roberto Gandara and Roberto Ramirez, trumpeters; Javier Gandara, hornist; Jaime Morales-Matos, trombonist, and Ruben Ramirez, tubist - include members of the Puerto Rico


ERRANDS OF THE RICH AND FAMOUS
LEAD: Lyn Revson's banker told her she was wasting her time paying her own bills, so she found Carol Wolse to do the job for her.
Twice a month the New York socialite reviews and initials her bills, then puts them all in a Federal Express envelope and ships it 60 miles away to Mrs.
Wolse, a Long Island housewife who used to work in a bank.


'Palm Sunday,' Tale Of Gospel Singers
LEAD: BY the end of ''Palm Sunday,'' the rousing gospel number that the playwright Paula Cizmar has been leading up to all play long happens at last, downstage center.
That the big finish doesn't raise the roof beams as highly as anticipated is the least of the play's letdowns.


Amid Autry's Halo, a Dream
LEAD: Gene Autry, the singing cowboy who owns the California Angels, was never quite good enough to become a baseball player, and by his own description was never much of an actor.
What he was and still is, he says, is a personality.


Mother, 18, Cleared in Killing
LEAD: Claire Hilary Moritt, an 18-year-old student at Hillsborough Community College, was found not guilty of murder by reason of insanity today in the Oct. 23 death of her newborn son.
She was accused of stuffing him into a dormitory toilet.
Judge Richard Lazzara of Hillsborough Circuit Court said he did not believe hospitalizing her was necessary but she should stay under psychiatric care.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: The Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Company holds its annual meeting in Akron, Ohio.
TUESDAY: Honda dedicates a $600 million expansion of its engine plant in Anna, Ohio, and, on Wednesday, a new $380 million assembly plant in East Liberty, Ohio.
The California Supreme Court hears oral arguments in a cancer patient's suit for a share of the profits from a biotech product created with his blood.


Untapped Resources
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nixon Thersites
LEAD: The entirely unembarrassable man has freedoms denied the rest of us.
We can be checked in midsentence with a cough; cut off when some in our audience start looking at their watches.
We sense that we are not wanted and yearn toward the nearest exit.
Such things do not trouble the man impervious to obloquy.


'Fiddler' Celebrates 25 Years Of Tradition
LEAD: Passover and Easter approach, most concert activity takes a break, so concertgoers will find fewer events than usual on the calendar.
Just in time for Passover, though, the Broadway-bound, 25th-anniversary production of ''Fiddler on the Roof'' is coming to Bushnell Memorial Hall.
The production stars Topol, the Israeli actor and singer who took the role of Tevye the milkman in the original London edition as well as in the


Campus Life: Florida;   An Organization For White Rights Prompts Protests
LEAD: Official campus recognition of a student white-rights group, over the protests of campus civil rights advocates, has created fears of heightened racial tension at the University of Florida.


Valvano Is Leaving North Carolina State


Business Trips: Spending More, Carefully
LEAD: WITH air fares and other travel expenses rising, companies in the county are renewing efforts to curb the costs of business trips.
Small companies ask, ''Is this trip necessary?'' Larger corporations, where travel is more likely to be a significant part of business, concentrate on better management of their travel departments.


The Mysterious Magical Jumbo Driver
LEAD: Jack Nicklaus couldn't believe it.
When he played with Masashi (Jumbo) Ozaki in Japan about 12 months earlier, their drives had traveled about the same distance.
But during a television celebrity match in Japan late last year, Jumbo was consistently outhitting the Golden Bear off the tee by as much as 90 yards.


Conference to Use Clock for Baseball
LEAD: The Missouri Valley Conference, in an experiment to speed play, will put a clock on league baseball games this season.


Israelis Rally for Electoral Reforms


Reviews/Dance;   Motifs for Solemn Occasions
LEAD: What one saw last Sunday afternoon when Jennifer Sargent and Dancers performed at the Bessie Schonberg Theater was powerful in itself.
But what one didn't see helped make Ms.
Sargent's works even more compelling.
Each foretold a momentous event.
This was choreography of premonition and trepidation.


Henry Fleck, Physician, 78
LEAD: Dr.
Henry Fleck, a former professor of medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, died of a heart attack on Friday at Montefiore Medical Center.
He was 78 years old and lived in Riverdale.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The paint on one wall of our house has developed blisters and cracks.
This is an outside wall, and the problem is only in the area where the chimney is.
There is no evidence of staining that would indicate a leak, and this problem occurs no place else.
The chimney was cleaned and covered last spring, and the bricks on the outside were repointed.


DISNEY DECO
LEAD: A PAIR OF 28-TON SWANS REIGNS IN TURQUOISE splendor over the fantasy landscape of Walt Disney World.
In a year or so, when the new guidebooks come out, the swan sculptures atop the new Walt Disney World Swan Hotel, designed by the post-modernist architect Michael Graves, will be described with the same reverence now bestowed on Cinderella's Castle.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: OF AN ESTIMATED 46 million students enrolled in elementary and secondary schools in fall 1989, about 12 percent were at private schools.
More than half of private school students attend Catholic schools, while about a third are enrolled in other religious schools.
Nonsectarian schools account for 14 percent of the private-school population.


Office of Wesleyan's President Is Firebombed
LEAD: The office of Wesleyan University's president was firebombed early this morning by someone who threw two beer bottles full of flammable liquid into it through a window.


SAFE IN THE HANDS OF THE UNCANNY
LEAD:
CONSTANCIA
And Other Stories for Virgins.
By Carlos Fuentes.
Translated by Thomas Christensen.
340 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


Technology;   'Smart' Windows, Intriguing Potential
LEAD: A modern-day Romeo ought to think twice about any impulse to utter, ''What light through yonder window breaks?'' These days, the romantic mood could be shattered by a response along the lines of, ''That depends.
How much are you willing to pay?''


THE QUIZ: Who Said it?
LEAD: Entrance and exit lines are the stuff of first impressions and lasting images - powerful stuff indeed.
The problem, however, is that the lines often make more indelible marks on the memory than the names of the people who uttered them.
How indelible can be tested here.
And that's our final word on the subject.


IN SHORT: SCIENCE BOOKS
LEAD:
IN CONFIDENCE: Four Years of Therapy.
By Roberta Israeloff. (Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) Can a book about someone's sessions in psychotherapy be of interest to anyone else?
Yes, if the writer is Roberta Israeloff and the book is ''In Confidence: Four Years of Therapy.'' Ms.
Israeloff, the author of ''Coming to Terms,'' sought counseling to become a better parent for her newborn son.


Fashion;   In Accessories, There's a Clear Trend
LEAD: Leave the diamonds in the vault.
For the icy look that becomes increasingly popular as warm weather approaches, designers are making jewelry out of materials used in items commonly found around the house.


Annexing Farmland
LEAD: THIS dairy-farming and agricultural town dating from the 17th century has annexed four farms totaling about 500 acres where development could triple the current population of 3,700.


Ann C. Carey to Marry Jean C. Loisel
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Ward Carey of New York and East Hampton, L.I., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Ann C. Carey and Jean Christophe Loisel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Loisel of Brive-la-Gaillarde, France.


Meeting the Challenge of a Dessert for the Passover Meal
LEAD: PASSOVER begins tomorrow evening with the festive and commemorative seder dinner.
The eight-day holiday, strictly limiting what foods may be eaten and what ingredients may be used in preparation, is always a challenge to the cook.


Cynthia Raffel, A Buyer, Weds
LEAD: Cynthia Ann Raffel, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Erwin S. Raffel of Beachwood, Ohio, was married yesterday evening in Cleveland to Alan Scott Dannenbaum, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Dannenbaum of Margate, N.J.
Rabbi Ben Kamin officiated at the Oakwood Country Club in Cleveland.


Ellen H. Collett To Marry in May
LEAD: Ellen Harper Collett, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James Rountree Collett of Morganton, N.C., and Alexander Gruszynski, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Krzystof Gruszynski of Copenhagen, plan to be married in May.


Out of Power
LEAD: Baudouin I of Belgium was not king for a day last week.
It happened like this: Parliament wanted to legalize abortion and passed a bill to that effect.
But under the Constitution, it could not become law without the King's signature and Baudouin, a Roman Catholic who opposes abortion, refused to sign.


Younger and Hungry to Win
LEAD: ''Most of the pitchers could use a few more innings,'' Davey Johnson said, bidding farewell to baseball's short spring. ''Most of the guys could use a few more at-bats.''


Single and Proud in a Postfeminist Era;   Men's Problem, Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brenda L. Kirkland and Peter George, Geology Students, Are Wed in Dallas
LEAD: Benda Lee Kirkland, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Douglas W. Kirkland of Carrollton, Tex., was married yesterday in Dallas to Peter Gillham George, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
H.
Krome George of Sewickley, Pa.
The Rev.
Dennis Hamilton, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Perkins Chapel of Southern Methodist


Giving Meaning To the Word Life
LEAD: TWENTY students at Yeshiva University's Stern College for Women in Manhattan are helping to replace the self-indulgence of the 80's with a better symbol for the 90's: volunteerism.
Through the Chai Lifeline program, the students visit terminally ill children and their families, offering emotional and practical support.


A Word on Cruelty And Fake Fur
LEAD: In responding to ''A Furrier's Wife Braves Slings and Arrows of Activists'' [Westchester Opinion, March 18] , I would like to say that Linda Spear did more than her share of slinging barbed falsehoods at the anti-fur activists, who are just ''regular people'' from all walks of life and from all age groups, and who are only trying to do their part to undo one wrong in this imperfect world.


Commission Urges Hungary to Overhaul Economy
LEAD: A task force of international economic experts has called for a swift and decisive attack on the centrally planned economy in Hungary, saying economic change must occur in ''quantum leaps'' if the country is to move successfully from its socialist past toward a free-market system.


Marilyn Sternlieb Weds J. A. Stern
LEAD: Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I., was the setting last evening for the marriage of Marilyn Susan Sternlieb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan M. Sternlieb of Lake Success, L.I., to Jeffrey Alan Stern, a son of Mrs.
Alfred Stern of Los Angeles and the late Mr.
Stern.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman, Rabbi Hillel Silverman and Cantor Benjamin


Gifts for the Garden Around London
LEAD: GARDENING is a national pastime in England so it's not surprising that the amount and variety of garden paraphernalia and plants on sale in its nurseries, garden centers, specialist shops, at the Chelsea Flower Show in May or even in neighborhood pet shops and Woolworths is abundant and tempting.
Plants cannot be brought into the United States but commercially packed seeds and just about everything else gardeners need, from watering cans and pruning shears to flower pots and fountains, can pass through United States


A Big Bar Offers an Ambitious Menu
LEAD: ONE VILLAGE SQUARE is both the name and address of a new restaurant in Glen Cove.
Coherence ends there.


Residential Mortgage InvestFments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Residential Mortgage InvestFments Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,301,821
11,038,329
Net inc
191,452
b1,098,291
Share earns
.05
-
Yr rev
42,700,047
46,073,219
Net loss
402,016
c1,428,638
Share earns
-
.34


Trimel Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trimel Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,800,000
7,800,000
Net inc
b3,501,000
465,000
Share earns
1.16
.19
b-Included the results of IWF Research since its acquisition in November 1989 and undisclosed tax credits and proceeds from the sale of assets.


Rescue of Gdansk Shipyard Stalls
LEAD: Ten months ago, it seemed that a capitalist fairy tale was unfolding at this city's famed shipyard, the birthplace of Poland's Solidarity trade union movement.
But today, the hoped-for revival has become a case study of the difficulties of turning state-run companies in Eastern Europe into private enterprises.


Medicaid Gives Excellent Treatment to New York State's Poor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Books of The Times;   Nixon's Battles and the Aftermaths
LEAD:
In the Arena
A Memoir of Victory, Defeat and Renewal
By Richard M. Nixon
Illustrated. 384 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


Fur Vault reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fur Vault (AMEX)
Qtr to Mar 3
1990
1989
Revenue
38,088,000
44,095,000
Net loss
5,021,000
b2,658,000
Share earns
-
.21
9mo rev
93,381,000
93,414,000
Net loss
9,705,000
b85,000
Share earns
-
.01
b


Yugoslavia Holds Free Vote For First Time Since 1940's
LEAD: Slovenes lined up patiently at polling stations in a cold rain today to vote for a new President for their republic, members of a new collective presidency and representatives to two of three parliamentary chambers.
The voting marked the first free multiparty elections in Yugoslavia since Tito took power here after World War


Cold Cash
LEAD: THIS may become known as the era of the yuppie snowboarder, which appears to be the youngest, fastest-growing athlete-entrepreneur segment in sports.


Sizing Up Rules On Bats, Gloves
LEAD: DON'T be surprised if you see more home runs this season or if you have to look twice to see what kind of bats are being used to hit them.
You can also expect to see more passed balls, not to mention bits of measuring tape hanging out of umpires' pockets.


2 More Bodies Uncovered In Florida Hotel Fire Rubble
LEAD: Searchers using dogs and heavy equipment found two more bodies and looked for others today in the charred hulk of the Fontana Hotel.


Ocean Bio-Chem reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ocean Bio-Chem
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,030,139
4,865,559
Net inc
266,522
290,663
Share earns
.09
.11


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Machine Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Machine Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
5,031,075
5,052,832
Net inc
171,877
122,982
Share earns
.04
.03
6mo sales
9,610,976
11,031,919
Net inc
228,595
263,408
Share earns
.06
.06


VIGIL BY KRISHNAS PROTESTS AWARD
LEAD: Members of the International Society of Krishna Consciousness have begun a 24-hour vigil outside the National Archives to publicize their contention that a multimillion-dollar damage award threatens their right to freedom of religion.


A Departure From the Past
LEAD: In this, the most hopeful of Prague springs in 22 years, life moves at a giddy pace, even if toward uncertain destinations.
The revolution of recent months has brought changes everywhere, and changes have created choices where none before existed.


Gale Alone Sank Burmese Ferry, Paper Says
LEAD: The Burmese ferry accident that may have claimed more than 200 lives on Friday is only the latest in a series of sinkings along this country's southern waterways in recent years.


Seeing Is Not Believing for Caps' Coach
LEAD: When the Devils escaped with a 6-5 victory over the Washington Capitals at Byrne Meadowlands Arena on Saturday night to even their Patrick Divison semifinal series at one game each, Terry Murray stood by himself on the bench and stared at the ice in disbelief over what had transpired.


Cherry Blossom Time? Gone With March Wind
LEAD: It rained on Dave C. Williams's parade.
It also snowed and sleeted.
Then the sun came out.


Frank Kozin, 60, Dies; Engineering Professor
LEAD: Frank Kozin, a professor of electrical engineering at the Polytechnic Institute of New York in Brooklyn who developed techniques of applied probability, died of a brain tumor on Thursday at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 60 years old and lived in Huntington, L.I.


Abortion From Persuasion to Prohibition
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ryan White Dies of AIDS at 18; His Struggle Helped Pierce Myths
LEAD: Ryan White, the Indiana teen-ager who put the face of a child on AIDS and served as a leader for gaining greater understanding and compassion for those with the deadly disease, died today.
He was 18 years old.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   McDonald Group Loses A Copywriter Partner
LEAD: A comeback by the co-founder of Atlanta's first nationally esteemed ad agency may be in peril by the defection of one of two creative partners.


Review/Theater;   Lloyd Webber's 'Aspects of Love'
LEAD: Andrew Lloyd Webber, the composer who is second to none when writing musicals about cats, roller-skating trains and falling chandeliers, has made an earnest but bizarre career decision in ''Aspects of Love,'' his new show at the Broadhurst.
He has written a musical about people.


Faldo Repeats as Masters Winner
LEAD: With a tempered-in-steel game so strong it broke one of the toughest competitors in golf, Nick Faldo today won his second consecutive Masters by beating Raymond Floyd on the second hole of a sudden-death playoff.


Arlene W. Stern, Writer, Is Married
LEAD: Arlene Williams Stern of New York and Ralph Warner Stern of New York and East Hampton, L.I., were married yesterday at the Stanhope in New York by Rabbi Dennis Math.The couple were not previously related.


Second Trial Begins in Child Molestation Case
LEAD: The Virginia McMartin Preschool child molestation case will be revived Monday as jury selection begins for the second trial of one of the original defendants.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   International Trade Group Reorganizes
LEAD: IN an effort to raise its profile to the level of other advertising trade groups, the International Advertising Association announced a management reorganization on Friday that will bring the group its first full-time professional leadership.


Telescope Is Set to Peer at Space and Time &gt;
LEAD: On the clearest of nights, high in the cool, dry mountain air, the unaided human eye can glimpse perhaps 6,000 objects in the sky: individual stars, a few planets and a multitude of galaxies composed of millions of stars but so far away that they appear as single points of light.


Standard Oil &amp; Exploration of Delaware Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Oil &amp; Exploration of Delaware Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
938,030
933,523
Net inc
97,602
57,456
Share earns
.13
.08
Shares outst
761,592
755,359


Community Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
6,000
293,000
Share earns
-
.11
Yr net inc
1,674,000
2,368,000
Share earns
.64
1.06
Full year 1988 figures included a gain of $747,000 from the sale of Tennessee Bank &amp; Trust Co.


Continental Mortgage &amp; EqFuity Trust reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Mortgage &amp; EqFuity Trust (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,010,000
16,655,000
Net loss
6,166,000
19,761,000
Shares outst
3,822,610
3,828,545
All share earnings figures reflect the 1-for-3 reverse split effective March 26.


No Quick Recovery For LaFontaine
LEAD: The Islanders' chances to get back into their Stanley Cup playoff series with the Rangers were diminished today when the condition of Pat LaFontaine was listed as doubtful for Game 3 on Monday night at the Coliseum.


Ronald E. Evans, 56, Astronaut Who Piloted Apollo 17 Mission
LEAD: Ronald E. Evans, the Apollo 17 astronaut who exclaimed ''Hot diggety dog!'' upon taking his first steps in space in December 1972, died of a heart attack in his sleep on Saturday at his home in Scottsdale, Ariz.
He was 56 years old.


Jane Rosenthal, Physician, Weds
LEAD: Dr.
Jane Lisa Rosenthal, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Rosenthal of Pompton Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Bruce Brian Cahan, a son of Bernard Cahan of Marco Island, Fla., and Joan Cahan of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Hyman Krantz officiated at the Preakness Hills Country Club in Wayne, N.J.


Market Place;   Browning-Ferris's Strategic Retreat
LEAD: NO one disputes that hazardous-waste disposal is a huge, lucrative market destined to become much larger.
Nevertheless, Wall Street's first reaction was decidedly upbeat when Browning-Ferris Industries said after trading ended Thursday that it would bail out of the business.


Greeks and Peruvians Give Leads to Rightists
LEAD: Greece's main conservative party won half the seats in Parliament, failing to secure an absolute majority but hoping to win independent support to form a government.


Nina Zakin Wed To James Essey
LEAD: Nina Elizabeth Zakin and James Andrew Essey were married yesterday at the Lotos Club in New York by Rabbi Shira Stern.


Arms Talks: Fresh Twist
LEAD: The Bush Administration's latest initiative on strategic arms poses difficult military planning and spending questions for Moscow as well as Washington.


A Glorious Day for Flying Dinosaurs


Review/Recital;   Paul Plishka Adds Drama To Songs
LEAD: The American bass Paul Plishka, who spends much of his time these days at the Metropolitan Opera, gave a song recital at Weill Recital Hall on Friday evening, and at times he virtually turned the auditorium into a mini-Met.


Greek Conservatives Finish First But Fail to Win Majority of Seats
LEAD: After a count that lasted far into the early hours today, Greece's main conservative party, New Democracy, secured exactly half of Parliament's 300 seats, failing to secure a majority to lead the nation out of political paralysis.
The elections were the country's third in 10 months.


Liability Laws Are Criticized
LEAD: United States companies are becoming less competitive because of the threat that they may have to pay huge damage awards in product liability suits, Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher said last week.


Mister Frisky's Next Date Is the Derby
LEAD: Mister Frisky, who scored his 16th victory without a defeat in the Santa Anita Derby on Saturday, will make his next start in the Kentucky Derby on May 5.
He is a virtual cinch to be the favorite at Churchill Downs, regardless of what happens in the remaining prep races over the next three weeks.


Heavy Schedule of Government Securities
LEAD: New issues will substantially increase the supply of debt obligations this week in the Government securities market.


Taj Mahal's Slot Machines Halt, Overcome by Success
LEAD: Less than a week after they began to swallow coins in record numbers, the slot machines of Donald J. Trump's new monument to casino glitz, the Taj Mahal, were paralyzed today, apparent victims of their own success.


Reviews/Television;   On the Art of Being a Spokesman
LEAD: A pride of former Presidential press secretaries purr and growl their way through ''The Presidency, the Press and the People.'' Prompted by the bantering questions and comments of John Chancellor, 10 men who served occupants of the White House from John F. Kennedy to Ronald Reagan indulge in anecdotes and analysis at 8 tonight on Channel 13, in a two-hour get-together that moves like a fast-paced press conference.


Marine Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marine Holding Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,300,000
10,200,000
Net loss
4,800,000
9,800,000
Yr rev
34,900,000
43,900,000
Net loss
28,200,000
19,700,000


Review/Dance;   Mixed-Media Ecology
LEAD: For part of the time during ''Against the Earth,'' hearing was believing.
What could be seen in this mixed-media creation by the Thunder Bay Ensemble on Friday night at La Mama E.T.C. usually prompted profound skepticism.
And before the hourlong production was over, both sights and sounds grew equally pretentious.


Pubco Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pubco Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
127,674,000
113,100,000
Net inc
3,282,000
5,991,000
Share earns
.10
.18


Soviet Georgians Rally, Demanding Independence but Revealing Disunity
LEAD: Tens of thousands of Soviet Georgians packed the streets of Tbilisi tonight for a mournful protest that laid bare the republic's increasing hunger for independence but also its badly fragmented politics.


Daimler-Benz Sued by G.E.
LEAD: The General Electric Company has filed a $1.15 billion lawsuit against Daimler-Benz of West Germany, contending that Daimler's new alliance with the United Technologies Corporation breached an agreement it already had with G.E. to develop jet engines.


'Country of Concern'
LEAD: Undeterred by the Bush Administration's appeasement of Iraq's bloodthirsty regime, Federal grand juries have recently brought two indictments against Saddam Hussein's agents:


Tough Call for Bush: A Presidential Pardon for Poindexter?
LEAD: John M. Poindexter's conviction on five felony charges seems likely to thrust President Bush once again into the discomforting limelight of the Iran-contra affair, this time over the possibility of a Presidential pardon.


Susan Ross Is Married
LEAD: Susan Ross, a vice president of the Republic National Bank in New York, and Dr.
Jeffrey Martin Factor, a fellow in allergy and immunology at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, were married yesterday at Sans Souci in Sea Cliff, L.I.
Rabbi Charles Agin officiated.
Mrs.
Factor, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr.


Cable Viewers Begin Season of Almost Daily Baseball
LEAD: America's love affair with baseball enters a new stage this year: For much of the country, there will be almost daily televised games from spring through summer through fall, including Sunday nights and weeknight doubleheaders.


JUDGE BARS ACTION AGAINST EXHIBITION
LEAD: A Federal district judge barred local law-enforcement officials today from shutting down or interfering with an art center's showing of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe.


Quality Book Publishing Shifts to Small Presses;   Who Gets Free Ride?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Penobscot Shoe reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penobscot Shoe (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 23
1990
1989
Sales
3,201,602
4,229,754
Net loss
337,127
b77,464
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


CHRONICLE
LEAD: THE AMAZING KRESKIN says no deal on that turreted turn-of-the-century Victorian house in Nyack, N.Y. - the one the owner says has ghosts.


PC Etcetera reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PC Etcetera
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,312,838
2,957,962
Net inc
6,237
b134,674
Shares outst
6,177,141
4,825,236
b-Net loss


Abortion From Persuasion to Prohibition;   But Condemn Violence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senators Visit Brandenburg Gate


Chorus of Coyotes Gets Closer to Cities
LEAD: Sometimes, when Emily Crowfoot lies in bed at night, the stillness is broken by a forlorn chorus of coyotes.


Former GTE Officer Is Chief of Telecharge
LEAD: International Telecharge Inc., which specializes in operator-assisted long-distance phone services, has named Allan L. Rayfield, a former top executive at the GTE Corporation, to the posts of chairman and chief executive.


Police Arrest Homeless Man In Rape at the Bus Terminal
LEAD: Police arrested a homeless man after a teen-ager said he had raped her last month at the Port Authority bus terminal.


Home Builder In Chapter 11
LEAD: The General Development Corporation filed for Federal bankruptcy protection on Friday, less than a week after revealing a severe cash shortage and agreeing to a $100 million repayment program for victims of a scheme to sell overpriced homes.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Golf


Scuba Class: A Journey Under and Within
LEAD: DESPITE the cold of the early April spring morning, the black rain clouds looming ominously overhead and three-foot swells, the chartered boat headed out of the marina in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, toward the open sea.
This was to be the final step in a demanding eight-week scuba diving certification program, and all 10 students were ready, rain or shine.


Review/Opera;   Norman and Lakes in 'Walkure'
LEAD: When ''Die Walkure'' was unveiled in 1986 as the first installment of the Metropolitan Opera's Wagner ''Ring'' cycle, the director Otto Schenk's concept for the whole was described as romantic realism.
To this observer, the ''Walkure'' production in particular has always fallen somewhat short of that ideal.


Question Box
LEAD:
Tops in Runs Batted In


Review/Television;   The People Who Report and Edit the News
LEAD: Several years ago MTM Enterprises had a bumpy but respectable television run with ''Lou Grant,'' starring Ed Asner, formerly employed by the television station on ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show,'' as a newspaper editor.
On ABC tonight at 9, MTM returns to print journalism with a special two-hour premiere of ''Capital News,'' in which the fictitious Washington Capital, an influential newspaper based in Washington, is given a sort of ''Hill Street Blues'' spin.


Discovery West reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Discovery West
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,367,000
6,697,000
Net inc
1,287,000
1,238,000
Share earns
.07
.07
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Telling the Seder's Story In the Voice of a Woman
LEAD: Twenty-seven women gathered in a downtown loft this weekend for a seder.
They celebrated the deliverance of the Jews in Egypt from slavery more than 3,300 years ago, they prayed over the four cups of wine and the matzoh, they ate the ritual foods of bitter herbs and haroseth that symbolize suffering.


His Lucky Day
LEAD: JEFF DINUZZO was contemplating his pitching assignment against Connecticut last Monday as he parked his car on the Seton Hall campus in South Orange, N.J.
DiNuzzo opened the car door and spotted a penny on the ground.
The coin was lying heads up.


Newark Publishes Sex and Drug Arrests
LEAD: For the last two weeks, the hottest paper in this city has been an eight-page scandal sheet.
Copies have become so scarce that even members of the City Council, which publishes the tabloid-sized quarterly, The Council Monitor, have to scramble to find one.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When BARBARA J. SABOL is sworn in as New York City's Human Resources administrator on Thursday, she will take her oath on the Bible of Harriet Tubman.
Mrs.
Sabol, 51 years old, borrowed the Bible because Harriet Tubman is one of her childhood heroines.


Secom General reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Secom General
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,178,164
1,932,769
Net inc
200,199
120,362
6mo sales
4,232,544
3,749,841
Net inc
291,177
208,690
Share earns
.01
-


Integrated Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integrated Systems
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
4,464,000
2,905,000
Net inc
916,000
788,000
Share earns
.13
.12
Shares outst
6,937,000
6,739,000
Yr rev
12,633,000
7,921,000
Net inc
1,987,000
1,385,000
Share earns
.29
.21
Shares outst
6,808,000
6,725,000


Baseball Today!
LEAD: RESILIENT as ever, baseball opens its season today, proving it can overcome man-made disputes as well as natural disasters.


Airline Fares Are Defended
LEAD: United States air passengers are being offered more flights at lower fares than in the mid-1980's even though there are fewer airlines, a Transportation Department official said last week.


One Buck Finally Stops
LEAD: When John Poindexter told Congress ''the buck stops here with me'' in 1987, he rescued his President from investigators of the Iran-contra scandal.
His testimony that he kept Mr.
Reagan in the dark on key matters effectively froze the Congressional investigators in their tracks.
As a jury's verdict now makes clear, the former national security adviser was also defining his own criminal role.


Marketing Systems of AmerFica reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marketing Systems of AmerFica
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,855,000
4,477,000
Net inc
b1,422,000
c782,000
Share earns
.22
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $515,000, or 8 cents a share, from operating loss carryforward.


Roth's Publishers: The Spurned and the Spender
LEAD: A poster of a man's hand grasping the naked flank of a shapely woman currently adorns many book stores, and thereby hangs a contemporary publishing tale involving a bitter clash between two of the industry's lions.


Healed, Avid Graf Returning to Court
LEAD: This has been an interesting winter for Steffi Graf.


Money Isn't Everything in Greyhound Strike
LEAD: With almost daily episodes of sniper fire, windshield smashing or threats to the substitute drivers, the Greyhound strike is about as nasty as strikes get these days, and it does not seem that it should be.


Quality Book Publishing Shifts to Small Presses;   Why Errors Abound
LEAD: To the Editor:


N-W Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* N-W Group
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
31,369,000
4,840,000
Net inc
b137,000
1,658,000
Share earns
.02
.20
Yr rev
46,696,000
41,899,000
Net inc
b2,656,000
2,868,000
Share earns
.32
.34
b-Reflected gains from debt extinguishment of $1.62 million for the quarter and $2.141 million for the year.


No More Cold Golf Balls
LEAD: For golfers seeking a quick boost in performance, a company in Tarrytown, N.Y., suggests heating your golf balls before the round.


Exhausted Sailors Heading to Florida
LEAD: After a grueling seven-month trip, the first of 22 boats still competing in the Whitbread Round the World Race was expected here early Monday.


Emerson Greenaway; Librarian, 83
LEAD: Emerson Greenaway, who as director of the Philadelphia public library system from 1951 to 1969 supervised the construction of several branches and the introduction of bookmobiles, died yesterday after a brief illness at a nursing care center in New London, N.H., where he lived.
He was 83 years old.


Labor Overcame Differences To Hammer Out a UAL Bid
LEAD: The agreement announced on Friday to buy the UAL Corporation for $4.38 billion was born in a series of informal meetings three months ago between the leaders of the machinists' and pilots' unions at the company, which is the parent of United Airlines.


Review/Theater;   'Balcony': The Fantasy Within A Fantasy
LEAD: More than three decades after it was written, ''The Balcony'' no longer seems so outrageous.
In the interval, too much has happened in the world and in art.
But Jean Genet's play retains its diabolical originality, and if properly presented on stage, it should still have the power to disturb and even disorient an audience.


Vargas Llosa Leads, but Faces a Runoff
LEAD: The novelist Mario Vargas Llosa appeared to have finished in first place today in a presidential election clouded by terrorist threats and charges of vote fraud, unofficial projections indicated.
But a dark-horse challenger, Alberto Fujimori, cut deeply into support for the internationally known writer and appeared to have forced a runoff election between the two men.


Kyoto Journal;   As High Priests of Tea Meet, a Cool Breeze Builds
LEAD: Because it was such an outstanding cultural event, the 400th anniversary of the death of Sen no Rikyu, the greatest Grand Master in the history of tea, offered an unparalleled opportunity to conduct a truly perfect tea ceremony in his honor.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-9
Moscow will barter ships and vodka for Pepsi-Cola in a deal with Pepsico worth more than $3 billion.
The agreement is the largest between a U.S. corporation and the Soviet Union.
Page A1


Lisa Brauer Wed to Scott McLaughlin
LEAD: The marriage of Lisa Brauer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Earle W. Brauer of New York, to Francis Scott McLaughlin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. McLaughlin of Brigantine, N.J., took place yesterday at the Boston Harbor Hotel.
Betty Brown, the town clerk of Marblehead, Mass., officiated.


Coradian Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coradian Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
27,698,000
27,112,000
Net loss
1,435,000
745,000


A Stronger Outlook for Germany
LEAD: Surging demand from East Germany is giving West Germany's economy unexpected strength and is bolstering the Bonn Government's claim that the monetary union of the nations can be financed without raising taxes.


Texas Campaign Tests Limits of Politics
LEAD: Texas politics is often described as a contact sport, but even veterans of the game say they have never seen a campaign rougher than the race for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination between the Attorney General, Jim Mattox, and the Treasurer, Ann Richards.


S. Dana Snyder Weds James F. Grant
LEAD: S. Dana Snyder and James F. Grant were married yesterday in Sharon, Mass., at the home of the bride's sister and brother-in-law, Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce L. Katcher.
Ann Taubes Warner, a justice of the peace in Belmont, Mass., performed the ceremony.


Rethinking Foreign Aid
LEAD: It's time to rethink foreign aid.
America no longer needs to view countries through the distorting ice of the cold war.
Instead, it can shift emphasis and resources toward building a less fortified, more truly secure world.
Such a shift would also serve U.S. interests in a new era in which weapons count less than economic success.


7 Weeks Later, No Answers in Killing
LEAD: Seven weeks have passed since a Suffolk County narcotics detective was killed by a car bomb outside his home here.
There have been no arrests, and the police refuse to discuss details of the investigation.


Man Killed at $3-a-Head Party in Brooklyn
LEAD: A man was shot and killed and a woman was wounded in the leg shortly before 2 A.M. yesterday following an argument at a party in a Brooklyn basement apartment, the police said.


Carolco Pictures reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolco Pictures (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
54,523,000
54,941,000
Net inc
8,164,000
18,767,000
Share earns
.27
.63
Shares outst
30,290,363
29,843,033
Yr rev
143,145,000
164,609,000
Net inc
14,036,000
35,504,000
Share earns
.46
1.15
Shares outst
30,296,670
30,999,608


Mor-Flo Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mor-Flo Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
56,282,343
56,067,603
Net inc
b90,911
c2,979,272
Share earns
.03
1.18
Yr sale
212,663,968
218,043,155
Net loss
b8,968,434
c2,778,678
b-Included charges of $151,000 in the quarter and $4,135,000 in the year reflecting an increase in the provision for the infringement damage award against the company.


Wiener Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wiener Enterprises Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 27
1990
1989
Sales
21,679,000
20,473,000
Net loss
1,138,000
654,000
Yr sales
86,289,000
88,112,000
Net loss
1,500,000
b360,000
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net income


U.S. Is Urged to Keep Pressure on Japan
LEAD: Despite Japan's recent pledges to open its markets to more foreign products, leading business groups and influential lawmakers are warning the Bush Administration against letting up on the pressure they say is responsible for the positive results.


East Germany Agrees on New Coalition
LEAD: East Germany's new political leaders said today that they had agreed on the basic outlines of a coalition government and expected to have it ready by the next session of Parliament, on Thursday.


Casual Male Chapter 11
LEAD: The Casual Male Corporation said last week that it was filing a voluntary petition for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy laws.
The company cited increased competition and costs associated with an aggressive store expansion program in the men's wear retail market as the principal factors contributing to the company's cash shortage.


Scott Instruments reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott Instruments
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
533,366
376,912
Net loss
b624,803
b661,394
Shares outst
24,371,648
14,839,542
b-After extraordinary credits of $9,937 for the latest year and $74,211, or 1 cent a share, for 1988.


P.A.M. Transportation Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* P.A.M. Transportation Svcs
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,757,394
18,181,356
Net loss
1,834,940
920,102
Yr rev
70,122,136
75,795,519
Net loss
b6,843,689
859,624
b-Included $2 million loss on retirement of property and equipment.


LOBBYING STEPS UP ON MILITARY BUYING AS BUDGET SHRINKS
LEAD: Military contractors, threatened as never before by shrinking Pentagon budgets, are responding with aggressive lobbying to protect weapons programs worth hundreds of billions of dollars.


Bob and Ray's Courage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Capriati Earns Respect In Defeat
LEAD: Martina Navratilova used her racquet like a pointer and the tennis court like a blackboard this afternoon to deliver 14-year-old Jennifer Capriati a heady lesson in comeuppance in the final of the Family Circle Cup.


Deerfield Federal S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deerfield Federal S&amp;L
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
886,000
1,088,000
Share earns
.74
.92
6mo net inc
1,814,000
2,146,000
Share earns
1.52
1.81


Review/Music;   Moscow Philharmonic
LEAD: The Moscow Philharmonic was best known in the West between 1960 and 1975, when Kiril Kondrashin was its conductor and it toured with some regularity.
Dmitri Kitayenko became its music director in 1976, and the orchestra visited the United States with him in 1979.
Since then, until Friday evening's concert at Carnegie Hall, the orchestra had not been heard here.


Blues Defeat Leafs in Overtime
LEAD: Sergio Momesso's second goal of the game at 6 minutes 4 seconds of overtime tonight gave the St.
Louis Blues a 6-5 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs and a three-game lead in their Norris Division semifinal series.


Review/Dance;   Aftershocks of Vietnam
LEAD: A great gap can exist between artistic aspiration and achievement.
When Michiyo and Dancers presented ''The Elevator'' on Thursday night at the Dia Art Foundation on Mercer Street, that gap became a chasm.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Companies


The Editorial Notebook;   The Guns of Managua
LEAD: Nicaragua is locked in civil war.
Washington is deeply involved.
Rebels remain in the hills, refusing to disarm.
Power in Managua is fiercely contested, as is the wisdom of U.S. involvement.


Legislator Slain in Colombia
LEAD: A Colombian politician from a faction of the governing party that opposes negotiations with drug traffickers was shot to death today, the police reported.
Jose Humberto Hernandez Rodriguez, 45 years old, a Liberal Party alternate member of Parliament, was shot several times at point-blank range as he left a meeting in Bogota, a police spokesman said.


Rexworks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rexworks Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,867,000
9,836,000
Net loss
b1,733,000
c696,000
Yr sales
52,993,000
58,516,000
Net loss
b1,677,000
c251,000
b-Reflected tax credits of $1,017,000 for the quarter and $994,000 for the year.


Careplus Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Careplus Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,668,000
7,956,000
Net inc
777,000
b882,000
Share earns
.13
.17
Shares outst
6,145,000
5,033,000
Yr rev
35,672,000
29,582,000
Net inc
2,205,000
b2,126,000
Share earns
.40
.42
Shares outst
5,537,000
5,016,000


Guidance or Censorship? New Debate on Rating Films.
LEAD: The designation of two new films as X-rated has rekindled debate over the 21-year-old movie-classification system of the Motion Picture Association of America.


Coronet Carpets reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coronet Carpets
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
353,892,000
384,119,000
Net inc
910,000
b4,780,000
Share earns
.10
.51
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $1,813,000.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Stocks Rise 3.93% in Tokyo
LEAD: The primary index on the Tokyo Stock Exchange surged nearly 4 percent this afternoon, helped by the yen's rebound against the dollar.


Mets and Yankees Go Separate Ways
LEAD: The games begin today, and while the Yankees and the Mets insist they are ready, the only barometer will be the season itself.
But if yesterday stood for anything, it was this: the Mets seem set; the Yanks, who left the Florida sun on Friday, are as cold as an April day in New York.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''When he first came, a lot of people were really scared.
But Ryan helped all of us to understand.
He didn't want people to feel sorry for him.
He hated that.
He just wanted to be a regular kid.''
- Brad Letsinger, a high school friend of Ryan White. [D10:2.]


Pacers Bring End To Knicks' Streak
LEAD: The Knicks did everything right in the closing seconds today but lost the game on a couple of bounces of the ball.


Sodarcan Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sodarcan Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
33,298,000
29,736,000
Net inc
1,582,000
1,566,000
Share earns
.16
.17
Yr rev
124,680,000
119,941,000
Net inc
1,216,000
855,000
Share earns
.10
.08


Altex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altex Resources
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
936,000
719,000
Share earns
.07
.05
Yr rev
12,096,000
6,116,000
Net inc
3,731,000
1,311,000
Share earns
.27
.10
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Stephanie Magdziak Weds Ronald Berlin in Princeton
LEAD: Stephanie Jo Magdziak, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thaddeus J. Magdziak of Levittown, Pa., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Ronald Hugh Berlin, the son of Hilda Berlin of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Milton Berlin.
The Rev.
David McAlpin, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Prospect House on the Princeton University campus.


When School Offers Refuge To Homeless
LEAD: Jessica was homeless, but in some ways life was better for her than when she had a home, especially her life as a third grader.


Neilson May Try The Goalie Shuffle
LEAD: John Vanbiesbrouck, stuck at the end of the bench because he has been denied the privilege to start in goal, has watched Mike Richter take the stage and steal the thunder by winning the first two games against the Islanders.
Richter, the Ranger rookie who if he isn't yet a playoff phenom has certainly been fairly fabulous, has won a lot of hearts in the process.


Nancy Antell and Hayim Nitka Have Wedding


Higher Fares Increase Lines And Evaders
LEAD: The recent increase in New York City's subway and bus fare, which rose to $1.15 from $1 on Jan. 1, has resulted in longer lines at token booths, a rise in fare evasion and a decline in ridership that could eventually cost the Transit Authority millions of dollars.


Ports of Call Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ports of Call Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,500,000
62,700,000
Net loss
9,300,000
5,800,000


Page 1 News: A Color Picture
LEAD: The front page of yesterday's Washington Post included a four-color rendering of a painting of the Hubble Space Telescope.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Hard Questions on Arms
The Bush Administration's latest initative on strategic arms poses difficult military planning and spending questions for Moscow as well as Washington.
News analysis, Page A7.
Down and Dirty in Texas
Veterans of state politics say they have never seen a campaign rougher than the one for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination.


In Bulgaria, Hard Times Are Harder
LEAD: The economy of Bulgaria is in bad shape.


Faldo Wins Masters


47th Street Photo Official Plans Software Business
LEAD: Robert Orbach, director of business development for 47th Street Photo, is leaving to start a new business in the software industry.


Beeba's Creations reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beeba's Creations
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
40,243,000
30,601,054
Net inc
1,237,940
1,003,470
Share earns
.27
.22
6mo sales
67,818,276
53,805,137
Net inc
1,412,679
1,407,647
Share earns
.31
.31


Oilgear Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oilgear Co.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
61,774,290
61,263,607
Net inc
1,661,201
1,602,041
Share earns
1.83
1.83
Shares outst
906,506
876,848


Pepsi Will Be Bartered for Ships And Vodka in Deal With Soviets
LEAD: In the largest deal ever between an American corporation and the Soviet Union, Pepsico expects to sign an agreement today to barter Pepsi-Cola for ships and vodka.
The accord is valued at more than $3 billion.


Foreman of the Jury In Poindexter's Trial Discusses the Case
LEAD: The foreman of the jury that convicted John M. Poindexter on Saturday said today that ''there was simply an overwhelming set of facts in support of the prosecution's allegations.''


Unico Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unico Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,004,100
1,195,053
Net loss
26,198
298,329
Shares outst
5,077,036
4,601,630
Yr rev
7,428,123
4,848,024
Net inc
101,559
b207,704
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
5,077,036
4,601,630


Shriver Leaves 2 Spots As NBC News Anchor
LEAD: NBC News announced yesterday that Maria Shriver has given up her assignments as a co-anchor of ''Sunday Today'' and anchor of the Saturday edition of NBC ''Nightly News,'' effective immediately.
Ms.
Shriver, who recently returned to the programs after a four-month maternity leave, is to serve as the anchor of an occasional series of prime-time news specials, said Michael G.


Outdoors: Tackle For High Rollers
LEAD: SOME people pursue fine and venerable fishing tackle and associated equipage as avidly as a dedicated angler goes after trout or striped bass, and one of the events that gives collectors a good idea of the going price for such items is the annual R. W. Oliver Gallery's High Roller's auction.


Lebanese Christians Ravaged, Now by Lebanese Christians
LEAD: The Christians of Lebanon, once the country's unchallenged and affluent rulers, are now a minority bleeding to death under civil war.
Since the end of January, fighting for control of the country's 300-square-mile Christian enclave has killed more than 900 people, wounded 3,000 and forced about 300,000 to flee abroad.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: TOMMY LEE, a drummer for the heavy metal group Motley Crue, was hospitalized with a mild concussion suffered when he fell during a concert on Saturday at the New Haven Coliseum, The Associated Press reported.


The Media Business;   Grey Advertising's Parts Add Up to Big Sums
LEAD: For years, the word on Madison Avenue was that Grey Advertising was a little like its name: a dull agency that created nondescript advertising.
But these days, Grey is anything but drab.


Halton Reinsurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Halton Reinsurance
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
249,397
204,111
Share earns
.04
.03
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Dinkins Acts to Protect City's Upstate Water Supply System
LEAD: New York City is taking measures to protect its upstate water supply system, which has given the city what Mayor David N. Dinkins describes as ''the champagne of municipal waters.''


Trico Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trico Products
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
59,895,000
68,225,000
Net inc
2,448,000
bc5,792,000
Share earns
1.33
-
Yr sales
240,704,000
232,729,000
Net inc
110,000
c5,638,000
Share earns
.06
3.05


Cupertino National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cupertino National Bancorp
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
280,000
247,000
Per share
.27
.46
Shares outst
1,035,400
540,100
Per share earnings and shares oustanding are adjusted to reflect a 5 percent dividend payable on May 3, 1990.


Sports of The Times;   Splash! The 7-Iron That Got Away
LEAD: FOR the rest of his life, whenever Raymond Floyd thinks about the Masters, he'll see the 7-iron that got away.


Proffitt's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Proffitt's Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 3
1990
1989
Sales
34,743,932
29,675,447
Net inc
1,026,748
1,260,217
Share earns
.27
.33
Yr sales
94,818,351
77,688,977
Net inc
820,255
1,937,001
Share earns
.22
.51


Man Charged in Gang Rape Of a Mute Brooklyn Woman
LEAD: A 28-year-old mute, retarded woman who wandered from her group home in Brooklyn early yesterday morning was raped in a school yard by three men, one of whom was caught and arrested, the police said.


Spate of New Offerings Undercuts Bond Prices
LEAD: Credit market analysts say a heavy schedule of new Treasury borrowings over the next month is likely to offset any positive effect of a slowing of economic growth and inflation.


President Not Meddling In Cuomo Election Fight
LEAD: While Republicans in Washington relish Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's problems in balancing the state budget and acknowledge that he may be a Presidential contender in two years, they are not helping to select an opponent to run against him this year.


Scholars Acclaim de Gaulle as a Man of Vision
LEAD: Although he was a thorn in the side of successive American Presidents, General Charles de Gaulle was portrayed this past weekend as a visionary statesman who restored France's faith in itself and peered beyond the cold war to foresee the collapse of the Soviet domain.


Senator Defends Help For Lincoln
LEAD: The chairman of the Senate Banking Committee yesterday defended his intervention with Federal regulators in 1987 on behalf of a Phoenix developer, Charles H. Keating Jr., saying that Mr.
Keating was a business constituent in Michigan, his home state.
The chairman, Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., said he had received no indication that Mr.


Canadian Foremost reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Foremost
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,834,000
27,236,000
Net loss
2,375,000
120,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


U.S. Wins In Soccer
LEAD: Eric Wynalda scored two first-half goals today as the United States beat Iceland, 4-1, in a tuneup for the country's first World Cup appearance in 40 years.


Review/Music;   Orpheus Chamber Orchestra
LEAD: The highlight of the concert by the chamber orchestra Orpheus at Carnegie Hall on Saturday evening came early, with a rousing performance of the Overture to Rossini's ''Italiana in Algeri.'' For a group (41 players on this occasion) premised on the challenge of playing conductorless, technical hurdles must prove a constant seduction, and Orpheus sometimes runs the risk of simply pushing speed to the limit as a substitute for meaningful interpretation.


Farm Aid Raises $1.3 Million
LEAD: The fourth Farm Aid concert, intended to help American family farmers, raised at least $1.3 million, a spokeswoman said today.
The 14-hour concert, held Saturday in the Hoosier Dome, attracted about 45,000 people.
A final figure on donations for the event will be released Monday, a spokeswoman said.


Designatronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Designatronics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
8,949,000
6,338,000
Net inc
193,000
115,000
Share earns
.07
.04
6mo sales
16,047,000
12,260,000
Net inc
322,000
176,000
Share earns
.11
.06


Business Scene;   Low U.S. Profits For Foreigners
LEAD: FEW issues raise more of a fuss these days than foreign ownership of American businesses.
European and Japanese companies are elbowing their way into manufacturing, retailing and other fields, and they are capturing profits that otherwise would have made Americans wealthy.
Or so goes one popular theme in the debate.


Albany Leaders Say a Budget Accord Is Near
LEAD: After a two-hour meeting in the Capitol tonight, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and leaders of the state Legislature described themselves as on the way toward reaching final agreement on the state's budget, now eight days overdue, but they declined to release any details.


Royal Gold Enterp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Gold Enterp
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,200,000
2,900,000
Net loss
388,000
159,000
The company said the 1989 first quarter included a $138,000 loss from discontinued operations.
Results are in Canadian funds.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Stock Exchange, New York, appointed Christopher Finn executive vice president, responsible for marketing, research, communications and government relations.
Philip Steele was named senior vice president, responsible for strategic planning and special projects.


Mastercard's Shift From Glamour
LEAD: Something risky is happening at Mastercard.
After years of me-too marketing that emulated Visa and American Express, the credit card is now pitching itself to Middle America and away from the affluent professionals depicted in the advertising of its rivals.


Awaiting His Fate, His World Closes In
LEAD: On a rooftop overlooking the tenements of East Harlem, Kenneth Mendoza kicked at a blood-stained syringe yesterday, one of dozens that lay everywhere.
For years, the 19-year-old said, he had used the roof to practice karate.
But he stopped coming when the heroin and crack users moved in.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Link Sought in North Sea Ferry Fires
LEAD: Opening an arson investigation into the ferry fire on Saturday that killed as many as 135 people, the Norwegian police said today that they were checking for links between the predawn blaze and earlier North Sea ferry fires, at least one of which was deliberately set.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
None
Thursday
Retail Sales ... March
Friday
Inventory and Sales ... Feb.
Producer Prices ... March


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of April 8:
MONDAY
Carolina Fght Corp
Phillips Pete Co
PS Group Inc
TUESDAY
Diversified Ener Minn
Hillenbrand Inds
ITT Corp
WEDNESDAY
Burlington Res Inc
Shelby Williams Inds Inc
Super Valu Stores Inc
Walgreen Co
Woolworth Corp


Winston Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winston Resources (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,485,797
5,081,886
Net loss
21,267
204,746
Shares outst
2,973,766
3,000,000
Yr rev
21,889,934
20,986,821
Net loss
74,326
b127,386
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
2,993,085
3,000,000


Right-Wing Christian Party Takes Clear Lead in Hungarian Voting
LEAD: The Hungarian Democratic Forum, a conservative party, emerged today with a decisive lead in the final round of elections for Hungary's Parliament, guaranteeing it the dominant role in the country's first freely elected government in more than four decades.


'Cosby Show' Buys Producer Big-League Field of Dreams
LEAD: SOME American boys fulfill their dreams and make it to the major leagues by learning how to hit.
Tom Werner is getting there because he knows how to make hits -on television.


CBS Is Said to Get 10 Films To Show Before Cable TV
LEAD: Universal Pictures has agreed to license 10 films that were released in 1989 to CBS for about $55 million, industry executives said.


Medicaid Gives Excellent Treatment to New York State's Poor;   Mental Health Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of Passover, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City tomorrow and Wednesday.
Other regulations will remain in effect.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation, which has come under criticism for discrimination against its Hispanic employees, will bestow its first Medal of Valor on a Hispanic agent.
The F.B.I.
Director WILLIAM S. SESSIONS will present the award tomorrow to special agent EDMUNDO MIRELES for his ''heroic actions'' in what the bureau called one of the most violent gun battles in its history.


Classified Documents Not Left in Vietnam
LEAD: To the Editor:


Visx Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Visx Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
960,000
-
Net loss
505,321
329,534
Shares outst
3,373,594
1,831,996
Yr rev
1,028,000
-
Net loss
1,645,344
513,024
Shares outst
2,553,421
1,831,996
The company, which was incorporated in 1987 and began operating as a functional entity in spring 1988, said it had no fourth quarter and yearly revenues for 1988.


Showing Italian Flights Of More Than Fancy
LEAD: Ever since Leonardo da Vinci's first drawings of a flying machine, Italy has made significant contributions to aerospace design and technology.
The history of Italian aviation is the subject of an exhibition at the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum through April 30.


Gooden's Return Perks Mets
LEAD: The baseball season, one week late because of the labor lockout of the spring training camps, will open with flourishes this afternoon in Shea Stadium with Itzhak Perlman rendering the national anthem on his renowned violin, Commissioner Fay Vincent throwing out the first ball and the Mets and Pittsburgh


Bridge
LEAD: Two teams of New York City experts battled in the district final of the Grand National Teams at the Cavendish Club in Manhattan yesterday, breathing hard after surviving close semifinal struggles Saturday night.
After 16 deals Debbie Zuckerberg of Flushing, Queens, and her team led by 5 imps against Saul Bronstein of


A Tale of Two Priorities
LEAD: All right, George Bush fans, let's reconcile the following two news items:


Lakers Rally to Beat Nuggets, 116-109
LEAD: A. C. Green had 26 points and 18 rebounds and Magic Johnson scored 5 of his 19 points in a 19-3 fourth-period run that gave the Los Angeles Lakers a 116-109 victory over the Denver Nuggets tonight.


Despite Heat Rally, Nets Win, 102-101
LEAD: The Nets and the Miami Heat entered tonight's game with the two worst records in the National Basketball Association.
And for much of the game, they played like it.


Devils Find Series Offensive
LEAD: The Devils and the Capitals are concerned because each team has given up a total of 10 goals in the first two games of their Patrick Division playoff series.


B&amp;H Maritime Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* B&amp;H Maritime Carriers (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,568,000
-
Net inc
1,380,000
-
Share earns
.46
-
11mo rev
17,896,000
-
Net inc
3,763,000
-
Share earns
1.34
-
The company began operations on Feb.


France is New Front in Battle Over Tobacco Ads
LEAD: With the anti-smoking movement gathering momentum throughout the European Community, cigarette manufacturers, ad agencies and some of the French media have quickly mobilized to fight a Government plan to ban all tobacco advertising by 1993.


W. Harold Flowers, 78, Arkansas Rights Figure
LEAD: The Rev.
W.
Harold Flowers, a patriarch of the civil rights movement in Arkansas and its oldest practicing black lawyer, died Saturday at a hospital here.
He was 78 years old and had been suffering from cancer.


Jo Shifrin, a Hospital Administrator,Is Married to Jethro K. Lieberman
LEAD: Jo Shifrin and Jethro K. Lieberman were married yesterday aboard the yacht Cabaret at Pier 62 in Manhattan by Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman.


Rio Alto Exploration reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rio Alto Exploration
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,194,183
1,227,119
Net loss
289,652
b1,096,059
b-After an extraordinary loss of $775,000.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Metro Matters;   For Friedman, Koch Becomes An Unlikely Ally
LEAD: Stanley M. Friedman, barred forever from politics by a Federal judge, is quietly waging the most important campaign of his life.


Adage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adage Inc.
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b878,000
c1,455,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
9,012,982
8,600,068
9mo net loss
b3,407,000
d6,374,000
Share earns
-
.74
Shares outst
8,957,000
8,619,268


In the West, High Noon for Lakers
LEAD: WHEN the Los Angeles Lakers open the morning paper and look at the National Basketball Association standing, it motivates them.


NEPAL'S KING LIFTS BAN ON POLITICKING
LEAD: Bowing to unrelenting pressure from a pro-democracy movement, King Birendra of Nepal announced tonight that he was lifting a 29-year ban on political activity, opening the possibility of multiparty rule in this Himalayan land.


Quality Book Publishing Shifts to Small Presses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Palm Sunday Brings Spirit of Unity to Washington Square Park


CRIMES OF VIOLENCE ARE UP 5% IN U.S.
LEAD: Violent crime in the United States rose 5 percent last year, while serious property crimes like theft and burglary rose only 2 percent, according to figures released today by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


A Huge Bomb Kills Four British Soldiers in Ulster
LEAD: Four soldiers were killed in Northern Ireland today in a bomb attack on a two-vehicle British Army patrol about 30 miles south of Belfast, the police said.


Power Surge Snarls Trains On L.I.R.R.
LEAD: A power surge knocked out crucial signals and switches on two miles of bottleneck track in Queens yesterday and threw the Long Island Rail Road into turmoil on the first night of Passover, one of the busiest days of the year on the nation's largest commuter line.


Cellular Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cellular Products (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
412,366
472,120
Net loss
252,592
597,065
9mo rev
1,891,574
2,055,953
Net loss
563,953
971,774


Dow Rises 4.95 in 2d-Slowest Day of Year
LEAD: Stocks rose slightly yesterday, and trading slowed to its second-lowest level of the year.


Cellular Information Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cellular Information Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,816,933
700,910
Net loss
6,788,760
1,681,397
Yr rev
7,698,460
1,454,904
Net loss
17,885,886
4,421,393


KREMLIN HESITATES AS DEADLINE FALLS FOR ECONOMIC PLAN
LEAD: On the day he was to submit a package of ''radical'' economic proposals to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of the program was still talking today of ''drafts'' and ''possible alternatives,'' not a clear plan of attack against what he acknowledged is a severe crisis.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in SportsMonday this week about television coverage of this baseball season misstated the availability of Sunday night Met and Yankee games on ESPN for viewers in the New York area.
They will be available, not blacked out.


Pamrapo Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pamrapo Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
592,000
700,000
Year net inc
2,437,000
2,645,000
The per share earnings are not presented because of the limited period of post-conversion operations.
Pamrapo shares began trading Nov.


New Iran-Contra Prosecution Is Being Considered
LEAD: Prosecutors in the Iran-contra affair are assessing leads from the trials of John M. Poindexter and Oliver L. North to decide whether they should try to find out if other officials of the Reagan Administration concealed their knowledge of the affair from Congress.


Upheaval in the East;   Victor in Hungary Sees '45 as the Best of Times
LEAD: Jozsef Antall, the next Prime Minister of Hungary, said today that the results from Sunday's elections show that a majority of the country's people are now ready for a center-right coalition, bonded together by anti-Communism and a shared faith in Hungarian and Christian values.


I.B.M. Said to Aid Project On Computers and Writing
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation is reported to be a major supporter of the Go Corporation, a new company in Foster City, Calif, that is working on a portable computer that recognizes handwriting.


Leary's Varied Path Leads to Big Opening
LEAD: There have been so many stops along the way that Tim Leary doesn't seem to mind them anymore.
In a career that is now in its sixth season, he has spent time in New York, Milwaukee, Los Angeles, Cincinnati and New York again, his life looking more like a traveling show than like the life of, say, an insurance salesman.


Pacific Inland Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Inland Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b958,368
4,510
Year net loss
487,505
1,176,385
b-Included $205,900 reversal of tax benefit from operating loss carryforward.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: In the heady upper reaches of Government, attention must be paid to the most sensitive diplomatic issues, like who throws out the first ball at a baseball game between American and Canadian teams.
The problem has been resolved for PRESIDENT BUSH, a former Yale first baseman who is now the First Southpaw, as the Toronto Blue Jays and the Texas Rangers play their American League opener in


9 Fewer Rigs Working
LEAD: The number of working American oil and natural gas rigs declined last week by 9, to a total of 937, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
The rig count showed a modest decrease after posting a gain of 53 rigs the previous week.
A year ago, 778 rigs were working.
Baker Hughes's rig count, the industry index of drilling activity, reflects the number of rigs actively exploring for oil and gas as of last Friday, not the number of producing wells.


Masters Provides A Cruel Reminder
LEAD: Like Greg Norman's misfortune at the hands of Larry Mize and his wedge in 1987 or Scott Hoch's tragic miss from 2 feet in 1989, Ray Floyd's stomach-wrenching loss at the 54th Masters was the latest proof that golf is the cruelest of games.


Roadway Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roadway Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 24
1990
1989
Revenue
640,249,000
563,220,000
Net inc
16,501,000
15,749,000
Share earns
.42
.40
Shares outst
39,160,000
39,173,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: In 1968 CAROLYN COCHRAN CLARK graduated from the Harvard Law School, 15 years after the first woman was admitted.
In 1977 she became the first woman to become a partner at the prestigious Manhattan law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.
Last Saturday she added another first, as she became the first woman elected to the 104-year-old Harvard Law School Association, an alumni group, in Cambridge,


Bailout Cost Rise Is Seen
LEAD: The Bush Administration conceded today that the bailout of the savings and loan industry would cost taxpayers more than previously estimated.


Softech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Softech Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 23
1990
1989
Revenue
10,165,000
13,358,000
Net inc
25,000
379,000
Share earns
.01
.10
9mo rev
31,652,000
35,300,000
Net inc
651,000
1,214,000
Share earns
.18
.33


Bridge
LEAD: The final of the district Grand National Team Championship, played on Sunday at the Cavendish Club in Manhattan, proved less exciting than the semifinals.
The team headed by Debbie Zuckerberg of Flushing, Queens, which had survived a playoff to win on Saturday night, led throughout and won by 101 imps against a squad led by Saul Bronstein of Manhattan.


Space Shuttle Is Ready For Liftoff
LEAD: The space shuttle Discovery underwent final preparations today and was declared ready for its scheduled launching Tuesday morning to haul the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope into orbit.


Ancient Japanese Classic Suddenly Turns Sexy
LEAD: For more than 1,200 years, the anthology of poems known as the ''Collection of 10,000 Leaves'' has been studied and revered by Japanese as a storehouse of their nation's soul.


Our Towns;   Allies of Nature Fight for Rabbits Amid the Refuse
LEAD: As Louis Cardenas walked toward the creek, all around him high marshy foxtail grass swayed in the breeze and he could see the late afternoon sun peeking through.
Sunday was one of the first fine days of spring.
Mr.
Cardenas reached the creek and whispered, ''Look, sofas.''


Gorbachev's Line on Lithuania Grows Stricter but Less Specific
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his new presidential council decided today to take unspecified ''additional economic, political and other measures'' against Lithuania after rejecting the rebel republic's latest attempt to explain its declaration of independence.


Pondering Transition At Backer
LEAD: DEAN SCAROS was asked about a recent article in Advertising Age about the future of agencies whose influential leaders face retirement. ''That's one of the reasons I wanted to speak with you,'' said Mr.
Scaros, the president of Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc.


Norton Hurt In Crash Against Endboards
LEAD: For the Islanders, the scene was familiar and frightening: one of their players flat on his back, medical personnel dashing onto the ice, players on the bench standing in concern.


Treasury Prices Dip in Slow Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped in lethargic trading yesterday, as credit market participants chose to ignore potentially favorable developments in other markets.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The sun was shining. The grass was green. The sky was blue.''
- Mayor David N. Dinkins, after attending the Mets' season opener.
[B9:2.]


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.18
9.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.80
7.77
8.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.80
7.75
8.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.63
8.60
9.28
30-YR.


Wendell G. Earle, Marketing Professor, 66
LEAD: Wendell G. Earle, professor emeritus of marketing at Cornell University, died of cancer Tuesday at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 66 years old and lived in Ithaca.


A Swift and Hard Fall for Brazil
LEAD: Three weeks after Brazil's new President ordered a radical program to contain rampant inflation, a recession is surging through Latin America's largest economy.


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Virginia Banks (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
16,029,000
16,581,000
Per share
.75
.79


New Plastic in Heinz Bottles To Make Recycling Easier
LEAD: Responding to consumer pressure for more environmentally friendly packaging, the H. J. Heinz Company said yesterday that it would replace its plastic ketchup bottle with another type of plastic that it said was much more likely to be recycled.


Grease Monkey Holding reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grease Monkey Holding
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,759,984
-
Net loss
222,990
-
The company said comparable results were not available; the company recently changed its year-end to Dec. 31 from Nov. 30.


State May Prosecute
LEAD: An Alabama state prosecutor said yesterday that a grand jury in Montgomery, Ala., has issued subpoenas in its investigation of a report that a relative of the Alabama linebacker Keith McCants may have received money from the agent Lance Luchnick.


Designing an SST: Noise, Sonic Booms and the Ozone Layer
LEAD: AS the United States quietly pursues a new effort to develop a plane to carry passengers over long distances at twice the speed of sound or faster, it is focusing unusual attention on environmental problems that could ground the plane before it takes off.


2 Rival Computer Groups Break Off Talks on Merger
LEAD: Two rival computer-industry groups trying to set software standards said today that they had broken off merger talks.


Greyhound Sues Union, Pointing to Violence
LEAD: Greyhound Lines filed a $30 million civil lawsuit today against union officers representing striking drivers, alleging that violence in the five-week-old strike was an attempt to ''disrupt interstate travel by criminal means.''


Hillcrest Resources reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hillcrest Resources
Year to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,295,000
2,460,000
Net loss
95,430
b595,491
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
6,500,000
5,800,000
b-Net income
The company said the 1989 loss results from a $235,000 writedown of a long-term investment while 1988 earnings included a one-time gain on the redemption of minority interest of $400,000.


New Evidence for Climate Shifts
LEAD: EXAMINATION of a core drilling extracted from the bottom of the North Atlantic has provided strong evidence that during the last ice age, and perhaps during all of them, there were drastic shifts of climate at intervals of about 1,000 years.


N.Y.C., True to Form
LEAD: Last year, I fulfilled a long-standing dream by quitting a job at The New York Times to take a position at half the pay as a caseworker with New York City's Child Welfare Administration.
I had a calling; it was that simple.
I wanted to help.


The Questions of Summer
LEAD: Baseball arrived yesterday, bringing joy after all.
For a moment there, during the 32-day lockout, it was touch and go whether the public would summon any real enthusiasm for the well-paid players and their well-fed bosses.
But it took only one pitch at Shea - Gooden to Backman, a fastball down the middle - to settle the issue.


MCI to Acquire Telecom USA
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation, the nation's second-largest provider of long-distance telephone services, announced a $1.25 billion agreement yesterday to buy Telecom USA Inc., the No. 4 company.


Iraq, in Retaliation, Ousts an American Envoy
LEAD: Iraq announced today that it was expelling an American diplomat in retaliation for the United States' expulsion last week of a United Nations-based Iraqi diplomat linked to a plot to kill opponents of President Saddam Hussein's Government.


Weak Effort to Aid Yen;   The Group of Seven Shows Less Urgency When the Dollar Is Not Directly Involved
LEAD: The United States and its allies in the Group of Seven industrial nations are making only a modest defense of the weakened Japanese yen, and this means the effort may have little impact.


Dream, Yes, but Restore Rights
LEAD: Just as President Bush was telling a Washington audience that he dreamed of the day when a black would occupy the White House, his Attorney General and press spokesman were threatening a veto of a civil rights bill now ready for Senate action.
These late and lame threats are what passes for civil rights policy in the Bush Administration.


Jones Intercable Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jones Intercable Investors (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,225,534
7,124,562
Net loss
3,157,113
2,817,820
Yr rev
31,563,027
27,017,265
Net loss
12,309,343
11,513,314
Jones Intercable Inc. is general partner of Jones Intercable Investors L.P.


First Federal Savings of P.R.  reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings of P.R.
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,620,000
3,306,000
Share earns
.50
.66
Latest quarter included results of First Florida Savings Bank, acquired in April 1989, and First Truck Lease Corp., acquired in July 1989.


PATTERNS
LEAD:
'Nothing Revolutionary'


Turner Deal With Tribune
LEAD: The Tribune Broadcasting Company will discontinue its nightly ''USA Tonight'' newscasts and use Cable News Network at six of its televison stations under an agreement announced today with Turner Broadcasting System Inc.


Whalers Top Bruins
LEAD: Dave Babych scored the tie-breaking goal 36 seconds into the third period and Pat Verbeek had two goals tonight as the Hartford Whalers beat Boston, 5-3, in Game 3 of their Adams Division semifinal series.


Kleinert's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kleinert's Inc.
Qtr to Mar 3
1990
1989
Revenue
5,971,000
6,788,000
Net inc
44,000
b100,000
Share earns
.03
.07
Shares outst
1,466,000
1,489,000
b-Included an extraordinary gain from net operating loss carryforward of $33,000, or 2 cents a share.


U.S. Weighs Trust Action
LEAD: The Justice Department is weighing antitrust action against the American subsidiaries of foreign companies engaged in bid-rigging and other activities that hurt American exporters, James F. Rill, an Assistant Attorney General, said today.


Standard Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Microsystems (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
21,138,000
17,817,000
Net inc
1,404,000
94,000
Share earns
.12
.01
Yr rev
77,201,000
71,631,000
Net inc
4,674,000
b5,925,000
Share earns
.41
-


Silicon Valley Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon Valley Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,298,000
1,505,000
Per share
.80
.56


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abbott Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,438,440,000
1,295,526,000
Net inc
224,950,000
197,965,000
Share earns
1.02
.88
Shares outst
220,323,000
224,501,000


Kelly Fights Charges
LEAD: The lawyer for the Buffalo Bills quarterback, Jim Kelly, said yesterday that Kelly has no intention of offering a settlement to a woman in Buffalo who claims he threw a beer balloon that injurerd her mouth and is asking for $200,000 in damages.


Revenge or Reconciliation?
LEAD: ''If there is a general amnesty and it brings democracy and peace to our country,'' Albie Sachs said, ''I would be thrilled.
Even if the amnesty extends to the people who tried to kill me.''


Chairman Sees Gains for G.M.
LEAD: The head of the General Motors Corporation said today that dramatic technological improvements would enable the auto maker to increase its United States and European market share despite intense Japanese competition.


Global Resources reports earnings for Year to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Global Resources
Year to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
485,200
367,500
Net inc
14,700
b37,713
b-Net loss


Further Staff Cuts At Home Builder
LEAD: The General Development Corporation further trimmed its work force as the troubled real estate company considered expanding its Federal bankruptcy filing to include its subsidiaries.
The company, which pleaded guilty last month to a scheme to sell overpriced homes, laid off 239 construction workers at some of its nine Florida communities.


Tee-Comm Electronics reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tee-Comm Electronics
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
39,909,779
42,741,154
Net loss
b2,812,743
b2,900,120
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $2,663,391 for the latest year and $2,441,861 for 1988.
The losses from discontinued operations resulted from the decision to close its satellite equipment manufacturing plant and tool and die operations in Canada and a move to sell Tee-Comm products through exclusive distribution rather than company-owned distribution in the U.S.


Networked Picture Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Networked Picture Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
752,700
363,500
Net loss
631,700
333,100
Shares outst
6,549,356
4,766,025
Yr sales
1,754,800
646,900
Net loss
1,823,900
1,669,900
Shares outst
6,015,621
4,447,640


Upheaval in the East;   East Germans Form 'Grand Coalition'
LEAD: East Germany's new political leaders reached agreement today on a ''grand coalition'' government whose major task will be to lead the nation to union with West Germany.


Honesty's Small Victory In Councils of Beijing
LEAD: To the Editor:


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
AMRE Inc., Dallas, said a management group that owned about 56 percent of its shares had decided not to proceed with a $8.75-a-share bid for the remainder.
The group said it was in AMRE's best interest to remain publicly held.


Hipotronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hipotronics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Mar 3
1990
1989
Sales
5,501,175
6,055,809
Net inc
619,304
678,495
Share earns
.30
.33


Accounts
LEAD: *
Puerto Vallarta Tourism Board, to Grey Advertising, for the United States and Canada, with a budget of $6 million.


Time Warner Will Help Pathe-MGM/UA Deal
LEAD: Time Warner Inc., evidently eager to insure it has a substantial library of films, announced yesterday that it has an important role in the negotiations for the sale of the MGM/UA Communications Company to the Pathe Communications Corporation.


Islanders Come From 3-1 Down To Defeat Rangers in Overtime
LEAD: Brent Sutter scored his second power play goal of the game after 59 seconds of the second overtime to give the Islanders a 4-3 victory over the Rangers tonight in a Stanley Cup playoff game that lasted for more than four hours and included an impressive home-team comeback, occasional brawling in the stands and another serious injury to an


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Colt Industries, New York, a diversified manufacturing company, named Robert M. Snow president of its Chandler Evans Control Systems division.
He replaces Karl F. Storrie, who remains a group president.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Corrections
LEAD: An article on April 2 about local controversies in Middletown, Conn., misstated the enrollment of Wesleyan University.
There are 2,700 undergraduates and 150 graduate students.


Industrial Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Industrial Acoustics
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,822,000
30,622,000
Net inc
1,159,000
1,352,000
Share earns
.40
.47
Yr sales
94,648,000
87,808,000
Net inc
3,315,000
3,389,000
Share earns
1.14
1.17


Delay Seen In Publicizing Spinal Drug
LEAD: A public interest health group criticized the Government today for not sending detailed information about a promising new treatment for spinal cord injury to emergency rooms and trauma centers.


Review/Theater;   The Personal Side of Life in Harlem
LEAD: Street people, some distraught, others with dreams intact, populate Gus Edwards's ''Lifetimes,'' a gentle anthology of monologues about life today in Harlem.
The view is personal rather than political.
The wistfulness of Mr.
Edwards's play (presented by the Negro Ensemble Company at Theater Four) is represented by a married woman named Mavis who returns to Harlem to look for the sanctuary of a distantly remembered beauty salon and stays to drift into a love affair that becomes increasingly less casual.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
NATIONAL LEAGUE - Named Mike Winters umpire.
CINCINNATI (NL) - Named Dan Wright assistant trainer.
YANKEES (AL) - Agreed to terms with Don Mattingly, first baseman, on a five-year contract extension through 1995.
OAKLAND (AL) - Placed Jim Corsi and Reggie Harris, pitchers, on the 21-day disabled list.


The Human Side of Harlem Troupe's Crisis
LEAD: Cheers and whistles filled City Center as the curtain fell after a recent performance by Dance Theater of Harlem for the city's public-school pupils.
The children at City Center's Young People's Dance Series roared with laughter at the wry guide to the history and technique of ballet provided by Eddie J.


Jazz Festival Concentrates On Playing, Not Singing
LEAD: The lineup for the JVC Jazz Festival, which is to be held from June 22 through July 1, was announced yesterday by the impresario George Wein for Festival Productions.
This is the 35th year that the festival has been held; in 1972 it moved from Newport, R.I., to Manhattan, where it has been held ever since.


Chicago Journal;   Memories Of a Park To Outlive Its Bricks
LEAD: From her seat in Section 131, not far from the White Sox dugout, Billie Burke scanned Comiskey Park today, and slowly counted out the memories. ''That's where my husband and I sat in 1945, on our honeymoon,'' she said, gesturing toward the lower deck, closer to home plate. ''It was a doubleheader with the Yankees.


U.S. Bishops Are Highly Critical Of Vatican Proposal on Teaching
LEAD: A committee of Roman Catholic bishops in the United States has issued a report highly critical of a text proposed by the Vatican as a guide for church teaching worldwide.


Thespian Doings In Style
LEAD: It was a nice surprise: a benefit party at Bloomingdale's that was relaxed and drew lots of people but wasn't uncomfortably crowded.


Soviet Union Hires Bechtel
LEAD: The Soviet Union has hired Bechtel Group Inc. to help convert a Government research center near Moscow into a Silicon Valley-style center for commercializing technologies.


Of Size, Power and Longevity: New Solutions for Laptops
LEAD: WHEN it comes to portable computers, some people are willing to sacrifice power to get the smallest size possible, while others are willing to sacrifice smallness to get the most power possible.
Many people would prefer not to sacrifice anything, however, and so several computer makers have developed battery-powered portables that use the Intel 386SX microprocessor.


New Europe: The Armies;   As Germany Reunites, East and West Seek A System for Future Security on Continent
LEAD: If current thinking prevails, a year from now a NATO country might be paying Soviet troops to stay on its soil alongside American forces.


Panama Journal;   Trafficking in People: Was It One More Racket?
LEAD: No sooner do the doors of Panama's Department of Immigration and Naturalization open for business than the waiting room fills to overflowing with dozens of anxious Chinese, accompanied by lawyers or interpreters and talking nervously among themselves in Mandarin, Cantonese or Hakka.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: New York University's fund-raising alumnus par excellence is LAURENCE A. TISCH, class of '42, who, when not occupied as chairman of N.Y.U.'s board, is the chief executive and largest stockholder of CBS Inc.


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Bancorp of Alaska
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,273,000
4,695,000
Per share
.79
.59
Per share earnings reflected 33 1/3 percent stock dividend payable May 4.


Pinnacle Banc Group reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pinnacle Banc Group
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,668,000
2,286,000
Per share
.71
.67
The per share earnings reflected 5-for-4 stock split effective Jan. 31, 1990.


Corrections
LEAD: A drawing with the Home Improvement column in The Home Section on Thursday, about repairs to a pressurized toilet flush valve, omitted the adjusting screw mentioned in the caption.
As described in the text, the screw is on the pipe that joins the valve body to the water supply plumbing.


Fans' Lungs Outlast Mets' Arms
LEAD: Spring training continues at regular-season prices.
The way it looks right now, the Mets' fans are working themselves into midseason form a lot faster than some of the players.


Herman Jessor, 95, New York Architect For Co-op Buildings
LEAD: Herman J. Jessor, an architect who helped build more than 40,000 units of cooperative housing in New York City, died Sunday at the Jacob Perlow Hospice of Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 95 years old and lived in Manhattan.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
In asbestos-related suits against Owens-Illinois, insurance companies are liable for $960 million in damage and injury claims, a New Jersey superior court has ruled. [Page D1.]
MCI Communications has agreed to buy Telecom USA in a deal worth $1.25 billion.
The deal is the latest and largest in a series of acquisitions by MCI.


Canyon Resources Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canyon Resources Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,770,100
2,858,600
Net loss
3,001,400
371,162


No Headline
LEAD: Hundreds of thousands of Nepalese, their faces smeared with vermilion powder, waved the red flags of the Nepalese Congress Party and the Communist Party today as they flooded the streets of this city and others in an explosion of joy at the end of a nearly three-decade ban on political activity.


Lazare Kaplan International reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lazare Kaplan International (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
27,897,000
15,942,000
Net inc
b1,005,000
c151,000
Share earns
.32
.05
9mo sales
75,410,000
52,533,000
Net inc
b2,916,000
c491,000
Share earns
.93
.16


Myers Opposes Needle Projects To Curb AIDS
LEAD: New York City's new Health Commissioner said yesterday that he opposes many of the strategies proposed to curb AIDS infection among drug addicts.


Charter Power Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter Power Systems Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
39,516,000
39,395,000
Net inc
327,000
b2,786,000
Share earns
.23
-
Shares outst
5,705,000
5,645,000
Yr sales
158,418,000
150,523,000
Net inc
3,752,000
b3,528,000
Share earns
.66
-
Shares outst
5,682,000
5,494,000


Washington at Work;   To Stay Ahead of History, How Fast Must Jackson Run? And for What?
LEAD: The walls of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's office testify to a career on the cutting edge of history and to a man who sees that as his proper place.


Why This Year Fashion's Thinking Green
LEAD: To the Editor:


Industrial Nations to Create Bank to Aid Eastern Europe
LEAD: After four months of hard bargaining, the United States, Japan and the European Community reached broad agreement here today on the creation of a regional development bank to help Eastern Europe's new democracies make the transition to market-oriented economies.


Goldfarb Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldfarb Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,684,000
17,692,000
Net inc
2,111,000
2,162,000
Share earns
.76
.78
Latest year included the operating results and financing costs associated with the equity investment in Speedy Muffler King Inc., undertaken in September.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-9


Upheaval in the East;   Leaders of 3 East Europe Nations Seek to Improve Ties With West
LEAD: Leaders of Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary met here today with other European officials to discuss how best to integrate the three formerly Communist countries into the rest of Europe.


Vikings Drop Kramer
LEAD: Tommy Kramer, ranked either first or second in every major passing category for the Minnesota Vikings, was released by the team at his request yesterday.
Kramer said General Manager Mike Lynn told him that he probably would be no better than the team's third-string quarterback next season.
Kramer said in a statement that he hoped to sign with another team.


United Vermont Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Vermont Bancorp
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
923,962
924,026
Per share
.48
.50
The per share earnings reflected 5-for-3 stock split effected in the form of a dividend on April 4, 1989.


Kirschner Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kirschner Medical Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,852,000
12,668,000
Net loss
b14,843,000
c408,000
Share earns
-
.17
Shares outst
2,463,000
2,406,000
Yr rev
55,204,000
36,508,000
Net loss
b14,177,000
c1,521,000
Share earns
-
.65
Shares outst
2,443,000
2,340,000


Immigration Raids on Bodegas Hit a Nerve in Washington Heights
LEAD: Federal immigration raids on small groceries and other businesses in the predominatly Hispanic Washington Heights section of Manhattan are seizing large sums of cash and illegal weapons and causing widespread concern among shopkeepers and customers.


Mets Open With a Big Thud, Losing by 12-3
LEAD: The baseball season finally opened yesterday, one week late because of the 32-day labor lockout of spring training, and the Mets opened it with glitter and glitz before a sellout crowd of 47,919 fans in Shea Stadium.
But, except for Itzhak Perlman, who rendered the national anthem on his renowned violin, there was very little virtuoso playing in the ball park on this shining


Drexel's 'Junk Bond' Files Are Purchased by Salomon
LEAD: Salomon Brothers Inc. said yesterday that it had bought the exclusive rights to important information on thousands of ''junk bonds'' underwritten by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., enabling Salomon to expand its own junk bond operations.


Suffolk Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suffolk Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,409,000
1,362,000
Per share
.43
.41


Exercise and Cancer
LEAD: Energetic rats appear to be more resistant to cancer-causing agents than sedentary rats, preliminary laboratory studies show.


Dr. Howard D. Abramowitz, 59; Fought Army's Discharge Policy
LEAD: Dr.
Howard D. Abramowitz, a sociology professor who in the 1950's sued to overturn an Army policy of giving draftees less than honorable discharges because of their political activities before induction, died of lung cancer yesterday at his home in Pittsfield, Mass.
He was 59 years old.


Passport Travel reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Passport Travel
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
11,000,000
9,318,000
Net loss
36,246
74,890
Shares outst
897,006
991,739


Greek Right Gains One-Seat Majority
LEAD: The leader of the New Democracy party, which emerged victorious from the Greek election, won the backing of an independent rightist today to secure narrow parliamentary support for the country's first conservative government in nine years.


First National Bancorp (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Bancorp (Ga.)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
5,744,000
5,224,000
Per share
.64
.58


Saks Grows by a Third on 5th
LEAD: At 10 o'clock yesterday morning, shoppers at Saks Fifth Avenue suddenly had 110,000 more square feet to browse through.
The store opened five floors of its new tower, which is east of the main store, between 49th and 50th Streets.


Royce Labs reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royce Labs
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,285,125
1,065,473
Net loss
1,703,095
1,525,007


Schulman (A.) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schulman (A.) Inc.(O)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
159,713,000
159,815,000
Net inc
7,975,000
7,191,000
Share earns
.60
.54
6mo rev
324,369,000
320,701,000
Net inc
15,540,000
13,966,000
Share earns
1.16
1.04


Scorned Thalidomide Raises New Hopes
LEAD: THALIDOMIDE, the notorious tranquilizer that was pulled from the market when women who took it gave birth to severely deformed infants, is finding new life.
Researchers have discovered that it is a spectacularly effective agent for combatting rejection of foreign tissue and for alleviating the symptoms of several diseases in which the immune system turns against the body.


Pepsico Signs Soviet Deal
LEAD: Pepsico Inc. signed a $3 billion agreement yesterday, as scheduled, with the Soviet Union to barter Pepsi-Cola for ships and vodka.


Bonuses Slide at Ford; Those at G.M. Just Slip
LEAD: The country's two largest auto companies released their annual proxy statements today and both showed declines in executive bonuses for 1989, although at markedly different levels.


Judge Narrows Verdict In Jersey Family Murder
LEAD: The judge presiding over the murder trial of John E. List will not allow the jury to consider manslaughter when it begins deliberating the fate of the 64-year-old defendant, who has admitted killing his wife, mother and three children in their Westfield house in 1971.


Market Place;   London Is Trying To Keep Its Lead
LEAD: THESE are nervous times for the London International Stock Exchange.
The exchange's computerized trading system is one of the most advanced in the world.
But officials there are deeply worried about competition from other markets in Europe and about investors' ability to bypass the exchange and trade among themselves -and their tendency to do so because of the exchange's cumbersome and costly settlement operation.


Budgeting What You Already Have
LEAD: TEN or so years ago, the most powerful personal computers had 64 kilobytes of memory, the equivalent of 64,000 characters.
Not all of that was available for the user's words and numbers, though; most of the instructions for manipulating those words and numbers had to be stored in the same space.
Still, the memory seemed ample.


Savings Chief Is Sworn In
LEAD: T. Timothy Ryan Jr. was sworn in today as director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, formally ending a period of legal uncertainty that had threatened to halt the Government's huge bailout program for savings and loan associations.


Haruoki Inoue, Garden Designer, 61
LEAD: Haruoki Inoue, a designer and builder of Japanese gardens on scores of estates in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, died of pancreatic cancer on Sunday at his home in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
He was 61 years old.


Albany Budget Talks Stall Over Environmental Bond Issue
LEAD: Negotiations over the largest environmental bond act in the state's history have hit new obstacles, officials here said today.
They cited disagreements over how the money would be spent and an insistence by some lawmakers on a veto power over specific land purchases.


Glendale Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glendale Bancorp
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
322,000
286,000
Share earns
.17
.14


John Henry Faulk, 76, Dies; Humorist Who Challenged Blacklist
LEAD: John Henry Faulk, a Southern humorist and raconteur whose successful libel suit against Aware Inc. in 1962 broke the stranglehold of McCarthy-era blacklisters on the entertainment industry, died of cancer yesterday at his home in Austin, Tex.
He was 76 years old.


As Gridlock Mounts, Region Buys More Cars
LEAD: The number of motor vehicles registered in the New York metropolitan region has risen more than 25 percent since 1980, planners say, and some suburbs will soon approach the unenviable position of having as many vehicles as people.


1989 Claims Set a Record
LEAD: Natural and man-made disasters made 1989 a ''year of catastrophes'' for insurers, forcing them to pay record claims, according to a study published last week.


Associated Communications reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Communications (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,675,000
16,141,000
Net loss
8,206,000
7,915,000


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Jones &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
427,063,000
406,760,000
Net inc
24,866,000
b200,003,000
Share earns
.25
1.99
Shares outst
100,808,000
100,757,000
b-Included an after-tax gain of $164.1 million, or $1.63 a share, from the sale of an investment in a cable- system operator.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Greek Right Gains Majority
An independent threw his support to the conservative New Democrats, giving them a narrow majority in the 300-seat Greek Parliament.
Page A3.
Hungary's Emerging Profile
Hungary's next Prime Minister said the results of Sunday's elections reflected the country's anti-Communist, Christian values.


Taylor Devices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Taylor Devices Inc.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
1,179,765
1,213,441
Net inc
63,966
39,801
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
2,488,491
2,356,243
9mo sales
3,631,400
3,780,770
Net inc
251,026
48,354
Share earns
.10
.02
Shares outst
2,488,491
2,356,243


Amnesty at the Point of a Gun Isn't Genuine
LEAD: To the Editor:


Learjet Sale At $75 Million
LEAD: Integrated Resources Inc. said yesterday that it would sell its Learjet Corporation unit to a new subsidiary of Bombardier Inc. of Canada for $75 million.


NEC Application For Sale to China
LEAD: The NEC Corporation said it would apply to Cocom for permission to export a work station to China as part of a contract to develop software there.
The Paris-based Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls oversees exports of high technology from the West and Japan to Communist nations.


Melcor Developments reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Melcor Developments
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
85,659,000
66,709,000
Net inc
9,238,000
2,396,000
Share earns
2.93
.81
Results are in Canadian funds.


Provident Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,847,000
4,513,000
Per share
.62
.58


Star Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Star Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,893,000
9,750,000
Net loss
2,234,000
4,523,000
Shares outst
16,581,000
15,993,000
9mo rev
25,913,000
28,533,000
Net loss
3,463,000
4,458,000
Shares outst
16,343,000
15,936,000


Granada Biosciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Granada Biosciences Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,224,000
1,876,000
Net loss
4,878,000
20,048,000
Yr rev
14,303,000
7,769,000
Net loss
16,077,000
41,218,000
The company said the decling net loss was due to a $16 million reduction in provisions for amortization and impairment expense of its purebred cattle herd and a $2.9 million combined reduction in selling and administrative costs and research and development costs.


AIDS Volunteers Deserve Praise Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advanced Medical Technoloies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Medical Technoloies (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
3,865,605
2,068,090
Shares outst
10,619,795
2,625,874
Yr net loss
11,534,105
6,449,843
Shares outst
8,717,572
2,615,004
The company said it became operational in March 1989 when it acquired Fidata Corp.


Business and Health;   Cutbacks Sought In Retiree Benefits
LEAD: AS Eastern Airlines tries to trim health-care benefits promised over the years to thousands of retired workers, its moves are being watched closely by benefits executives, labor union officials and bankruptcy lawyers.


Careers;   Managing A Diverse Work Force
LEAD: SENSITIVITY training for managers has been around for years, but it has recently evolved into something more timely - training in the management of a diverse work force.


Drug for Shock From Infection Advances
LEAD: A new treatment can significantly reduce the death rate of patients who go into shock from bacterial infections, potentially saving tens of thousands of lives each year, a research report to be released this week shows.


BayBanks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BayBanks Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net loss
13,750,000
b20,828,000
Per share
-
1.30
Shares outst
15,812,000
15,980,000
b-Net income


For a Space Visionary, Persistence Nears Payoff
LEAD: At 75, Dr.
Lyman Spitzer Jr., professor emeritus of astrophysics at Princeton University, has a string of scientific accomplishments behind him.
He had a leading role in the development of sonar in World War II and of in early concepts for controlled fusion energy.


Cuomo Participates in Racial Harmony Day in Brooklyn


Dow Jones Net Tumbled By 87.6% in First Quarter
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company, the publisher of The Wall Street Journal, said yesterday that losses from forming a currency trading service and profit declines at its community newspapers group sharply reduced first-quarter earnings.


Ford to Switch British Investment
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would switch an investment of $:225 million, or $369 million, planned for British plants to West Germany, partly because of unreliable supplies from the British factories.
The American car giant's British unit said it had made the decision to move the investment from factories in South Wales to Ford's Cologne plant after evaluating the company's manufacturing plans in


Not Just the Inner City: Well-to-Do Join Gangs
LEAD: In suburban Hawthorne, social workers tell of the police officers who responded to a report of gang violence, only to let the instigators drive away in expensive cars, thinking they were a group of teen-agers on their way to the beach.


Hiding in Uniform; Homosexuals in the Military;   For Gay Soldiers and Sailors, Lives of Secrecy and Despair
LEAD: Barred from military service by Defense Department regulations and threatened with investigation, interrogation and discharge, gay men and lesbians in the Armed Forces lead desperate, furtive lives reminiscent of those led by homosexuals throughout the country a generation ago.


Report on OPEC Production Sends Oil Prices Skidding
LEAD: Crude oil prices plunged yesterday, largely on a report that OPEC's production had soared to its highest level since 1981.
Global demand for oil has also been declining because of the uncommonly mild winter in the Northern Hemisphere as well as softening in the economies of industrial countries.


County Bank reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* County Bank (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b11,686,000
3,233,000
b-After an extraordinary credit from repurchase of notes of $1,798,000.


By Design;   The Look of Leggings
LEAD: Watch out below!
At last week's shows of the American fall collections, the leg looks were riveting, both on and off the runway.
Sometimes it seemed as if every other model had her legs encased in opaque leggings.


The Daily News Terminates Contracts With 10 Unions
LEAD: The Daily News, paving the way to put more pressure on its 10 unions, told them yesterday that it was terminating contracts that expired March 30.


Morton Sunshine, 74; Directed Variety Clubs
LEAD: Morton Sunshine, the former executive director of Variety Clubs International and a show-business impresario, died of cancer yesterday at the Hospice of Palm Beach County in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 74 years old.


Four in Mississippi Join A Switch to the G.O.P.
LEAD: Four Democratic state legislators announced today that they were switching to the Republican Party, earning them praise from President Bush.


RCA Sentences On U.S. Papers
LEAD: Two RCA Corporation employees who pleaded guilty to obtaining and transporting classified Pentagon budget documents were sentenced on Friday to two years' imprisonment, with all but a few months suspended.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Kartzmann Gains, Beating Cash
Ninth-seeded Mark Kartzmann of Australia survived a tie breaker in the second set to defeat Pat Cash, also of Australia, 6-4, 6-7, 6-4, in the first round of the Japan Open in Tokyo yesterday.
Amos Mansdorf of Israel, seeded 10th, and Milan Srejber of Czechoslovakia, 13th, also advanced to the second round.


H.W. Kaufman Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* H.W. Kaufman Financial
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,400,000
15,500,000
Net inc
1,000,000
1,200,000
Share earns
.54
.66


Officials Say Deaths In Danish Ferry Fire Could Rise Past 176
LEAD: The bodies of victims of the North Sea ferry fire began arriving here today for identification as the Norwegian police said the death toll could rise to more than 176.


Light in El Salvador
LEAD: Peace talks are an old, sad story in El Salvador.
But there's a new ingredient in the forthcoming round between the Salvadoran Government and its guerrilla adversaries.
The talks will be mediated directly by the shrewd, careful United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar.
He is not addicted to lost causes.


James G. E. Smith, 63, Social Anthropologist
LEAD: Dr.
James G. E. Smith, a social anthropologist and curator at the Museum of the American Indian-Heye Foundation, died of brain cancer on April 2 at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 63 years old and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


Taiwan Concern Plans To Acquire Huffington
LEAD: The national oil and gas company of Taiwan agreed today to acquire the Huffington Corporation in Houston, including a stake in large energy fields in Indonesia.


Review/Music;   A Protege Conducts Messiaen in Brooklyn
LEAD: In his handful of performances in New York, the conductor Kent Nagano has left the impression that he is happiest and most inventive in 20th-century music.
He fortified that impression in a performance with the Brooklyn Philharmonic on Saturday evening at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Included on the program was a recent work by Olivier Messiaen, a Stravinsky classic and a Chopin concerto.


Upheaval in the East;   Muslim Area of China Is Reported in Ferment
LEAD: Ethnic disturbances have taken place recently in Muslim areas on China's far western frontier, a Western diplomat said today.


JB's Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 12
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JB's Restaurants (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 12
1990
1989
Revenue
24,536,000
23,992,000
Net inc
284,000
162,000
Share earns
.06
.03
6mo rev
48,728,000
47,355,000
Net inc
524,000
397,000
Share earns
.10
.08


Chip Index Shows Gains
LEAD: The semiconductor industry's leading indicator showed continued strength in March, as United States semiconductor orders and shipments increased, a trade group reported today.


On Horse Racing;   Risky Idolatry at Aqu: SA and GP and Etc.
LEAD: Three days ago at Aqueduct, New Yorkers bet nearly half a million dollars on a colt named Burnt Hills, who finished third as the 8-5 favorite in the $306,000 Gotham Stakes.
It was money sacrificed in the worship of a false idol.


Ford Recalling Aerostar Vans
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it was recalling about 101,000 Aerostar vans of the 1986 model year to install new seals between fuel tanks and the fuel tank filler pipes.
A Ford official said fuel might seep between the seal and the fuel tank when the tank was full or nearly full, creating a risk of fire.


Gambro and F.T.C.
LEAD: The medical supply company Gambro A.B. of Sweden said the United States Federal Trade Commission had asked for more information about to its $37-a-share bid for Cobe Laboratories Inc., a medical specialty company in Lakewood, Colo.
The company said that it might have to extend the tender, which is scheduled to expire on April 18.


Wonder Of Metness: Day at Shea
LEAD: Finally, it was time for what Robert Derbabian calls ''the wonder of Metness.''


Books of The Times;   A Triple-A Hero: Ambitious, Arrogant and Awful
LEAD:
Titmuss Regained
By John Mortimer
281 pages. Viking. $19.95.


New York State Accuses 14 Lawyers of Income Tax Evasion
LEAD: Baring its teeth in a continuing campaign to improve tax compliance by lawyers, the state announced today that it has charged 14 of them with failing to file personal income tax returns.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about a conference on Charles de Gaulle referred incorrectly in some copies to the date of his return to power, to the conference organizers and to the meeting site.
De Gaulle returned in 1958, not 1957.
Besides Columbia and New York Universities, the organizers included Harvard; the sessions were at Columbia and N.Y.U., not the United Nations.


In Alchemists' Notes, Clues to Modern Chemistry
LEAD: AN alchemist's illustration published more than four centuries ago shows a gray wolf devouring a king and then mounting a flaming pyre that consumes the wolf and restores the king to life.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Orange Juice


Review/Cabaret;   Dixie Carter As a Madcap Miss Scarlett
LEAD: When Dixie Carter made her New York cabaret debut five years ago at Freddy's Supper Club, which has closed, she immediately established herself as one of the most vivid and endearing performers in a field already crowded with idiosyncratic personalities.
The character she brought to the stage was an original for New York: a proper


Reporter's Notebook; Upheaval in the East;   From a Harvest of Grief, Georgia Culls Its Pride
LEAD: The Georgian way of grief has always included wine and tears.


CBS Television Cancels 'The Pat Sajak Show'
LEAD: CBS canceled ''The Pat Sajak Show'' yesterday and announced a plan to replace the late-night talk show temporarily with action-adventure movies.
Rod Perth, the CBS vice president for late-night programming, said the network was developing original programming for introduction in the fall.


Devils Take 2-1 Lead in Playoffs
LEAD: The Devils took the lead tonight in their playoff series against the Washington Capitals with a 2-1 victory that employed effective team defense, the part of the game that brought them success in the last month of the regular season.


Planters Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Planters Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,715,000
2,672,000
Per share
.39
.38


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of Easter music in Weekend on Friday misstated the program and time for an event tomorrow at Corpus Christi Church, 529 West 121st Street.
The program, at 8 P.M., consists of a traditional service with Gregorian chants, psalms and lessons.


OBSCURE ENGINEER NOW THE FAVORITE TO LEAD PERUVIANS
LEAD: Alberto Fujimori, an once little-known obscure agricultural engineer who campaigned in traditional Japanese robes, displaced the novelist Mario Vargas Llosa today as the favorite to become Peru's next President.


The Red Grime Line
LEAD: Along with the other problems of uniting Germany, there are mountains of garbage.
Literally, garbage.
During those years behind the wall, East Germany indulged in a sneaky form of cooperation with West Berlin: waste disposal.


Leniency Due as 5 Whites Plead Guilty in Racial Attack in Queens
LEAD: Five white men pleaded guilty yesterday to assault or riot charges stemming from what the authorities said was a racial attack on a group of black people last July 4 in Rosedale, Queens.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of Passover, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations will remain in effect.


Consolidated Papers reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Papers (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
240,387,000
242,439,000
Net inc
40,331,000
43,410,000
Share earns
.92
1.00


CHRONICLE
LEAD: On his 64th birthday yesterday, HUGH HEFNER, founder of Playboy magazine and guru of the sexual revolution, became a father as his 27-year-old wife, KIMBERLY CONRAD, gave birth to a boy.
MARSTON GLENN HEFNER, 8 pounds, 13 ounces, was born at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, said a Playboy spokesman, Bill


Mercantile Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
17,279,000
15,995,000
Per share
.62
.58


Advanced Micro Expects Flat Sales
LEAD: Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said it expects to report first-quarter revenues below expectations.
The company said its sales would be flat compared with both the previous quarter and the comparable quarter last year, when it had revenues of $269.6 million.
Advanced Micro said, however, that it expected higher earnings because of an extraordinary gain realized from a sale, leaseback and technology transfer transaction with the Sony Corporation.


Compudyne reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compudyne (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,508,000
13,056,000
Net loss
b2,471,000
c3,933,000
Yr sales
47,792,000
41,730,000
Net loss
b4,984,000
c14,616,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $877,000 for the quarter and $1,150,000 for the year.


Southern Union Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Union Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
59,802,000
54,861,000
Net inc
3,950,000
b10,519,000
Share earns
.33
-
Shares outst
10,155,357
10,123,301
Yr rev
197,460,000
191,428,000
Net inc
851,000
b10,064,000
Shares outst
10,145,814
10,123,377


Church Burns as Renovation Nears End
LEAD: A few hours after workers put the finishing touches on a new roof for the Church of the Holy Apostles yesterday, it caught fire, heavily damaging the Chelsea landmark and destroying several irreplaceable stained-glass windows, fire and church officials said.


Outlay Rise Abroad Seen
LEAD: United States companies plan to increase their overseas capital spending by 13 percent this year, up substantially from a 2 percent increase projected six months ago, the Government said last week.
The Commerce Department said a survey in December showed that foreign affiliates of United States companies planned to spend $54.9 billion, after increases of 14 percent in 1989 and 24 percent in 1988.


Chess
LEAD: The greatest players in the tradition of what might be termed the Belligerent Defense have always had the sort of defiance expressed by Samuel Reshevsky's laconic, ''What's he got?''


Assad Tells Visiting Senators He Wants Better U.S. Ties
LEAD: President Hafez al-Assad of Syria told a visiting delegation from the United States Senate today that his nation wants better relations with the United States and a peaceful and just settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.


Sarah Vaughan Is Eulogized in Church Where She Sang as a Child
LEAD: Family members, musicians, friends and more than 1,000 admirers gathered today at Mount Zion Baptist Church here to bid farewell to Sarah Vaughan, the hometown girl who became one of the country's most beloved singers.
Miss Vaughan, who died of lung cancer at the age of 66 on April 3 at her California home, had asked that her funeral be held at the church where she sang in the choir when she was 11 years old.


Male Violence the Real Cause of Bronx Fire
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tandem Acquires A Software Maker
LEAD: Tandem Computers Inc. acquired the Array Technology Corporation, a private company in Boulder, Colo., for an undisclosed amount.
Array produces software and hardware for memory systems using a computer storage technology called redundant arrays of inexpensive disks, or RAID.


Frederick's of Hollywood reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frederick's of Hollywood (AMEX)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
28,629,000
23,297,000
Net inc
2,038,000
1,509,000
Share earns
.54
.41
6mo sales
50,276,000
40,714,000
Net inc
2,445,000
1,659,000
Share earns
.65
.45


Acquisition Of B.A.T. Is Set Back
LEAD: California insurance regulators today delivered a severe setback to Sir James Goldsmith's $21 billion bid to acquire B.A.T.
Industries by denying the proposed sale of Farmers Group Inc., the insurance subsidiary of B.A.T.


Male Violence the Real Cause of Bronx Fire;   Check Liquor Licenses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Puns, Tales and Lunacy In Oxford Humor Book
LEAD: ''I feel like a mastodon who has had a calf after 17 years, and now feels very empty and a little sad and unlikely to have another quite yet.''


Bid to Prosecute Rushdie Is Rejected
LEAD: England's High Court today rejected a Muslim group's request to prosecute Salman Rushdie and the publishers of his novel ''The Satanic Verses'' on charges of blasphemy and seditious libel.


A Hit Songwriter Is About to Become A Cabaret Performer
LEAD: When Sheldon Harnick opens this evening at Rainbow and Stars, performing a four-decade retrospective of his songs, the veteran lyricist who has not had a new show on Broadway in 14 years will offer samplings from three recent works that have yet to find their way to the New York stage.


Bush Picking the Kind of Judges Reagan Favored
LEAD: Faced with the opportunity to name dozens of Federal judges, President Bush is quietly but steadily continuing to fill the nation's courts with judges expected to construe laws narrowly, side more frequently with the police and defer to Congress, according to a wide range of monitoring groups and Bush


2 Killed by Train on Bridge
LEAD: Two fishermen caught on a railroad bridge by an oncoming freight train were struck and killed Sunday when they tried to outrun it, officials said.
The men were struck 60 feet from the east end of the trestle, said Vicki DeGeus, chief deputy coroner of Canyon County.


Sallie Mae Prices Floating Notes
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, priced $500 million in short-term floating-rate notes yesterday through a regular selling group led by the Government-sponsored private corporation.


Pentagon Investment Made in Chip Company
LEAD: The Defense Department, through its advanced research arm, has for the first time made what is essentially a venture capital investment in a young Silicon Valley company.


New Phillips Fuel
LEAD: The Phillips Petroleum Company has joined a growing number of oil companies introducing a reformulated gasoline intended to be less harmful to the environment than existing grades.
Phillips's reformulated fuel, blended to reduce certain hydrocarbon emissions, will be tested in St.
Louis, one of more than 100 cities that fall below the Environmental Protection Agency's minimum standards for air quality, the company said.


Sutton Top Candidate At Oklahoma State
LEAD: Eddie Sutton, who resigned the Kentucky head-coaching post under pressure a year ago, appears to be heading home, to Oklahoma State where he played and started coaching.
The regents governing the school scheduled a special meeting for tomorrow to hear the president of the school, John Campbell, make a recommendation for a new coach.


Sterivet Laboratories reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterivet Laboratories
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,563,000
3,131,000
Net loss
830,000
1,343,000
Results are in Canadian funds.





Prime Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Bancshares Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
493,000
302,000
Per share
.29
b
Shares outst
1,713,658
b
b-There are no historical per share earnings or shares outstanding for periods prior to the bank's conversion from a mutual to a stock-owned corporation on July 26, 1989.


15 Nations Seek Policy
LEAD: A group of 15 developing nations wants to set a common policy on world debt and trade that could serve as the basis for talks with industrialized countries, Malaysia's Foreign Minister said today.
The group consists of Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, Senegal, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zimbabwe.


Benefit for Renovation At Theater for New City
LEAD: Theater for the New City, an experimental theater company founded in 1971, will hold a benefit on April 18 at 7 P.M. to raise money to renovate its new $1.75 million performing-arts complex at First Avenue and 10th Street.
The center, in the former First Avenue Retail Market building, will include four theaters ranging from 65 to 250 seats, an exhibition space, and a restaurant and cabaret.


Shareholders Propose Plan For Eastern
LEAD: The preferred shareholders of Eastern Airlines submitted a reorganization plan to the bankruptcy court yesterday aimed at keeping the airline flying and averting a liquidation.


RTI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RTI Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
905,000
673,000
Net inc
89,000
b222,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
6,599,519
6,598,719
b-Net loss


Insurers Liable on Asbestos
LEAD: Insurance companies are liable for $960 million in damage and injury claims against Owens-Illinois Inc. arising from the use of its products containing asbestos, a New Jersey superior court has ruled.


Allstate Sues to Block New Jersey Law
LEAD: The Allstate Insurance Companies asked a Federal District Court today to stop Gov.
Jim Florio from trying to punish the insurer for its opposition to New Jersey's new automobile insurance law, which would charge the insurance industry more than $1.3 billion.


Santa Monica Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Monica Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,013,363
3,113,170
Per share
.51
.53


Amserv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amserv Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,940,035
3,036,443
Net inc
394,825
326,571
Share earns
.13
.11
Shares outst
3,115,134
2,938,671
9mo sales
10,100,719
7,028,046
Net inc
1,095,989
821,477
Share earns
.35
.29
Shares outst
3,114,415
2,863,155


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audiovox Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
68,232,000
62,965,000
Net inc
85,000
b1,429,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Computer Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Data Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
30,842,500
29,079,700
Net inc
842,600
94,200
Share earns
.29
.03
Shares outst
2,857,000
2,882,000
9mo rev
92,980,900
74,365,500
Net inc
2,562,200
210,300
Share earns
.89
.07
Shares outst
2,866,000
2,882,000


Keating Links Regulators To Savings Industry Woes
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr. testified today that the savings and loan crisis and the collapse of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, which he had headed, resulted from a regulatory system that failed to anticipate the effects of deregulation in the early 1980's.


Rocky Start for Gooden With Signs for Hope
LEAD: When the 1990 baseball season started yesterday, it was, in terms of the calendar, a week late because of the owners' lockout of the players.
For the Mets' Dwight Gooden, the season started perhaps a week too soon in terms of preparedness.


Consensus for Fall: Short Is Classy
LEAD: In the end, it turned out not to be the kind of season that will unhinge cartoonists, editorial writers, taxi drivers and other astute observers of the fashion scene.
It will, in fact, be reassuring to the women who wear the clothes.
Reassuring, that is, if they can accept the basic concept of fall dressing: the exposed knee.


Soviet Oil Strike Delayed
LEAD: Workers in the Soviet Union's largest oil field have postponed until late April a planned strike over living conditions and improvements to the industry, a trade union leader said today.
The leader, Nikolai Trifonov, who represents 700,000 oil workers in Tyumen, western Siberia, said his union had decided not to begin the strike on Sunday although they had not yet received a government response to their demands.


Funnel, Don't Flood, Aid to Panama and Nicaragua
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Ripping Little Yarn
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Friday about Browning-Ferris Industries' discontinuation of a hazardous-waste operation misidentified the company that pleaded guilty to violation of Ohio's environmental laws.
It was a subsidiary, Cecos Internation= al, not Browning-Ferris itself.


Doubts Arise on a Test To Detect Cancer Signs
LEAD: Four years ago, a test that seemed to detect all forms of cancer from tiny blood samples appeared destined to revolutionize the way doctors screen people for the disease.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article on March 27 described a conflict among homosexuals over the practice of unmasking prominent people who are said to be secretly gay.
The article included comments from Nan Hunter, director of the Lesbian and Gay Rights Project of the American Civil Liberties Union.
It then quoted the A.C.L.U.


Pick-6 Winner Sets Record
LEAD: One bettor cashed the largest Pick-Six payoff in New York racing history yesterday when he was rewarded with $767,998 for selecting the winners of the third through eighth races at Aqueduct Race Track.


EXXON IS DENYING GUILT IN OIL SPILL
LEAD: Exxon and its shipping subsidiary pleaded not guilty in Federal District Court today to criminal charges stemming from the nation's worst oil spill.


BSD Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSD Medical
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
467,299
1,491,882
Net loss
213,827
b18,778
Shares outst
9,853,778
8,341 463
6mo sales
1,072,252
2,740,073
Net loss
360,262
379,653
Shares outst
9,853,778
8,347,620


CVB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CVB Financial Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,130,000
1,556,000
Per share
.34
.26
Shares outst
6,256,933
5,984,615
The year-ago per share earnings and shares outstanding were adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split in November 1989.


Red Sox Start Off Right By Defeating Tigers, 5-2
LEAD: The new season looked just like the old one at Fenway Park: Wade Boggs got three hits, Roger Clemens won and the Detroit Tigers lost.


Stake Technology reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stake Technology
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
959,000
302,000
Net loss
b1,172,000
b1,906,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $417,000 for the latest year and $807,000 for 1988.
Results are in Canandian funds.


Lincoln Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,619,540
1,405,162
Per share
.43
.37
Shares outst
3,801,074
3,757,929


Premier Bancorp (La.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Bancorp (La.) (O)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,066,000
b7,346,000
Per share
.04
-
b-Net loss


Mega Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mega Group
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
249,824
b8,965
b-Net income
Share earnings not available; company changed from a fiscal year to a calendar year reporting schedule.


Stereotypes Of the Sexes Persisting In Therapy
LEAD: PSYCHOTHERAPY and psychiatric diagnosis are still often used to enforce conventional standards of masculinity and femininity and sometimes to brand as mentally ill people who depart from the norm, several new studies show.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
Economic and Social Council


Belgians and Arabs Hold Talks in Beirut On Deal for Captives
LEAD: The radical Palestinian group led by Abu Nidal began talks today with an official Belgian delegation on exchanging a Palestinian jailed in Brussels for four Belgians held by the group since 1987.


One Player Doesn't Make a Team
LEAD: Michael Jordan scores 69 points against the Cleveland Cavaliers and his coach, Phil Jackson, said he would have preferred that Chicago's offense was more diverse and not so dependent on one player.
Jackson is not alone in his thinking, as many coaches in the National Basketball Association are learning just how much difference one player can make between winning and losing.


3d Hispanic Network Seeks Viewers
LEAD: The competition is heating up in the Hispanic television market.
Galavision, the newest entrant, is threatening to steal viewers and advertising from Univision and Telemundo, the two struggling Spanish-language television networks.


The Dollar Is Mostly Lower While Gold Prices Retreat
LEAD: The dollar ended modestly lower yesterday against all major currencies except the Japanese yen and British pound, after a wave of selling by several central banks overseas to help prop up the yen.


BancTexas Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancTexas Group Inc. (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
49,190,000
29,543,000
The amounts included the operating results of all of the company's subsidiaries, including BancTexas Dallas N.A., for the entire year.


Cutting Blood Pressure Reduces Heart Risk
LEAD: FOR the first time, researchers have found evidence that reducing blood pressure reduces the risk of heart disease.


Medicore Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medicore Inc. (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
28,018,074
21,164,475
Net loss
552,565
650,100


ACC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ACC Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,613,109
10,892,150
Net inc
465,332
273,612
Share earns
.14
.08
Shares outst
3,426,297
3,255,457
The company said year-ago revenues included revenues of $1,878,253 from discontinued operation.


Leslie Combs, Horse Owner, Is Dead at 88
LEAD: Leslie Combs 2d, the founder of Spendthrift Farm and a leading owner and breeder of thoroughbred horses, died of cancer Saturday at the University of Kentucky Medical Center in Lexington, Ky.
He was 88 years old.


Bad Day for Gooden and Big Day for Mattingly


George Strawbridge, 80, a Leader Of Philadelphia Stockbrokerage
LEAD: George Strawbridge Sr., a stockbroker, suffered a heart attack on April 3 at a business meeting at the Union League in Philadelphia and was pronounced dead at Thomas Jefferson Hospital there.
He was 80 years old.


Sabine Royalty Trust reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sabine Royalty Trust (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
19,877,424
19,335,662
Share earns
1.36
1.33
Share earnings are in units.


Grumman in Talks On Japanese Deal
LEAD: The Grumman Corporation, the aerospace company in Bethpage, L.I., that also links supercomputers in large networks, said it had started talks with Japanese supercomputer makers to bring the Japanese machines to America.
Political opposition had blocked nearly all sales in the United States of Japanese supercomputers, used mainly in large research projects to design weapons, aircraft and cars.


Premier Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Financial Services
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
600,959
596,773
Per share
.35
.35


Marcos Said to Have Wept for Gift Of Skyscraper From Her Husband
LEAD: A former Philippine bank official testified yesterday that he had been told by a confidante of Imelda Marcos that she had begged her husband in tears to buy a Manhattan skyscraper for her as a gift.


Divi Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Divi Hotels (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
22,467,000
32,211,000
Net loss
b10,392,000
1,950,000
9mo rev
65,039,000
77,516,000
Net loss
b22,601,000
c11,626,000
b-Included an unrealized loss on properties of $4,447,000 for both the quarter and 9 months, and the 9 months also included a partial net gain on the sale of properties of $2,420,000.


Ex-Morgan Executive To Join CS First Boston
LEAD: Archibald Cox Jr., a former chief executive of Morgan Stanley International, will join CS First Boston in New York as a member of senior management, effective May 1, First Boston said yesterday.


False Fears About Japanese Stocks
LEAD: Tokyo's financial markets are reeling.
Since the beginning of the year, Japanese stocks have dropped almost 30 percent, the yen about 10 percent.
Worried that the chaos would spread, the finance ministers of the U.S. and six other industrialized powers, meeting in Paris last weekend, put the issue at the top of their agenda.


Another Top Officer Resigns at Shearson
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., the Wall Street firm that recently announced a major restructuring in response to a serious contraction in its business, has lost another top executive.


Superior Industries Intl reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Superior Industries Intl (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
246,124,000
200,150,000
Net inc
16,151,000
13,138,000
Share earns
2.04
1.66


California Opens All-Out War On Tobacco and Its Marketing
LEAD: In one of the nation's most aggressive anti-smoking efforts, the State of California today began a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign that will be paid for by the smokers themselves through cigarette taxes.


'Midlife Crisis' Seen by Doctor In Family Killer
LEAD: A psychiatrist for the prosecution testified today that John E. List was suffering from nothing more than a ''midlife crisis'' when he shot his wife, mother and three children to death in their Westfield house on Nov. 9, 1971.


Plan to Sell Puerto Rico Utility Becomes Law
LEAD: Gov.
Rafael Hernandez Colon signed into law today a measure clearing the way for the Commonwealth to sell the Puerto Rico Telephone Company, despite the protests of workers.


AST Offers PC in Japan
LEAD: AST Research Inc., a small American computer maker, is invading Japan with a clone of that country's most popular personal computer.


Sharon Steel Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sharon Steel Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,035,881,000
1,025,873,000
Net loss
b52,328,000
c39,978,000
b-Included environmental charges of $18.1 million.
c-Included an extraordinary credit of $17,731,000, or 21 cents a share, and after a loss of $92,337,000 from an adjustment in accounting.


Moscow's New Worry: Its Army
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev has strong grounds for worrying about the impact of Lithuania on the widening fault lines in the Soviet military.
This worry adds to his major concern about the ''domino effect'' of letting Lithuania have its freedom: It could trigger the rapid disintegration of the Soviet Union and end his rule and perestroika.


American Pacesetter reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Pacesetter
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,608,000
5,075,000
Net inc
498,000
b520,000
Share earns
.32
-
Yr rev
36,007,000
27,772,000
Net inc
126,000
b178,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss and the year is after a loss from discontinued operations of $516,000.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-11
Lech Walesa will run for President in Poland.
The Solidarity leader's declaration was the first step in a campaign that apparently seeks to force Wojciech Jaruzelski from office.
Page A1


Coach Suspends Season
LEAD: Coach Don Axtell of the State University of New York at Oneonta has suspended 22 players and cancelled the rest of his team's games this spring for a violation of campus drinking rules, college officials said yesterday.
The 22 missed games will be recorded as forfeit losses for the Division III school.


Judge Asks U.S. to Say How It Valued Lincoln
LEAD: In a sign that he may find fault with the way regulators handled the takeover of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, Federal District Judge Stanley Sporkin today asked Government lawyers to provide him the basis of their estimate of taxpayer losses stemming from Lincoln.


Peres Appears Certain to Lead Israel
LEAD: Shimon Peres and the Labor Party seem almost certain to form a new, left-leaning government on Wednesday, unencumbered by a paralyzing coalition with the rightist Likud party.


Universal Health Realty Inome Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Health Realty Inome Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,493,000
4,228,000
Net inc
b2,040,000
2,059,000
Share earns
.29
.29
Shares outst
7,047,000
7,048,000
b-Included loss of $360,000 due to continuing interest-payment default on mortgage investment.


Dollar Shows Sharp Drop; Gold Prices Also Decline
LEAD: The dollar declined sharply yesterday against most major currencies in thin, seesaw trading as concerns about continued central-bank intervention dampened market sentiment.


American Locker Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Locker Group
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,356,613
11,339,000
Net loss
b811,277
c885,814
Share earns
-
.68
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $1,224,822.
c-Net income and included income from discontinued operations of $80,712, or 6 cents a share.


Mets Ready to Put Ball Into the Hands of Viola
LEAD: Under sunny skies at Shea Stadium yesterday, all was well for the Mets again.
Gregg Jefferies fielded grounders without a miscue, Keith Miller snared fly balls easily in the outfield and Darryl Strawberry laughed as he belted a few balls over the right-field wall.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: PROSCIUTTO DI PARMA, the air-cured ham from Italy that was approved for importing to the United States last fall, is now available in most major cities.
To my taste prosciutto di Parma has a leaner and more buttery texture than domestic prosciutto.
It is also more moist, which can make it tricky to slice, so make sure it is done on a slicing machine.


Washington Talk;   Learning to Say 'No' To Some Constituents
LEAD: The word Representative Gary L. Ackerman uses is ''gun-shy.''


Ruddock Recalls Some Good Advice
LEAD: Michael Dokes can blame Rico Rossi for the loss he suffered Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.


Summit Savings Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Savings Assn (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
164,000
b699,000
Per share
.08
-
Shares outst
1,995,839
625,974
9mo net inc
315,000
b1,095,000
Per share
.28
-
Shares outst
1,111,777
625,974


Keane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keane Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
22,671,000
15,882,000
Net inc
1,125,000
827,000
Share earns
.27
.21


Better Ways to Make Electricity
LEAD: The gas turbine, which has been called the ''neglected stepsister'' of electricity-generating equipment, is becoming the utility industry's main hope for the next decade.


Prices Drop After Refcorp Auction
LEAD: A second unsuccessful auction of 40-year bonds by the Resolution Funding Corporation pushed prices of Treasury securities lower in fairly thin trading yesterday.


Pacific Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,006,000
1,538,000
Per share
.52
.56
Shares outst
3,894,000
2,731,000


Holnam Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Holnam Inc. (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,037,514,000
1,016,309,000
Net inc
8,490,000
37,701,000
Share earns
.09
.38


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


GOVERNOR VETOES BILL ON ABORTION
LEAD: As he had promised, Gov.
Judd Gregg vetoed an abortion rights bill today only hours after it had reached his desk.


A New Generation Begins Computing
LEAD: Hugh Bell decided he was behind the times when he saw his great-grandson, who is in elementary school, using a computer. ''I watched that little guy last Christmas and he was making Christmas cards,'' said Mr.
Bell, an 83-year-old retired marine engineer. ''I looked and I thought to myself, 'You should learn this too.


The News of Lithuania, But With Kremlin Spin
LEAD: When it comes to reporting on the situation in Lithuania, Soviet news organizations have reverted to the one-sided, polemical style of the pre-glasnost era.


Oil-Fueled Fire Razes a Plant In a Town Outside Milwaukee
LEAD: A fire feeding on tens of thousands of gallons of outboard motor oil, kerosene and insecticide destroyed a plant in this Milwaukee suburb today and raged out of control for seven hours until a foam spray doused the flames.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
The Sea and Mysticism


Correction
LEAD: A recipe for Hungarian hazelnut torte in The Living Section last Wednesday, with an article about Passover cooking, omitted parts of two steps.
Step 5 should have said: ''While baking, make the icing.
Boil the sugar in the water until dissolved.
Continue boiling slowly.
Test the thickness of the syrup by dropping a small amount into a glass of cold water until it holds its shape.


Harrison Winter, 69, Federal Appeals Judge
LEAD: Harrison L. Winter, former chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, died of cancer yesterday at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 69 years old and lived in Baltimore.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
Economic and Social Council
COMMISSION ON TRANSNATIONAL CORPORATIONS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Male Population Rises Faster Than Female
LEAD: The Census Bureau reported today that the number of men grew faster than the number of women in the United States during the 1980's, something that had not happened since the first decade of this century.


Washington Bancorp (N.J.) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Bancorp (N.J.) Inc.(O)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
137,000
151,000
Per share
.06
.11


KLLM Transport Services reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLLM Transport Services (OTC)
Qtr to Apr 1
1990
1989
Revenue
30,799,000
27,182,000
Net inc
385,000
248,000
Share earns
.15
.10


David C. Cook 3d, Publisher, 77
LEAD: David C. Cook 3d, retired chairman of the D. C. Cook Publishing Company in Elgin, Ill., an international publisher of religious books and educational materials, died Friday at Humana Hospital in Hoffman Estates, a suburb of Chicago.
He was 77 years old and lived in Bartlett, Ill.


Provena Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provena Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1980
Sales
9,380,409
7,727,503
Net inc
198,805
180,003
Share earns
.08
.07


Great Country Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Country Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Net loss
1,926,000
b680,000
Per share
-
.31
9mo net loss
6,763,000
b2,495,000
Per share
-
1.14
b-Net income
Results in the latest third quarter included a provision for loan losses of $3.3 million, compared with $120,000 in the year-ago quarter.


Tax Revolts and Cuts in Aid Batter Schools
LEAD: Local school districts across the metropolitan region are facing some of the stiffest financial pressures in years, just as their states, also struggling to balance budgets, are cutting aid to them.


Work Force Failing To Meet Math Needs
LEAD: Although the fastest-growing occupations require a mathematical background, a new report contends that a growing number of people entering the work force will not have the required training.


SOVIETS FLESH OUT VIEW ON GERMANY
LEAD: Providing the first details of a proposal broached last week, a top adviser to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev says the Soviet Union would accept a united Germany's membership in both NATO and the Warsaw Pact for a five- to seven-year transitional period leading to a new European security system.


Metro Datelines;   Man Held in Shooting Is Linked to a Killing
LEAD: A man was charged yesterday with shooting his brother during the morning's rush hour at Pennsylvania Station, the police said.
The man is also suspected of killing a friend in a dispute in Brooklyn hours earlier.


Bridge
LEAD: A great American player, Lou Bluhm of Atlanta, died on Thursday after a long battle with cancer.
Two weeks earlier, he had been in Fort Worth, helping his teammates try to defend their Vanderbilt Knockout Team title.
They reached the semifinal, and then fell to a strong group headed by Zia Mahmood of Manhattan.


Falcons Have Designs On Illinois Quarterback
LEAD: Unless a major trade opportunity arises, the Atlanta Falcons have decided to make Jeff George, the quarterback at the University of Illinois, the No. 1 pick in the National Football League college draft on April 22.
George will give up his senior year to turn professional.


Midwesco Filter Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midwesco Filter Resources
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,940,000
4,860,000
Net inc
217,000
198,000
Share earns
.09
.10
Shares outst
2,324,000
1,950,000
Yr sales
19,301,000
18,053,000
Net inc
1,697,000
634,000
Share earns
.83
.33
Shares outst
2,044,000
1,950,000


A Church Celebrates Its First Century Of Creative Growth
LEAD: By all rights the Judson Memorial Church, which is celebrating its centennial this year, should have become a congregation for the sort of moneyed men and women who populate the fiction of Edith Wharton and Henry James.
Instead, it became a home to outcasts of all kinds, from turn-of-the-century immigrants to prostitutes, political refugees and avant-garde artists whose work no one else would present.


About New York;   A 3-Ring Census: The Circus Folks Want to Count
LEAD: The show was about to go on, and the backstage scene at Madison Square Garden was dizzy.


Why Not a Secondhand Arms Treaty?
LEAD: Hi, there!
Wanna buy a used tank?
Kick the treads.
Not a lot of mileage.
Look at that gun -clean as a whistle.
Hardly fired a shell.
Or how about some brand new helicopters?
Big discounts if you order now.


A.T.&amp;T. Selling Computer Unit
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it was selling a subsidiary that makes peripheral and communications equipment for I.B.M. mainframes.
The unit will be sold to the


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: AN observer at any toy store or video arcade is privy to children's delight in pushing buttons.
Increasingly, the buttons they like to push are those of the microwave oven.


'Nonpartisan' Council Race on S.I. Shows It Isn't
LEAD: New York City's first nonpartisan election campaign under the new City Charter - a special election for the City Council on Staten Island - has got off to a highly partisan start.


Paragon Petroleum reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paragon Petroleum
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,627,052
2,782,508
Net inc
267,983
790,343
Share earns
.07
.22
Results are in Canadian funds.


Lessons
LEAD: Do men get more for their money than women do when they slap down $50,000 to $100,000 for a college education?
Based on her analysis of thousands of hours of college teaching, Catherine G. Krupnick says the answer is a resounding yes.


Marcia R. Richman, Lawyer, 55
LEAD: Marcia R. Richman, a lawyer who specialized in juvenile justice, died of cancer on Monday at her home in Short Hills, N.J.
She was 55 years old.


First Federal Savings Bank (Alabama) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank (Alabama)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
402,000
b491,000
Per share
.34
.40
Shares outst
1,187,125
1,219,017
6mo net inc
736,000
b880,000
Per share
.61
.72
Shares outst
1,207,623
1,218,268


Lotus Introduces Apple Software
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation introduced a market analysis product for Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh called Lotus Marketplace.
The software includes data bases stored on CD-ROM, or compact disk read only memory, with data on United States businesses and households as well as software for pinpointing customers, analyzing markets and business prospecting.


Sex 'n' Drugs 'n' Wagner
LEAD: Now that the major record companies have agreed to stamp warning labels on offensive rock albums, the public should be alerted to an even greater danger that has not been acted upon.


Eight Players Sue N.F.L.
LEAD: In a long-expected new effort to establish the right of players whose contracts have expired to negotiate with any National Football League team, eight players filed an antitrust suit against the league and its 28 clubs yesterday.
The suit accuses them of violating Federal antitrust laws by imposing a series of restrictions on the movement of players.


Chronicle
LEAD: FRED ROGERS is celebrating the 35th anniversary of his television debut in ''Children's Corner,'' his first show before he became known nationally as the gentle host of ''Mister Rogers's Neighborhood.''


Knicks Are Mastered By the Pistons Again
LEAD: Whenever the Knicks solved one problem last night, the Detroit Pistons created another one.


Checkpoint Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Checkpoint Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Apr 1
1990
1989
Revenue
11,555,000
8,238,000
Net inc
443,000
b667,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
9,558,000
9,004,000
b-Net loss


Rev. Dale S. Alexy, 57; Fought for Bus Service
LEAD: The Rev.
Dale Stewart Alexy, an Episcopal priest who led demonstrations last year against the curtailment of bus service in Jamaica, Queens, died of cancer on Monday at the rectory of St.
Stephen's Church, where he lived.
He was 57 years old.


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
94,387,000
87,774,000
Net inc
6,930,000
5,328,000
Share earns
.56
.45


Nepalese Opposition Demanding Control of an Interim Government
LEAD: Leaders of the opposition movement denounced representatives of the nonparty system today for seeking to remain in power as ''an interim government.''


2 USAir Pilots Reach Pact With the F.A.A.
LEAD: The captain and co-pilot of a USAir jetliner that crashed at La Guardia Airport last year can fly again if they pass recertification tests, the pilots and the Federal Aviation Administration have agreed.


New York Budget Cuts Will Swell Ranks of Homeless on Streets
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fast Food Chains Try to Slim Down
LEAD: AMERICA'S fast-food chains are hardly paragons of nutritional virtue, but they are beginning to respond to criticism by health professionals that they are nutritional wastelands.
Those in search of low-fat meals, who have stayed away from chains like McDonald's, Burger King, Wendy's, Hardee's and Roy


Japan Keeps Up the Big Spending To Maintain Its Industrial Might
LEAD: At a time when some Americans are worrying about how much Japan is investing to buy real estate and companies from New York to Honolulu, the bigger concern for the United States may be how much Japan is continuing to invest on its industrial prowess at home.


Soviet Wheat Purchase
LEAD: The Soviet Union has bought an additional 125,000 metric tons of United States wheat at subsidized prices for delivery through mid-May, the Agriculture Department said today.
The sale was the first since Jan. 19, when the Soviet Union's authority for buying subsidized wheat was virtually exhausted.


New Salary Won't Affect Mattingly
LEAD: Back home in Evansville, Ind., where he was born and still lives in the winter, Don Mattingly keeps a green 1962 Ford truck parked in the driveway.
It is the only thing he drives, perhaps the only thing in his possession that does not shout about Mattingly's wealth.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The objective is to change the image that the tobacco industry has created for smokers -that it's sexy, glamorous, youthful - to it's dumb, dirty, dangerous.''
- Kenneth W. Kizer, director of the California Department of Health Services. [A1:1.]


New York Budget Cuts Will Swell Ranks of Homeless on Streets;   Empty Days
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dinkins Asks U.S. To Halt Development of S.I. Naval Port
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins has asked the United States Defense Department to stop development of the Navy port that has brought one cruiser to Staten Island and may bring several other ships there.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Reader's Digest Starts Monthly
LEAD: Reader's Digest Association Inc. said yesterday that it would start its first new magazine in 10 years with Budgets Famille, a French monthly magazine to help families manage their finances.


Arab Militants Release 3 After Qaddafi Intervenes
LEAD: A Frenchwoman, her Belgian companion and their daughter were released in Beirut today, more than two years after being taken hostage by a Libyan-supported militant group as they cruised the Mediterranean on a pleasure boat.


Washington Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Bancorporation (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net loss
5,700,000
b3,600,000
Per share
-
.50
b-Net income


Kleer Vu Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kleer Vu Industries (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,602,000
15,429,000
Net loss
b1,495,000
b3,429,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $1,059,000 for the latest year and $2,257,000 for the year- earlier period.


Court Trustee Urged for Eastern
LEAD: The unsecured creditors of Eastern Airlines asked the bankruptcy court yesterday to appoint a trustee to take over the airline.


Mattingly: Yankees' Last Tradition
LEAD: On the morning after signing a $19 million contract, somebody else might have awakened with a champagne hangover.
Or fluffed the pillow and slept until noon.
But if you're wondering why Don Mattingly deserves to be baseball's highest paid player and why all that money isn't likely to change him, consider the guest book near the weight machines and stationary bicycles in the health club of Stouffer Tower City Plaza hotel where the


Mazda and Hertz In Rental Venture
LEAD: The Mazda Motor Corporation formed a joint car rental venture in Japan with the Hertz Corporation, the world's largest automobile rental company.


Sacramental Wine: Lowest Profile of All
LEAD: SACRAMENTAL wine may be the lowest-profile wine in the United States.
Though drunk daily, primarily by Roman Catholics, Episcopalians and Lutherans, it is rarely discussed and almost never seen in bottles.


Review/Music;   Comparing and Contrasting A and B
LEAD: Hearing the Baltimore and Atlanta Symphonies play at Carnegie Hall in the space of a few days has been an instructive exercise not so much in comparative skills but in comparative esthetics.


Hospital Workers in California Approve Pay Offer, Ending Strike
LEAD: Workers at the nation's largest health maintenance organization voted on Monday to approve a reworked contract offer, ending a weeklong strike by 11,000 nurses, technicians and maintenance workers.


Home Federal S&amp;L Assoc. of The Rockies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal S&amp;L Assoc. of The Rockies
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b1,572,000
c102,000
Per share
-
.19
Year net loss
b1,250,000
c1,132,000
Per share
-
2.06
b-After gains of $543,000, or 99 cents a share, for the quarter and $743,000, or $1.35 a share, for the year, both from an accounting change.


Hospital Staffing Services reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hospital Staffing Services (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
6,377,438
6,068,545
Net inc
470,316
464,271
Share earns
.11
.15
Shares outst
4,270,471
3,158,960


Lockheed Plans To Cut 500 Jobs
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation has confirmed that it will lay off 500 white-collar employees at its Marietta plant.
The layoffs, which will come by the end of June, will include workers in engineering, finance and information systems, said Richard Martin, a spokesman for the Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Company


2 Iowa Editors Ousted For Anti-Abortion Role
LEAD: Two editors active in anti-abortion causes have been dismissed by a newspaper for violating a policy that forbids employees to serve as officers of politically active groups that receive news coverage.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:
BEWILDERED
This month tax refunds
Arrive in mailboxes
A little dizzy,
Like love letters,
Sealed with a kiss,
Chapters of a novel
By Henry James,
Horatio Alger stories,
A Shakespeare sonnet,
A farce by Moliere.
The return of tax dollars
Serving to remind us
Of 50-cent allowances,
Piggy banks, cookie jars,
Wishes on falling stars,
Lightning bugs in glass jars.


Talks Urged In Drug Suit
LEAD: A Chicago arbitration judge has ordered Amgen Inc. and its leading marketing partner, the Ortho Pharmaceutical Corporation, a unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson, to negotiate quickly their dispute regarding the sale of genetically engineered erythropoietin, or EPO, a hormone used to treat anemia.


At Easter, Classic Greek Fare, Made Anew
LEAD: AT St.
Paul's Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Hempstead, L.I., precisely at midnight on Saturday, all the lights will go out and members of the congregation, each holding a white candle, will watch in the darkness as the priest lifts one solitary flame and proclaims: ''Receive ye the light from the light that never wanes and glorify Christ, who has risen from the dead.


United and Boeing Held At Fault in Deaths on Jet
LEAD: Federal investigators said today that improper maintenance by United Airlines and a flawed design by the Boeing Corporation were responsible for the accident last year on a jet whose cargo door blew open over Hawaiian waters, killing nine passengers.


UAL Buyout Proposal Gets Formal Approval
LEAD: The UAL Corporation said today that it had formally agreed to sell the company, the parent of United Airlines, to its employees for about $4.38 billion.


Suntrust Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suntrust Banks Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
87,900,000
84,000,000
Per share
.69
.65


Kaydon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaydon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
42,881,000
37,208,000
Net inc
5,988,000
5,624,000
Share earns
.70
.66


A New Museum's Bright Future Grows Dim
LEAD: Once a bright gleam in the cultural future of Massachusetts, the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art, a projected $86 million complex for contemporary art, has lost much of its luster.
Some in this financially strapped state are calling it ''the miracle that's become a mirage.''


Soviets Assail Radicals
LEAD: The Soviet Communist Party Central Committee sharply attacked a group of party radicals agitating for drastic changes and said today that if they did not conform they had no place in the party organization.


Market Place;   A Way to Hedge On 'Junk Bonds'?
LEAD: ROBERT GORDON, president of Twenty-First Securities in New York, thinks he has found a way to permit those who own ''junk bonds'' to sleep better at night.
His proposed sedative is a hedging strategy, a hybrid of stock and bond-futures trades, that he says will offset some of the risk of investing in the volatile, unrated debt issues.


Pickens Seeks Japan Inquiry
LEAD: The Boone Company, an investment company owned by the United States takeover specialist T. Boone Pickens, asked Japan's Fair Trade Commission today to investigate possible violations of antimonopoly laws by Japanese auto makers and parts suppliers.
A commission official, Yoshiro Sekine, said the panel would study


Ames's Rocky Retailing Marriage
LEAD: Ames Department Stores Inc. had visions of greatness when it acquired nearly 400 Zayre discount stores in October 1988.
Overnight, Ames would be transformed from a little-known variety chain operating primarily in New England into the nation's fourth-largest discounter, after K Mart, Wal-Mart and Target.


AEL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AEL Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 23
1990
1989
Revenue
33,067,000
36,037,000
Net loss
2,370,000
b195,000
Share earns
-
.05
Yr rev
121,159,000
136,997,000
Net loss
8,987,000
1,984,000
b-Net income


And Yet They Rise
LEAD: The President's no-new-taxes promise is malarkey, of course.


Arcus Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arcus Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,953,401
12,745,400
Net inc
1,455,069
1,165,079
Share earns
.20
.16


Celtics Top Nets, 112-96
LEAD: A crowd of 17,515 showed up at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight for the last visit of the Boston Celtics, perhaps thinking that not much else disastrous could happen to the Nets.
Then something did.
Sam Bowie, the Nets' 7-foot-1-inch center, who has suffered broken legs three times in his career, left the game limping with a sore right foot in the third quarter and his status is now day to day.


Lockheed Claims Victory Over Simmons
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation said today that it had successfully beaten back an attempt by the Dallas financier Harold C. Simmons to gain control of the company.


Gorbachev Envisioning Market Steps by Decree
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that he was prepared to use his new executive powers to speed the transition to a regulated market economy.


Death Toll at 9 in Florida Fire
LEAD: Searchers have found three more bodies in the rubble of a residential hotel in Miami Beach that was destroyed by fire last week, raising the death toll to nine.


Mitsui Bank Expansion
LEAD: The Mitsui Taiyo Kobe Bank Ltd. announced plans yesterday to create a new company to specialize in interest-rate and currency swaps and options.


Reserve Industries Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reserve Industries Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
2,192,276
2,439,407
Net inc
b83,299
132,659
Share earns
.04
.07
Shares outst
1,986,465
1,972,867
6mo rev
4,670,431
4,562,991
Net inc
b136,287
c245,162
Share earns
.07
.12
Shares outst
2,013,304
1,972,867


United Park City Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Park City Mines (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b478,167
389,281
Yr net loss
b1,517,746
c680,715
Shares outst
10,801,395
10,801,462
b-After an extraordinary gain of $1,444 on disposal of assets for the quarter and year.


A Forced Removal of Squatters in South Africa


Help the Poor, but Don't Call It Welfare
LEAD: To the Editor:


Landowner Linked to D'Amato Gives In on Pipeline
LEAD: A landowner in Dover, N.Y., who lobbied to have the route of a natural-gas pipeline moved off his empty field and angered his neighbors when a new route was planned for their front yards, has volunteered to take the pipeline back.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
PITTSBURGH (NL) - Assigned Brian Morrison, outfielder, to the team's extended spring training program.
Assigned Jeff Richardson, shortstop, from Salem of the Carolina League to Buffalo of the American Association.
TORONTO (AL) - Traded Brian Morrison, outfielder, to Pittsburgh for Joe Szekely, catcher.


Washington Federal S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal S&amp;L (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
15,305,000
13,569,000
Share earns
.70
.62
6mo net inc
30,600,000
27,391,000
Share earns
1.40
1.26


Errors Created L.I.R.R. Delays, Amtrak Reports
LEAD: A series of mishaps by Amtrak technicians caused the power surge on Monday that disabled track signals in Queens and delayed more than 150,000 riders on the Long Island Rail Road, an Amtrak official said yesterday.


Piedmont: Italian Gift for America's Palate
LEAD: TUSCAN olive oil and crostini, pesto from Genoa and lusty Neapolitan spaghetti puttanesca have become as American as French fries.
But if asked to name one dish from Piedmont, a largely rural province in northwest Italy, most Americans would be at a loss.


Comstock Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comstock Resources
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,045,060
4,920,272
Net inc
1,085,423
173,544
Share earns
.47
.09
Shares outst
2,305,420
1,890,919
The company said share earnings are adjusted to reflect the 1-for-4 reverse stock split on March 15.


Top S.E.C. Counsel To Join Private Firm
LEAD: John H. Sturc, who played a leading role in many of the insider trading cases pursued by the Securities and Exchange Commission, is leaving to join a Washington law firm, the agency said yesterday.


Dr. Allen Tanney, 79, Physician in Baseball
LEAD: Dr.
Allen D. Tanney, a physician who practiced as a consultant to manufacturers, hotels, a newspaper and several baseball teams, died of heart failure yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Harrison, N.Y.


Lithuanian Independence Deserves Recognition
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: After a five-month search for a house that meets the tastes of JOSEPH and LILY FERNANDEZ, New York's Schools Chancellor and his wife, a city fund plunked down nearly $1 million yesterday for a town house in Brooklyn Heights.
A state agency acquired title to the house, which it is giving to the city, which is in turn transferring it to the Board of


Wedgestone Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wedgestone Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
7,840,300
10,267,400
Shares outst
5,795,225
5,795,039
Yr net loss
10,665,900
11,065,100
Shares outst
5,795,225
5,778,099


Book Notes
LEAD: Publishing waters have been roiled in recent days by a dispute between James Webb, a former Secretary of the Navy, and Prentice Hall, which published his first two novels.


Chronicle
LEAD: Usually they compete rather than cooperate.
But 19 leading international fashion designers will join in a fashion show on May 16 to benefit Carnegie Hall.
LIZA MINNELLI will be the host of the evening, the first time Carnegie Hall has actually presented a fashion show.


Prosecutor Drops Hint to Jury Of Confession in Racial Case
LEAD: A prosecutor said yesterday that a major witness in the Bensonhurst street slaying is a ''con man'' with a long criminal history, including convictions for robbery and rape.


Computer Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Research Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
3,060,740
3,032,826
Net inc
97,628
6,966
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
5,708,621
6,249,770
Net inc
46,477
106,836
Share earns
.01
.03


Nuns Help Prisoners Find Freedom Within Walls
LEAD: Willis Walker is so tall and broad-shouldered he seems to fill the stone corridor as he strides toward a classroom deep inside the United States Penitentiary here, but the inmate confesses a touch of awe at several small, soft-spoken women who also spend a lot of time in the prison.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
Edible Easter Menagerie


INSIDE
LEAD:
Dinkins Faults Home Port
The New York City mayor asked the Defense Department to stop development of the Naval station in Staten Island.
Page B1.
Tight Times for Schools
Local school districts in the New York City area are facing unusually stiff financial pressures that are compounded by cuts in state aid.


Pioneer Hi-Bred Intl reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Hi-Bred Intl (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
131,093,000
136,640,000
Net loss
20,011,000
b15,367,000
Share earns
-
.48
6mo sales
175,761,000
178,185,000
Net loss
51,794,000
b4,793,000
Share earns
-
.15


Review/Television;   An Earnest Teen-Ager in the Big City, on ABC
LEAD: On Wednesday nights, ABC is doing nicely with one teen-ager, an unbelievably precocious all-American type named ''Doogie Howser, M.D.'' So what's the next logical step?
Go find another teen-ager, of course, perhaps just reasonably precocious.
So now, at 9:30, immediately following Doogie, ABC is offering ''The Marshall Chronicles.


Fraternity Rebuff Stirs Whirlwind in Vermont
LEAD: Winston D. Brathwaite 2d had never envisioned the rigors of Hell Week when he pledged to join the Acacia fraternity at the University of Vermont last fall.
On the first night of the weeklong initiation, each pledge, head covered with a pillowcase, was led to the attic where the brothers spelled out his faults.


First Commercial Bancorp of Sacramento reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancorp of Sacramento (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,545,045
1,113,811
Per share
.31
.26
Shares outst
4,935,000
4,273,000
Per share earnings for the latest quarter is fully diluted.


Apple Bancorp
LEAD: Apple Bancorp said its board had unanimously rejected an unsolicited offer from Stanley Stahl, the New York developer, to buy all outstanding common shares of the company at $38 a share.
The board recommended that stockholders not tender their shares.
The New York-based company said it would begin discussions with thrid parties about a possible sale or merger.


Mars Graphic Services reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mars Graphic Services (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
6,868,528
3,936,603
Net inc
152,917
51,881
Share earns
.09
.03
Shares outst
1,817,580
1,617,600
Yr sales
24,419,362
16,053,844
Net inc
807,514
238,217
Share earns
.48
.15
Shares outst
1,734,255
1,617,600


Economic Scene;   Socialist Eggs, Market Omelet
LEAD: HUNGARY'S voters sent their Communist leaders to metaphoric Siberia this week, electing a nationalist coalition loosely cast in the image of the Christian Democratic parties of Western Europe.
But the Communists' economic baggage, two decades of central planning followed by two decades of botched reforms, remains behind.


Breaking Oil Industry Ranks, Conoco Buys 2-Hulled Ships
LEAD: Conoco Inc. said yesterday that it was ordering two new oil tankers with double hulls, designed to reduce the likelihood of oil spills like that of the Exxon Valdez last year.
The Conoco move represents a break with most United States oil companies, which so far have resisted ordering such tankers.


Bank of New Hampshire reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New Hampshire
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,013,000
2,252,000
Per share
.30
.67


Tributes to a Think Tank
LEAD: Among the luminaries at last week's 20th anniversary dinner of the Joint Center for Political Studies were President Bush and Douglas Wilder of Virginia, the nation's first elected black Governor.
Mr.
Bush's presence was testimony to the center's importance as the premier think tank devoted to black issues.





David M. Robb, Art Historian, 86
LEAD: David M. Robb, an art historian and a teacher, died on Monday at his home in Scituate, Mass.
He was 86 years old.


Oil Prices Off Sharply as Supplies Rise
LEAD: Oil prices continued to tumble yesterday as mounting surpluses of petroleum caused increased waves of selling here and overseas.
The May contract for crude oil settled at an eight-month low of $17.68 a barrel, down 76 cents, on the New York Mercantile Exchange, the largest energy market.


ENLARGED HEARTS TIED TO JOB STRESS
LEAD: Job stress among men can cause potentially dangerous physical changes in the heart as well as high blood pressure, a new study has found.


Daniel Aldrich Jr., 71; Was Irvine Chancellor
LEAD: Daniel G. Aldrich Jr., a chemist who became the first chancellor of the Irvine campus in a 50-year career with the University of California, died of colon cancer on Monday at the Irvine Medical Center.
He was 71 years old.


Fan Mail
LEAD: The U.S.
Postal Service has done it at last -produced the stamps you love to buy!
They were issued a few weeks ago: Clark Gable and Vivien Leigh in ''Gone With the Wind,'' Gary Cooper in ''Beau Geste'' (why that one?), John Wayne in ''Stagecoach'' and Judy in ''The Wizard of Oz.'' What's a quarter when it's Rhett and


R. Dixon Herman, 78, Judge at Berrigan Trial
LEAD: R. Dixon Herman, the Federal judge who oversaw the conspiracy trial of the Harrisburg Seven, died of a heart attack on Friday at Harrisburg Hospital.
He was 78 years old.


Quality Food Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quality Food Centers (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 24
1990
1989
Sales
73,200,000
59,100,000
Net inc
3,126,000
1,979,000
Share earns
.32
.21


Gateway Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,270,000
1,267,000
Per share
.33
.33
Shares outst
3,852,329
3,838,098
The company said where applicable, per share earnings and shares outstanding have been adjusted to reflect the 10 percent stock dividend declared on March 13.


BUSH NAMES ENVOY FOR MANILA TALKS
LEAD: President Bush today named Richard L. Armitage, a former Defense Department official, to be the chief American negotiator in talks on the future of United States bases in the Philippines.


Harding Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harding Associates (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
16,973,000
12,734,000
Net inc
725,000
484,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Shares outst
4,706,000
4,452,000
9mo rev
50,654,000
37,719,000
Net inc
3,351,000
2,377,000
Share earns
.72
.54
Shares outst
4,685,000
4,388,000


FEAR IS TORMENTOR OF BURMESE IN U.S.
LEAD: One day a man speaking Burmese left a threatening message on the answering machine of U Kyaw Win, an emigre professor who is an outspoken critic of the Government in Myanmar, formerly Burma.


Conservative to Form Government in Greece
LEAD: The conservative party leader Constantine Mitsotakis received a mandate to form a government today after working out a deal with a small party to achieve the necessary parliamentary majority.


Lithuanian Independence Deserves Recognition;   Support for Gorbachev
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cavazos Criticizes Hispanic Parents on Schooling
LEAD: But when asked at a news conference what solutions he would propose, Mr.
Cavazos, a sixth-generation Texan who is of Mexican descent, leveled his criticism at Hispanic parents.
Hispanic cultures long placed a high value on education, he said, but "somewhere along the line we lost that."
'We Start by


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   WCRS Earnings Up In New Fiscal Year
LEAD: The WCRS Group P.L.C. said yesterday that it earned $:40 million, or about $66 million, in pretax profit in 1989, up from $:24 million, or $40 million, in the 14 months before the end of 1988.
The time periods are not identical because the company changed its fiscal year.


Motorola-Hitachi Ruling Postponed
LEAD: Motorola Inc. said a United States district judge in Texas has delayed until June 18 his decision on Hitachi Ltd.'s motion to lift a stay on an injunction in a patent infringement suit between the two electronics companies.
Motorola said it would continue to sell its 68030 microprocessor, which has been at the center of the litigation.


Johnson Returns to Devils' Lineup
LEAD: A knee injury to Pat Conacher will force the Devils to break up their most consistent and effective line for perhaps the remainder of their playoff series with Washington.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Jaite Defeats Zoecke
Martin Jaite of Argentina, who is seeded No. 2, beat Markus Zoecke of West Germany, 6-1, 7-6, yesterday in Barcelona, Spain, to advance to the third round of the Count of Godo tournament.
Carlos Costa of Barcelona upset ninth-ranked Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, 6-3, 2-6, 6-2, while eighth-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria was eliminated by Goran Prpic, 3-6, 6-1, 6-2.(AP)
Chang Advances in Tokyo: Michael Chang overcame windy conditions to defeat Kelly Jones, 1-6, 6-0, 6-1, in the second round of the $1.15 million Japan Open yesterday in Tokyo.


Chronicle
LEAD: WILLIAM G. McGOWAN, the chairman of the MCI Communications Corporation who had a heart transplant in 1987, was in fair condition yesterday at Presbyterian-University Hospital in Pittsburgh after undergoing exploratory chest surgery.
An MCI spokesman, JOHN R. HOUSER, said the operation was unrelated to Mr.


Biogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biogen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,143,000
8,103,000
Net inc
1,737,000
144,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
22,607,000
22,917,000


Paper Maker's Profit Down
LEAD: The International Paper Company said yesterday that lower prices in some key product lines, disappointments in manufacturing operations and a higher effective tax rate led to a 19.3 percent decline in its first-quarter profit.


Greenman Bros.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greenman Bros.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 3
1990
1989
Sales
125,830,000
113,515,000
Net inc
11,324,000
11,035,000
Share earns
1.88
1.84
Yr sales
295,955,000
266,706,000
Net inc
2,406,000
1,804,000
Share earns
.39
.30


Air Travel Gridlock Seen for Europe
LEAD: Air travel in Europe will come to a ''near standstill'' by the end of the decade if radical improvements are not made, a study released today predicts.


Review/Jazz;   Rap Group Releases Album That Includes Disputed Song
LEAD: The rap group Public Enemy has released a new album, ''Fear of a Black Planet.'' The album includes a song that was attacked by religious groups as anti-Semitic on its release as a single in February The single, ''Welcome to the Terrordome,'' includes lines like ''Crucifixion ain't no fiction/So called chosen frozen/Apology made to who ever pleases/Still they got me like Jesus.


Soviet Diplomat Found Slain By a Main Road in Suriname
LEAD: The Soviet Union's second-ranking diplomat here was found shot to death in a gutter in this South American country, the police said today.


Third Driver Is Killed In Bronx Cab Robbery
LEAD: Three cab drivers have been killed in three separate incidents in the Eastchester secton of the Bronx in the last five weeks by a gunman after someone telephoned for car service, then shot and robbed the drivers, the police said.


UConn Seeks Prospect
LEAD: Coach Jim Calhoun of the University of Connecticut said yesterday he planned to meet today with Chris Corchiani of North Carolina State to discuss the possibility of the point guard transferring to Connecticut for his final year of college eligibility.


About Education
LEAD: The shaping of child-care legislation is made difficult by long neglect.
How can this nation catch up with care that should have been provided years ago and that has long been available in other industrial societies?
The problem is compounded by a similar backlog of other unmet social needs, like health insurance and care for the elderly.


Motorola Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motorola Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,533,000,000
2,175,000,000
Net inc
127,000,000
123,000,000
Share earns
.98
.95
Shares outst
130,600,000
129,700,000


Cal Rep Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cal Rep Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,778,427
1,651,139
Share earns
.64
.60


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday with an article about homosexuals in the military misidentified the woman shown.
She was Roxanne Stetser, a retired


To Chinese, Genghis Tomb Is No Mystery
LEAD: To the Editor:


For New York: More Than Money
LEAD: The new team at City Hall in New York has rapidly proved it can manage scarcity.
Mayor David Dinkins and his colleagues are facing up responsibly and unflinchingly to one shortfall after another in tax revenues.
Even so, there's more to leadership than fiscal management and there's more to the quality of life in New York


Study Finds the Will to Live Can Work
LEAD: Willpower can delay death briefly when people want to go on living to celebrate major events in their lives, researchers say.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Nestle S.A., to Lintas: Europe, for undisclosed confectionary brands, with billings of $20 million.


Stocks Edge Upward as Dow Gains 9.01
LEAD: Stocks prices rose slightly yesterday in dull trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 9.01 points to end the session at 2,731.08.


Interco Posts Quarterly Loss
LEAD: Interco Inc., the maker of Converse footwear and Broyhill furniture, today reported a $23.3 million loss for the fourth quarter and a 50 percent drop in profits for the year.


NHI Nelson Holdings Intl Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NHI Nelson Holdings Intl Ltd. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
40,049,000
29,272,000
Net inc
2,934,000
c5,781,000
Share earns
.56
-
Shares outst
4,529,327
3,057,275
Yr rev
108,575,000
100,637,000
Net inc
b4,474,000
c9,352,000
Share earns
.35
-
Shares outst
4,083,371
2,868,222


F&amp;M National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F&amp;M National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,510,000
2,710,000
Per share
.28
.31


Bank Yields Mixed in Week As a Rate Drop Is Expected
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were mixed for the week ended yesterday.


Why Not a 'Solvency Dividend'?
LEAD: With all the talk in Washington about a peace dividend, we're in danger of overlooking another kind of windfall, one that's enjoyed by Michigan and other prudently managed states.


Citicorp Deal Seen as Possible
LEAD: Citicorp is considering the purchase of United Savings Bank of Tysons Corner, Va., in a move that would sharply increase the size and reach of its consumer banking business in the Washington area, it was disclosed yesterday.


Metro Datelines;   Mayor Seeks Answer On Missing Chlorine
LEAD: Mayor James D. Griffin says he is not satisfied with his former parks commissioner's explanation for what happened to 10 tons of swimming-pool chlorine.


Norton Recovering From Injury as N.H.L. Reviews Incident
LEAD: Jeff Norton, recovering from a concussion, left the hospital today but is listed by the Islanders as doubtful for Wednesday night's fourth game of their Stanley Cup playoff series against the Rangers.


Westinghouse Electric Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westinghouse Electric Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,862,000,000
2,887,000,000
Net inc
210,000,000
b189,000,000
Share earns
1.43
1.30
Shares outst
146,900,000
145,500,000
b-Included $266 million in gains from major business disposition and joint venturing and $261 million provision for restructuring.


F.B.I. Awards Its First Medal of Valor


Joyce Carol Oates Wins Short-Story Award
LEAD: Joyce Carol Oates is the winner of the annual $25,000 Rea Award for the Short Story, it was announced yesterday by the Dungannon Foundation.


Credit Suisse Parent to Buy Stake in Oldest Swiss Bank
LEAD: The parent of Credit Suisse, Switzerland's third-largest bank, will take a big stake in the nation's oldest bank, Bank Leu Ltd., the companies said today.


Traders to Get Ethics Classes
LEAD: More than a year after allegations of fraud in the Chicago futures markets, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange has ordered its 2,500 members to enroll in ethics classes.


A Top Line for Rangers Struggles to Find Touch
LEAD: Perhaps it is because their superb synchronization seemed so effortless that their struggle right now seems so pronounced.
Kelly Kisio, Brian Mullen and John Ogrodnick, the three components in what has been a sensational line for the Rangers, are now three pieces of a productivity puzzle.


Eight Sentenced In 1980 Protest At Nuclear Unit
LEAD: In a case that seems to bridge the years between the antiwar turmoil of the 1960's and the current easing of the cold war, eight peace advocates were sentenced today for a 1980 protest in which they poured their blood on blueprints at a nuclear weapons plant.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Exxon Valdez oil spill referred incorrectly in some editions to the number of dead birds held in evidence.
Federal biologists say they have at least 36,000 dead migratory birds and 100 eagles stored in freezer vans.


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
213,012
178,255
Per share
.02
.01
Shares outst
4,012,727
3,987,948


Injury Layoff Over, Graf Is in Fine Form
LEAD: She didn't play like a person who has ever had a sore thumb.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
R.
R.
Donnelley &amp; Sons Co., Chicago, a commercial printer, appointed Robert J. Coleman a senior vice president in its magazine group.
Richard V. Thursby was named a senior vice president in its financial printing services group.


IP Timberlands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IP Timberlands Ltd.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
51,000,000
51,000,000
Net inc
30,000,000
31,000,000
Share earns
.79
.77


Portsmouth Bank Shares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portsmouth Bank Shares Inc.
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,003,000
1,017,000
Per share
.26
-
There were no per share earnings in year-ago first quarter because the company went public in February 1988.


French Suspects Held in Basque Terror
LEAD: A routine identity check on a highway near Seville has led to the arrest of a band of French terrorist suspects who reportedly carried out at least 33 killings over the last 12 years on behalf of the Spanish Basque separatist group E.T.A.


Sharing of Power Lines Is Proposed
LEAD: New England's largest electric utility has promised to allow other regional electric companies access to its transmission lines if the Federal Government approves its $2.3 billion plan to purchase the Public Service Company of New Hampshire, the troubled power company that built the Seabrook nuclear plant.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of Passover, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations will remain in effect.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.18
9.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.78
7.80
8.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.79
7.80
8.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.66
8.63
9.38
30-YR.


Edward O. Kallmann, Financier, 89
LEAD: Edward O. Kallmann, a financial consultant and adjunct finance professor at Pace University for 30 years, died in his sleep on Saturday at his home in East Williston, L.I.
He was 89 years old.


Monterey Capital reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monterey Capital
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,300,000
1,600,000
Net inc
b22,000
c994,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Included a loss of $512,000 from discontinued operations, and after an extraordinary credit of $353,000, or 16 cents a share.


2d Inmate Stabbed at Prison
LEAD: A prison inmate was recovering in a hospital today after his lung was punctured when he was stabbed by another prisoner Sunday night in the gymnasium of the maximum-security Dannemora state prison.
It was the second stabbing of an inmate in four days at the prison, near the Canadian border north of Albany.


Volvo-Renault Link Advancing
LEAD: The Swedish car maker Volvo A.B. said it planned to sell up to 5 billion crowns, or $820 million, of assets to finance its link with the state-owned French company Renault S.A.
A spokesman, Hans Renstrom, said Volvo would probably sell part of its stock portfolio, which was valued at about 12.5 billion crowns, or $2.4 billion, at the end of 1989.


Dinner and Concert To Benefit the Kitchen
LEAD: The Kitchen, the experimental performing-arts center, will hold its fourth annual spring benefit concert on May 9 at 7:30 P.M. at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.
Performers are to include the Kronos Quartet, the performance artist Ann Magnuson, and the dancer and choreographer Molissa Fenley, performing ''The Floor Dances - Requiem for the Living,'' a piece composed in memory of wildlife killed by the 1989


Concord Journal;   Wherein Public Art Doesn't Please
LEAD: In recent years this city 25 miles east of San Francisco has been sucked inexorably into the Los Angelization of the Bay Area.
Once a sleepy backwater, it is now a city of 112,000 people, its freeways clogged with commuters, its downtown of genteel covered walkways dominated by looming office buildings.


For a Burned Church, Help Pours In
LEAD: All day long, donations and expressions of sympathy poured in for the Church of the Holy Apostles, the Chelsea landmark heavily damaged by fire Monday night.


Idaho Plans King Holiday
LEAD: Gov.
Cecil D. Andrus signed into law today a bill that makes Idaho the nation's 47th state to honor the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. with an official holiday.
The new law creates a Martin Luther King Jr.-Idaho Human Rights Day on the third Monday in January.


Banks Gain On Wall St.
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today upheld the right of banks to underwrite certain securities, giving banks another victory in their attempt to dismantle Depression-era restrictions on their activities.


Books of The Times;   Privilege, the Right Hand Of Soviet Censorship
LEAD:
Inside the Soviet Writers' Union
By John and Carol Garrard
303 pages. The Free Press. $22.95.


Stieb Helps Blue Jays Set Back Rangers, 2-1
LEAD: Dave Stieb and three Toronto relievers allowed five hits tonight as the Blue Jays beat the Texas Rangers, 2-1.


Dime Savings Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dime Savings Bank of New York (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b20,373,000
b10,478,000
Per share
.89
.46
b-Included extraordinary net operating loss carryforwards of $6,209,000, or 27 cents a share, for the latest quarter and $4,329,000, or 19 cents a share, for the year-earlier period.


WALESA DECLARES INTENTION TO SEEK POLISH PRESIDENCY
LEAD: Lech Walesa, leader of the Solidarity trade union, today declared his intention to run for the presidency of Poland, the first step in an apparent campaign to force President Wojciech Jaruzelski from office.


Signs of Plywood Trouble
LEAD: One of the first signs of degrading fire-retardant plywood is a darkening of the plywood's color from the normal light tan to a dark brown on the underside, or attic side, of the roofing.


Pilsen Journal;   G.I.'s or Russians? Time to Show the Snapshots
LEAD: With lots of American flags and the beer that made this Bohemian city famous, Pilsen is cheerfully preparing to celebrate a truth that it holds dear but has rarely been able to tell.
The last time was 22 years ago, during the brief spring of freedom in 1968.


Sunair Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunair Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,214,553
950,456
Net inc
145,327
99,100
Share earns
.04
.03
6mo rev
2,066,404
2,440,511
Net inc
220,857
255,726
Share earns
.06
.07


West Mass Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Mass Bankshares Inc.
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
196,000
190,000
Per share
.16
.15


Auberges des Gouverneurs reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Auberges des Gouverneurs
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
39,884,706
39,768,825
Net inc
3,033,565
5,645,760
Share earns
.37
.68
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Bodies Found in Car for Sale
LEAD: Police Department workers in Queens discovered two bodies in the trunk of an abandoned car yesterday as they prepared the car for public auction, the police said.
The badly decomposed bodies of a man and a woman were found in the trunk of a 1988 Oldsmobile about 8:30 A.M. at the police pound in Whitestone, the police said.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about Carolyn Cochran Clark misstated her role in the Harvard Law School Association.
She is the first woman elected president of the 104-year-old association, not the first female member.


Study Helps Drug Stocks
LEAD: Clinical studies showing that a drug used to treat Parkinson's disease may also help victims of Alzheimer's disease helped the stocks of the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company and Mylan Laboratories Inc. yesterday, analysts said.


Star Banc Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Star Banc Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
17,236,000
15,477,000
Per share
.60
.54


International Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Paper Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,200,000,000
2,600,000,000
Net inc
180,000,000
223,000,000
Share earns
1.65
1.96
Shares outst
108,800,000
110,500,000


Cadence Acquires Software Company
LEAD: Cadence Design Systems Inc., a leading producer of software for designing integrated circuits, agreed to acquire Automated Systems Inc. of Milwaukee, which produces printed circuit board design software.
The deal, which is structured as a stock swap, is valued at about $23.8 million.


Mexican Inflation Slows
LEAD: Mexico's consumer price index rose 1.8 percent in March, continuing a downward trend that held inflation in the first quarter to 9.1 percent, according to figures released by the Banco de Mexico on Monday.
The index rose 4.8 percent in January and 2.3 percent in February.
The Government has set an inflation target of below 20 percent for 1990.


Separatist Coalition Takes Lead In Voting in a Yugoslav Republic
LEAD: In the first free multiparty elections in Yugoslavia since World War II, a center-right opposition coalition appears certain of a majority in the main chamber of the Slovenian Parliament.


Kenneth Robinson, 73, Former House Member
LEAD: J. Kenneth Robinson, a Virginia Republican who served in the House of Representatives for 14 years, died of pancreatic cancer on Sunday at his home in Winchester, Va.
He was 73 years old.


Disney Cites Survey on Theater Ads
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company today defended its policy of banning commercials on movie screens before its pictures are shown by releasing a study that concludes that 90 percent of moviegoers do not want commercials in theaters.


Farmstead Telephone Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farmstead Telephone Group
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,287,000
4,850,000
Net loss
2,367,000
406,000


War of Words Misfires On Drugs in Capital
LEAD: To the Editor:


Smith (A.O.) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith (A.O.) Corp.(A)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
237,158,000
274,397,000
Net inc
4,924,000
5,670,000
Share earns
.51
.59
Shares outst
7,910,512
8,001,860


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 6
Mar. 30
Apr. 7
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.5
6.7
6.6
Distillate production, daily
2.6
2.7
2.9
Gasoline stocks
225.5
228.3
227.5
Distillate stocks
100.2
102.8
96.1
Crude imports, daily
6.0
6.1
5.5
Product imports, daily
1.8
2.1
1.9
Crude stocks
370.9
362.7
325.9
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
82.1
83.9
82.4


Peoples Bancorp of Worceser Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorp of Worceser Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,369,000
1,522,000
Per share
.52
.52
Shares outst
2,628,082
2,929,397
The bank said its latest first quarter results included a non-cash expense in the amount of $312,000 on an after-tax basis, for the amortization of the deposit premium paid for the former First Service Bank for Savings.


Carbide Review Is Delayed
LEAD: A Supreme Court review of the Government's $470 million settlement with the Union Carbide Corporation for the 1984 Bhopal gas disaster was adjourned today until July, a news agency said.


WINE TALK
LEAD: LAST week's column set out to show that despite all the hand-wringing over high wine prices, it is not at all difficult to drink well for $10 a bottle or less.
That list dealt only with red wines; this one will deal with whites.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Companies


1 1/2 Tons of Cocaine Seized
LEAD: Four Federal agents on patrol along the Mexican border on Monday followed a trail of footprints to a trailer, where they arrested three men and confiscated more than a ton and a half of cocaine, the Border Patrol said.
The agents seized 3,192 pounds of cocaine near Naco, 100 miles southeast of Tucson, said Jacqui Parker, a spokeswoman for the Border Patrol.


IN CANADA'S WEST, MORE PROTESTERS
LEAD: Western Canada has long been a breeding ground for political protest movements.
Quietly, another one of them, the Reform Party of Canada, is gaining western strength and national attention, with implications for this country's political order and its relationship with the United States.


Aegon Insurance Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aegon Insurance Group (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,544,000,000
4,831,000,000
Net inc
232,000,000
183,000,000
Share earns
5.81
4.96
Results are in U.S. dollars; dollar amounts have been translated at the average rate of Dfl 2.12 equals $1.00.


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bandag Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Sales
127,681,000
114,326,000
Net inc
15,688,000
15,516,000
Share earns
1.08
1.06


Metro Datelines;   Private Citizen Lends $110,000 to County
LEAD: A retired postal worker outbid four banks to lend $110,000 to Genesee County - the first time in at least 24 years that the county has borrowed money from a private citizen, officials said.


Westinghouse Profits Are Up 11.1%
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said today that its first-quarter profit increased 11.1 percent in part because of the sales of two radio stations and a minority interest in a nuclear power project.


Execufirst Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Execufirst Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,943
b143,827
Per share
.01
-
b-Net loss


A Plywood Used in Many Homes Is Found to Decay in a Few Years
LEAD: A fire-retardant plywood that has become a standard building material in town house developments in the last decade has now been found to decompose after only a few years, leaving homeowners and builders with leaky and unsafe roofs and large repair bills.


GORBACHEV SPEAKS OF LITHUANIA MOVE
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that he might use his newly strengthened powers to impose Moscow's control over Lithuania as an extreme measure in case of civil conflict there, the official press agency Tass reported.


Ford in Australia
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company of Australia, the country's biggest car maker and a subsidiary of the Ford Motor Company of the United States, said it planned to spend $1.2 billion (Australian), or $916 million in United States currency, in the next five years to improve its products and factories.
The announcement came as the company said earnings had slid to $124.1 million (Australian) in 1989 from $126 million in 1988, despite a 16 percent increase in new car sales.


Review/Television;   The Perils and the Benefits Of Nature's Internal Clocks
LEAD: ''The Living Clock,'' tonight's offering on ''Infinite Voyage,'' is an absorbing report on research into humankind's sensitivity to the hours of the day and the seasons of the year.
You can catch it at 8 P.M. on Channels 13 and 49 and at 9 P.M. on Channel 21, the hours that nature has apparently set aside for peak viewing.


Infodata Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Infodata Systems Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,199,509
3,309,131
Net inc
145,360
110,608
Share earns
.07
.04
Yr rev
11,953,135
12,331,825
Net loss
823,858
b461,603
Share earns
-
.18
b


Inquiry Into Stealth's Performance In Panama Is Ordered by Cheney
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has ordered an inquiry into why the Air Force failed to inform him that one of its Stealth fighter planes missed its target during the Panama invasion, the Pentagon's chief spokesman said today.


Structural Dynamics Reearch reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Structural Dynamics Reearch (OTC)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Revenue
25,158,000
20,942,000
Net inc
2,411,000
1,536,000
Share earns
.35
.23
Shares outst
6,847,000
6,548,000
Share earnings are fully diluted.


Shuttle Liftoff Postponed Because of a Bad Valve
LEAD: A defective valve in the steering system of the space shuttle Discovery halted the countdown within four minutes of the planned liftoff today and forced an indefinite postponement of the mission to carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit.


Continental Adds Nicaragua Route
LEAD: Continental Airlines announced it would add nonstop service to Nicaragua from Houston's Intercontinental Airport, giving it flights to each of the seven Central American countries.
The nonstop service to Managua is scheduled to begin on July 1.


Power-Play Goal Gives Jets 4-3 Victory in 2d Overtime
LEAD: Dave Ellett's power-play goal at 1 minute 8 seconds of the second overtime gave the Winnipeg Jets a 4-3 victory over the Edmonton Oilers last night, lifting the Jets within a game of winning the Smythe Division playoff series.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Ed McCabe's Big Return: A Small Step
LEAD: THE copywriter who married a tough man to a tender chicken to build the Perdue poultry empire and the Scali, McCabe, Sloves advertising agency, Edward A. McCabe, said yesterday that he was returning to the advertising business.


Review/Film;   Dudley Moore Acts Up In Tony Bill's 'Crazy People'
LEAD: ''Let's face it, Steve,'' says Emory Leeson (Dudley Moore), ''you and I lie for a living.''


Billboards in War on Drugs Bring Criticism and Lawsuit in Carolina
LEAD: Sheriff Gene Taylor of Anderson County was only trying to catch drug dealers when he erected billboards promising to pay informers.
But the program has generated criticism, and he has been sued for $40 million by an informer.


Offers of Help for Fire-Ravaged Church Pour In


A Gas Burner Converts Light Into Electricity
LEAD: rrGetting electricity from natural gas has almost always meant burning the gas for heat first.
Usually more than half the energy is lost, including the energy given off as light.


Real Estate;   Church Plans To Expand Its Holdings
LEAD: THE parish of Trinity Church, which has owned extensive tracts of land in Manhattan for almost 300 years, is re-entering the New York real estate market to acquire properties that can increase the income the parish spends on charity.


Japanese Children To Sing at Carnegie Hall
LEAD: Members of Otowa Yurikago Kai, a chorus of Japanese youngsters, will make their United States debut on May 2 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The concert of traditional and contemporary children's songs will feature 30 members of the troupe, which in its entirety numbers 200 singers from 3 to 17 years old.


B&amp;H Bulk Carriers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* B&amp;H Bulk Carriers Ltd.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,358,000
4,152,000
Net inc
336,000
1,391,000
Share earns
.16
.68
Yr rev
23,055,000
15,129,000
Net inc
11,892,000
5,556,000
Share earns
5.83
2.72


House Democrats Challenge Bush By Seeking to Reduce Aid to Zaire
LEAD: In a challenge to the Bush Administration's Africa policy, House Democrats are moving to cut aid to Zaire to protest the reported corruption and human-rights violations of President Mobutu Sese Seko.


Allegheny Opposed On Reorganization
LEAD: Japonica Partners L.P. said it would file suit in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Pittsburgh to block Allegheny International Inc.'s reorganization plan.
Japonica contends Allegheny's plan was set up to allow a group that includes the company's senior management to seize control of Allegheny.
Japonica last week filed its own amended cash plan of reorganization, which increases the price it is offering for Allegheny by $5 million, to an aggregate of $655 million.


2 Strikers Charged in Greyhound Shooting
LEAD: Two striking drivers for Greyhound Lines were arrested by Federal agents here today and charged with one of more than two dozen shooting attacks against the company's buses since the drivers' union went on strike March 2.


Mongolia's Communists Mapping Changes to Keep Grip on Power
LEAD: Hoping to keep its 70-year grip on power in the face of a growing pro-democracy movement, the Communist Party opened a hastily convened congress today with a call for widespread change.


Exposure to Reactor Radiation Is Reported Up
LEAD: A consumer advocacy group said today that more nuclear power plant workers than ever before were exposed to measurable radiation in 1988, the last year for which data are available.


New York to Return to Court to Contest Census Count Rules
LEAD: A group of big cities and states, including New York and California, will return to a Federal court today, asking it to strike down the Commerce Department's guidelines for adjusting the 1990 census to compensate for expected undercounting of minorities and the poor.


Atnn Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atnn Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,378,251
814,549
Net inc
539,587
b5,410,418
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Student Loan Marketing Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Student Loan Marketing Assn (NYSE)
Qtr to Mar 31
1990
1989
Net inc
71,034,000
61,255,000
Share earns
.69
.60
Shares outst
99,128,000
102,395,000


Yevgeny Y. Savitsky, Soviet Flying Ace, 80
LEAD: Yevgeny Y. Savitsky, a World War II flying ace who shot down 22 enemy planes in 216 missions against the Nazis over the Soviet Union, Poland and Germany, died on Friday after a long illness.
He was 80 years old.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allied-Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., an aerospace and electronics company, said it had received an eight-year, $99 million contract to manage the United States space station center in Houston.
The contract includes a two-year option at $41 million.


Oce-van der Grinten NV reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oce-van der Grinten NV (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
296,600,000
253,300,000
Net inc
9,500,000
8,500,000
Share earns
3.16
2.84
Shares outst
3,009,057
3,006,306
The results are in U.S. dollars and have been converted from Dutch florins at Dfl 1.9105 equaled U.S.


Review/Dance;   A 13th-Century Mystic Takes Flight in Boston
LEAD: Johannes Eckhardt, a 13th-century German mystical theologian known as Meister Eckhart, would be a worthy hero for the flower children and new agers of the 1990's.
Or so one might suspect from the innocent piety of ''Airborne: Meister Eckhart,'' a theater-dance piece presented by Dance Umbrella on Friday night at the Boston Center for the Arts Cyclorama.


The Flag and a Few Punks
LEAD: There has been no epidemic of flag burning.
Most of the people who like the idea - all seven or eight of them - are now involved in the Supreme Court case testing the constitutionality of the new law against flag burning.
But legions of posturing public officials stand ready to scrap the Bill of Rights, all to show how sternly they would punish a handful of vandals.


New England Bank
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation said today that it would sell $665 million in assets of a subsidiary, New England Commercial Finance Corporation, to the National Bank of Canada for an undisclosed price.
The move is part of an asset sales program at the bank, which reported $1.11 billion in losses in 1989, mostly because of bad real estate loans.


Officer Kills Teen-Age Boy In Teaneck
LEAD: A 15-year-old youth who the police said was carrying a gun was shot to death by a Teaneck police officer near a school playground Tuesday evening, police officials said.


Rogers Is Suspended
LEAD: George Rogers, the former running back and Heisman Trophy winner, was suspended yesterday from a two-month-old job at the University of South Carolina following his arrest on cocaine charges last Saturday.


Guatemala to Investigate Nun's Kidnapping
LEAD: President Vinicio Crezo Arevalo has agreed to form a commission to investigate the kidnapping last November of an American Ursuline nun, a presisdential spokesman said today.


Blount Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Blount Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
155,662,000
230,876,000
Net inc
b9,047,000
c2,578,000
Share earns
.75
.21
Shares outst
12,042,732
12,028,055
Yr rev
683,843,000
1,062,257,000
Net inc
b21,800,000
c47,412,000
Share earns
1.81
3.94
Shares outst
12,040,823
12,026,868


Hallador Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hallador Petroleum
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,323,000
705,000
Net loss
1,428,000
254,000
Yr rev
3,128,000
1,908,000
Net loss
846,000
570,000
The 1989 results included a writedown of $1,111,000 in the carrying value of the company's oil and gas properties attributable primarily to reduced development potential in a major property and significant declines in gas prices since January 1990.


Bitter Race in Texas Ends With Richards As Democrats' Pick
LEAD: Ann Richards, the Texas State Treasurer, won the Democratic nomination for Governor here tonight, defeating Jim Mattox, the Attorney General, after an extraordinarily bitter primary campaign that revolved around allegations of drug use and personal attacks.


New York Starts Legal Action To Stop Home-Repair Fraud
LEAD: New York has begun taking legal action against 112 of the 10,000 unlicensed home-improvement contractors it believes are operating in the city, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday.


Football Cases Are Fun For Asbestos Lawyer
LEAD: Andrew T. Berry, who just won a big asbestos-liability case for Owens Illinois Inc. over its insurance companies, has also won a few for the New York Giants football team.


Interco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 24
1990
1989
Sales
380,304,000
483,116,000
Net loss
b23,332,000
c5,926,000
Yr sales
1,656,079,000
2,011,962,000
Net inc
b35,207,000
c70,150,000
Share earns
-
1.53
b-Included a loss of $5,454,000 for the quarter and a gain of $86,082,000, or $2.15 a share, for the year, both from discontinued operations.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of information sources about diabetes on Thursday, with the Personal Health column, misstated the address of the American Diabetes Association.
It is 1660 Duke Street, Alexandria, Va. 22314.


H.W. Kaufman Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* H.W. Kaufman Financial Group
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,074,000
4,188,000
Net inc
83,000
41,000
Share earns
.04
.02
Yr rev
19,400,000
15,500,000
Net inc
1,000,000
1,200,000
Share earns
.54
.66


Homefed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homefed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
34,545,000
30,472,000
Per share
1.62
1.42
Shares outst
21,335,497
21,452,881


Aircraft Carrier to Undergo a $729 Million Refitting


Genetic Code Found in 17-Million-Year-Old Leaf
LEAD: Scientists have extracted fragile strands of DNA, the genetic code of life, from a plant that thrived millions of years before the dawn of man.


Bush Bars Deportations
LEAD: President Bush issued an executive order today barring the deportation of Chinese students from the United States to spare them possible punishment at home.
Mr.
Bush promised last week to issue the order, which is effective immediately.


G.I. Accused of Murder in Panama Invasion
LEAD: The Army said today that it had charged a paratrooper with premeditated murder and aggravated assault during the invasion of Panama.
It was the first time since the Vietnam War that a soldier was charged with murder in a combat situation.


U.S. Role In Aid Bank Draws Fire
LEAD: The Bush Administration faces stiff opposition from conservative Republicans, organized labor and some special-interest ethnic groups to American membership in a new regional development bank for Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.


Efforts to Prop Up the Yen Have Little Effect on Dollar
LEAD: The dollar ended narrowly mixed yesterday in thin trading as dealers shrugged off continued efforts by some European central banks to shore up the Japanese yen.


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flowers Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 10
1990
1989
Sales
190,209,000
175,194,000
Net inc
7,708,000
5,817,000
Share earns
.22
.17
Shares outst
34,866,855
34,879,978
9mo sales
578,747,000
524,612,000
Net inc
b15,658,000
21,979,000
Share earns
.45
.63
Shares outst
34,864,855
34,861,581


Helio Smidt, Leader Of Varig, the Airline Of Brazil, Dies at 64
LEAD: Helio Smidt, the president of Varig Brazilian Airlines, died of cancer yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old and lived in Rio de Janeiro.


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Union Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b77,559,000
c72,181,000
Per share
.67
.68
b-Included a $1 million after-tax gain from the final payment on the 1988 sale of the factoring unit and a $2 million tax benefit from previously expensed alternative minimum tax.


Insituform Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insituform Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,583,119
5,622,980
Net inc
657,518
b115,795
Share earns
.06
-
Yr rev
36,446,277
15,545,629
Net inc
1,533,092
199,453
Share earns
.15
.02


School Stars Are Honored
LEAD: The 1990 Kodak Metropolitan High School All-Stars were honored at a dinner last night at the Downtown Athletic Club along with La Salle's Lionel Simmons, the winner of the Eastman Award as the outstanding basketball player in the country.


Police Say One Man Killed 3 Livery Drivers in the Bronx
LEAD: The police believe a serial killer has robbed and killed three livery cab drivers in the Bronx in the last five weeks, frightening radio-dispatched drivers in the borough and prompting many to stop working at night or to quit driving altogether.


Alma Sioux Scarberry, Writer, 90
LEAD: Alma Sioux Scarberry, a novelist, songwriter, reporter and an entertainer whose career spanned more than seven decades, died of a stroke on Tuesday at a San Antonio nursing home.
She was 90 years old.


Seaport Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seaport Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,250,000
3,591,000
Net inc
522,000
b596,000
Share earns
.13
-
Yr sales
9,552,000
16,045,000
Net inc
212,000
b525,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


Inmate With AIDS Is Guilty Of Trying to Kill by Biting
LEAD: An inmate who has AIDS was convicted yesterday of attempted murder for biting a Camden County sheriff's officer and telling him to ''die, you pig!''


Liberty National Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liberty National Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
8,554,000
7,494,000
Per share
.72
.67
Shares outst
12,310,000
11,615,000


Durham Journal;   The Day The Voters Struck Out The Bulls
LEAD: Life was simple and seductive in ''Bull Durham,'' the 1988 film about minor league baseball and major league sex in a small Southern town.


Bridge
LEAD: One of the greatest female players in the history of the game died in January, just short of her 88th birthday.
She was Margaret Wagar, an Atlanta resident most of her life, who retired from the game in 1978.


Why Not Just Ban All Political Ads From TV?;   Where's the Press?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Political Idealists Trying to Hold Back the Night
LEAD: Waldemar Hille joined the Communist Party 48 years ago believing that the movement would create a more compassionate and humane America.


New Strategies for Military Suppliers
LEAD: During the last round of military budget cuts, in the 1970's, the nation's military contractors diversified into everything from canoes and buses to coffins and solar energy.
Now that a new round of cuts is likely, the companies are staying closer to home.
They are scrambling to repackage and find new outlets for products once thought attractive primarily for fighting the cold war.


Sonoco Products Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonoco Products Co. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
403,526,000
433,134,000
Net inc
24,812,000
24,573,000
Share earns
.57
.56
Shares outst
43,728,467
43,877,749
Sales in the year-ago first quarter included the plastic motor oil bottle business which was merged into Sonoco Graham Co.


Judge Sets Trial Date in Burning of Boy, 12
LEAD: A May 23 trial date was tentatively set yesterday for a 13-year-old boy accused of burning David Opont, 12, whose critical injuries evoked an outpouring of sympathy that included a hospital visit from former President Ronald Reagan.


Neworld Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neworld Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
104,000
2,421,000
Per share
.03
.55
Shares outst
4,036,000
4,368,000


Review/Jazz;   A Niche for Moonlighting
LEAD: For the last 20 years Lew Anderson, an alto saxophonist, composer and arranger, has been leading an ad hoc big band made up of musicians moonlighting from steady jobs in recording studios and the pit bands of Broadway musicals.
He has recently found an ideal time and place for his 15-piece ensemble to play - from 5:45 to 7:45 P.M.


D&amp;N Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* D&amp;N Financial (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,231,000
2,039,000
Per share
.33
.56


Higgins to Join N.B.A.
LEAD: Sean Higgins, who helped the University of Michigan win the national championship a year ago, said yesterday that he had withdrawn from school and would make himself available for the National Basketball Association draft.
Higgins, a 6-foot-9-inch junior, played both forward and guard during his three seasons with the Wolverines.


Miller Expanding Brand
LEAD: The Miller Brewing Company announced this week that it would expand sales of its new low-calorie Genuine Draft Light beer into 10 states.
Genuine Draft Light, which capitalizes on the success of Miller's fast-growing regular Genuine Draft brand, was introduced in several test markets last July.
Milwaukee-based Miller said the beer would be sold statewide in Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah and Washington.


Reviews/Music;   Branford Marsalis Band
LEAD: The saxophonist Branford Marsalis's show at the Miller Theater on Saturday night confirmed several things that were suggested at his recent engagement at the Village Vanguard.
For one, he's leading one of the best groups in jazz.
And for another, the jazz audience is rapidly getting younger.


Like Old Times, Viola and Franco Share Spotlight
LEAD: Frank Viola and John Franco played their own version of hockey during spring training with the Mets.
Viola rolled baseballs at his teammate and Franco kicked them away and made saves like a goalie.


Landlords Can Also Take Some Blame for Structural Accidents
LEAD: To the Editor:


Books of The Times;   The Everlasting Grip of Bonds Forged by War
LEAD:
These Good Men
By Michael Norman
Illustrated. 310 pages. Crown Publishers. $19.95.


Boeing Still Negotiating Japanese Tie
LEAD: Negotiations are continuing between the Boeing Company and three potential Japanese equity partners in its proposed 767-X aircraft, the company said today in response to reports in the Japanese press that an agreement was imminent.


N.B.A. Hands Out $10,500 in Fines
LEAD: Mike McGee, a Phoenix Suns guard, Charles Barkley, the Philadelphia 76ers' star forward, and Charles Oakley of the Knicks were among seven players fined a total of $10,500 yesterday for fights in three different National Basketball Association games.


Total Systems Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Systems Services Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
17,024,000
15,390,000
Net inc
2,654,000
2,402,000
Share earns
.17
.15
Shares outst
15,888,122
15,874,772


Upheaval in the East;   5 Kosovo Province Officials Quit, Citing Serbian Pressure
LEAD: The Prime Minister and five other Cabinet members in Kosovo province have resigned after four months in office, citing pressure from Communist leaders in the republic of Serbia, the official news agency reported today.


Tracking the Life Of the New Father
LEAD: FOR the 16 people seated around a horseshoe-shaped mahogany table in their company's conference room here, lunch was sandwiches and park-bench talk.
As they ate, they shared worries about a deep concern in their lives: how to pursue a demanding career yet be an involved parent.
Here is what some of them had to say: ''I have so little time with my child.


DRUG IS PROMISING IN SICKLE-CELL TEST
LEAD: An experimental drug treatment for sickle-cell disease may be the first to affect the disorder itself and not just the symptoms, researchers said today.
They said promising results in preliminary human trials warranted larger trials.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: '' I WAS totally baffled by this because we've always pushed the importance of education,'' said Gayle L. of Minneapolis.


Crestar Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crestar Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
27,100,000
24,400,000
Per share
.85
.78


Todd-Ao Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Todd-Ao Corp.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
6,192,000
5,913,000
Net inc
137,000
64,000
Share earns
.03
.02
6mo rev
12,025,000
10,692,000
Net inc
228,000
96,000
Share earns
.06
.02


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bertelsmann Music Group, the music and video subsidiary of the West German media company Bertelsmann A.G., named Lou Maglia president of its new music label, still unnamed, which will be based in Los Angeles.


Richard M. Kain, an Authority On James Joyce, Is Dead at 81
LEAD: Richard M. Kain, an authority on James Joyce, died on April 5 at his home in Louisville, Ky.
He was 81 years old.


Close to Home
LEAD: THE crazy quilt was not one of the craft's beauties, and some of its patches shredded at a finger's touch.
But a slip of paper pinned to a corner read ''Your grandmother made this out of family clothes, 1890's,'' and I could not bear to let it go to the ragman.


Brenco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brenco Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,469,000
16,340,000
Net inc
1,377,000
1,067,000
Share earns
.14
.11


Novellus Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Novellus Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
15,195,000
10,451,000
Net inc
3,191,000
2,132,000
Share earns
.47
.36
Shares outst
6,844,000
5,845,000


Talking Deals;   MCI Deal Called Antitrust Test
LEAD: THE agreement by the MCI Communications Corporation to buy Telecom USA Inc. raises several antitrust issues.
The Justice Department's response to the $1.25 billion deal, in which the nation's second-largest long-distance company would buy the No. 4 company, is widely seen as a test case of the Bush Administration's antitrust policy.


Washington Bancorp N.J.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Bancorp N.J.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b137,000
151,000
Per share
.06
.07
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $613,000 on sale of real estate.


Molex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Molex Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
146,025,000
141,662,000
Net inc
16,677,000
14,782,000
Share earns
.67
.58
9mo rev
435,546,000
423,979,000
Net inc
45,556,000
38,850,000
Share earns
1.82
1.53


Guardian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardian Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,476,069
1,172,286
Per share
.43
.36


Nissan Car Priced
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Corporation's Infiniti division said its new four-door luxury sports sedan will cost about $20,000 when it is offered for sale this fall in the United States.
The public today got its first look at the car, called the G20, at the New York Automobile Show.
The front-wheel-drive sedan is intended as a less-expensive alternative to Infiniti's M30 and Q45 models, which sell for $23,500 and $38,000, respectively.


Orange Juice Prices Jump; Six-Day Slide Ends for Oil
LEAD: Prices of orange juice futures jumped yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange after the Government projected a smaller Florida orange harvest than the market had expected.


Trouble All Over
LEAD: Forms lost or not delivered.


Electro Rent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro Rent Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
26,902,000
27,625,000
Net inc
1,634,000
1,715,000
Share earns
.39
.41
9mo rev
80,831,000
85,888,000
Net inc
5,181,000
6,103,000
Share earns
1.24
1.30


Freed Rapist Accused of Theft
LEAD: Lawrence Singleton, a convicted rapist whose release from prison caused a furor in California when several communities chased him out of town, has been arrested and accused of trying to steal a $10 camera.
Mr.
Singleton, 62 years old, was not jailed after his arrest on Sunday at a drugstore in Brandon but was given a notice to appear in court May 2 on the misdemeanor charge of petty theft, the authorities said.


Stake in Renault Nearer for Volvo
LEAD: The French Cabinet cleared the path for a new law that would allow Volvo of Sweden to take a 25 percent stake in the state car maker Renault.
It approved a legal framework strictly limiting the opening of Renault's capital to 25 percent and stipulating that the state should retain 75 percent of its voting rights, a Government spokesman, Louis Le


Saatchi Twist In Developing New Products
LEAD: EAGER to reap the benefits agencies receive from helping their clients develop new products, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising has begun to promote a novel system that turns product development into a school game.


Review/Dance;   Philadelphia Troupe Makes Its New York Debut
LEAD: Philadanco breezed into town like a fresh spring wind on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater, where it is performing in its New York debut season through Sunday.
Now 20 years old, the Philadelphia-based company has the verve and brightness of new paint.
The performers move with the clarity and the pulled-up look of ballet dancers, the stretch and the direct emotional commitment of modern dancers and the sharp attack of jazz dancers.


Fluff 'n' Stuff on Opening Day
LEAD: It was the opening of the baseball season, the sun shone - except, of course, in Chicago, where it was a typically gray, windy, mitten-required opening day - the players ran to their positions, the fans ran to their seats, or to shelter under the stands, and the air was filled with cries of ''Play Ball!


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Celanese Canada
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
92,000,000
101,600,000
Net inc
12,800,000
13,500,000
Share earns
.93
.98
The company is listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Officer Shot in Left Leg During Building Search
LEAD: A police officer was shot in the left leg last night as he tried to execute a drug-related search warrant in an apartment in the Coney Island section of Brooklyn, the police said.


SICK SAVINGS UNITS RIDDLED BY FRAUD, F.B.I. HEAD ASSERTS
LEAD: The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that fraud in the savings and loan institutions seized by Federal regulators was ''pervasive'' and warned that pursuing the hundreds of cases would be a costly effort stretching out over several years.


Addenda
LEAD: *
The WPP Group agency Ogilvy &amp; Mather and its Adams &amp; Rinehart unit, a public relations firm, have formed Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart, a corporate and financial public relations and advertising firm in London.
Jonathan P. L. Perry has been named chairman and chief executive.


Federal National Mortgage Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal National Mortgage Assn.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
277,000,000
165,000,000
Share earns
1.06
.67


Upheaval in the East;   Romania Advises King Michael to Forgo His Visit
LEAD: The Government said today that the return of King Michael to Romania on Thursday could ''exacerbate existing conflicts'' here, and it advised him not to make the trip.


'Smart' Cars and Highways To Help Unsnarl Gridlock
LEAD: Predicting a doubling of traffic in the next three decades, Federal highway officials are actively promoting a major program of computerization and automation that would fundamentally alter the designs of vehicles and highways.


Artfully Built Nests Await Feathering
LEAD: LAURA FOREMAN has designed a series of whimsical houses for leafy sites around Manhattan.
The city is a second home for a couple of her prospective clients, the house wrens that fly in seasonally on business or on pleasure.
Others, like the house sparrows, have their primary residence in New York.


WALESA RETREATS ON PRESIDENCY BID
LEAD: A day after announcing that he would run for President, Lech Walesa, the leader of the Solidarity trade union, said today that he was taking it back, at least part of the way.


Air War With Castro Costs U.S. Good Will
LEAD: To the Editor:


Why Not Just Ban All Political Ads From TV?
LEAD: To the Editor:


N.J. Transit Proposes Raising Fares
LEAD: N.J.
Transit today proposed raising rail fares by 10.9 percent and bus fares by 9.9 percent for transit riders in northern New Jersey, where most of the system's 291,600 daily commuters live.


Homestead Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homestead Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,500,000
b21,500,000
Per share
.40
-
b-Net loss


First-Quarter CBS Profits Jumped 52%
LEAD: CBS Inc. yesterday reported a 52 percent increase in its first-quarter net income and a 16.5 percent gain in sales, largely because of its broadcasts of the Super Bowl and the NCAA basketball tournament.


Martin Case Puzzling
LEAD: William Reedy, the Detroit bar owner who told the police he was driving Billy Martin's pickup truck on Christmas Day when it crashed, killing the former Yankee manager, has given a different story to The Detroit Free Press.
Reedy, who suffered a broken hip in the wreck at Martin's rural home near Binghamton, N.Y., was quoted in an article published yesterday as saying that he had lied to the police.


Vessel Traffic Systems Are a Safety Bargain
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviews/Music;   Power vs. Idealism in Bolcom's 'Cinema Paradise'
LEAD: The composer William Bolcom in a recent article talked of the continuing evolution of a musical comedy: ''It never stops.
Everybody comes in and has got something to say.''


Why Not Just Ban All Political Ads From TV?;   For More Discourse
LEAD: To the Editor:


City National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* City National (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
13,912,000
14,049,000
Per share
.44
.46


An Appointment That Stirs the Pot
LEAD: As one of their first major exports since the fall of the Berlin wall, East Germans have sent New York a music director.


Shelby Williams Indus reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelby Williams Indus (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
40,961,000
40,318,000
Net inc
910,000
874,000
Share earns
.10
.09


Raytheon Profit Rises
LEAD: Raytheon Inc. said today that gains in its military electronics, aircraft and energy divisions helped push earnings up by 8.4 percent in the first quarter on a 7.3 percent rise in sales.
Earnings in the period rose to $130.9 million, or $2 a share, from $120.8 million, or $1.83 a share, in the first three months of 1989.


Onbancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Onbancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,262,000
2,614,000
Per share
.45
.43
Shares outst
7,172,247
6,121,136


Reviews/Music;   Two Brazilian Visitors
LEAD: More than a few fans of Brazilian music created a double bill for themselves on Friday night by attending rare New York shows by the pianist, guitarist and composer Egberto Gismonti at Town Hall and the singer Elba Ramalho at the Palladium.
Both Mr.
Gismonti's jazz and Miss Ramalho's pop are self-conscious attempts to make modern Brazilian music that is both cosmopolitan and rooted, fusing the local and the international.


Scimed Life Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scimed Life Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1989
1988
Sales
20,756,000
9,169,000
Net inc
5,321,000
1,820,000
Share earns
.40
.14
Yr sales
67,362,000
27,424,000
Net inc
16,859,000
3,924,000
Share earns
1.29
.33


Northrop Is Sued on Billing
LEAD: The Justice Department said today that it had filed a lawsuit against the Northrop Corporation, accusing the company of overbilling the Navy for work on the F/A-18 fighter-bomber.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: DIANE SAWYER may be an elusive television image for most people.
But for the person who wins her at Monday's Fantasy Auction at Sotheby's, she will cook breakfast for two and deliver her version of the week's news, in person at the winner's home.


Newmark &amp; Lewis Hires Outsider as a Top Executive
LEAD: Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc., a discount retailer of consumer electronics and home appliances in the Northeast, said yesterday that it had hired Ron Fleisher as president and chief operating officer.


Guy Simoni, 62, Dies; Construction Executive
LEAD: Guy P. Simoni, a founder and executive vice president of MacLean Grove &amp; Company, a construction concern based in Greenwich, Conn., died of lung cancer yesterday in St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old and lived in Tenafly, N.J., and Vero Beach, Fla.


Intervoice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intervoice Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
6,500,000
3,600,000
Net inc
2,000,000
800,000
Share earns
.36
.20
Yr rev
24,400,000
11,100,000
Net inc
7,000,000
2,100,000
Share earns
1.45
.60


Accounts Differ in Officer's Fatal Shooting of Youth
LEAD: Tonight's confrontation between the police and young blacks came after a day of conflicting accounts about the fatal shooting of a 15-year-old black youth by a white officer on Tuesday.


Jockey Banned 10 Years
LEAD: Sylvester Carmouche was banned yesterday from racing in Louisiana for 10 years because he allegedly took a fog-shrouded short cut to win a race at Delta Downs aboard a 23-1 long shot named Landing Officer.
The vote to suspend Carmouche was 7-1.


Where Paper Planes Fly, Census Plan Crashes
LEAD: This was supposed to be the easy part: counting people by sending them 1990 census forms in the mail, which they would fill out and return.


F.B.I. Seeks Broad Powers to Seize Documents Without Subpoenas
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation is seeking broad new powers to seize documents and other evidence in criminal investigations without the use of grand jury subpoenas, bureau and Congressional officials say.


BTR Gains in Attempt To Take Over Norton
LEAD: A Federal judge dealt a blow today to the Norton Company in its effort to elude a takeover by the British industrial conglomerate BTR P.L.C. by ordering the company to restore a canceled shareholder meeting at which BTR intends to try to oust the board.


Federal Paper Board reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Paper Board (NYSE)
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Sales
316,810,000
284,724,000
Net inc
38,786,000
47,096,000
Share earns
.92
1.16


Devils Beaten by Capitals
LEAD: The Devils failed to match the intensity of the Capitals, were ineffective on the power play again and suffered a 3-1 loss tonight in the fourth game of their Patrick Division semifinal series.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bechtel Group Inc., San Francisco, won a contract from the Hong Kong government to manage a $16 billion construction project scheduled for completion in 1997, which is to include a new airport, the world's longest suspension bridge, a harbor tunnel and a rail transit system.


Home Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Savings &amp; Loan
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
654,038
760,319
Per share
.38
.45
6mo net inc
1,114,575
1,572,186
Per share
.65
.93


Counting the People: How It's Going
LEAD: From residents of a high-rise in Houston that was listed as a single-family residence to families in Oakland neighborhoods that are recovering from the October earthquake, hundreds of thousands of Americans have said they never received census forms.
Here is a look at what is being said about the census in cities and regions around the nation.


Kimberly-Clark reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimberly-Clark (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,573,300,000
1,421,800,000
Net inc
117,200,000
103,100,000
Share earns
1.46
1.28
Shares outst
80,500,000
80,600,000


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I believe that most musicians who know me know that in rehearsal I am quite tough.
But I am still a friend.''
- Kurt Masur, the next music director of the New York Philharmonic.
[C18:2.]


DS Bancor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DS Bancor Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
960,000
1,072,000
Per share
.44
.48


Suspect in Killing of Trooper Says 'Fat Guy' Gave Him a Gun
LEAD: A man charged with killing a New York State undercover narcotics officer has told New York City police detectives that ''some fat guy from Brooklyn'' gave him a gun and was going to pay him $3,000 to ''rip off some guys who wanted to buy drugs.''


Employee Benefit reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Employee Benefit (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
25,963,004
17,102,952
Net loss
b7,590,140
c516,603
Share earns
-
.13
9mo rev
66,129,823
48,373,601
Net loss
b5,540,952
c978,630
Share earns
-
.25


Horn Fits Right In With Oriole System
LEAD: The Baltimore Orioles derived remarkable results last season from their collection of youngsters and reclamation projects.
This season is only days old and already their system is working again.


Contest in Texas To Test Currents In U.S. Politics
LEAD: With the bitter Democratic primary finally over, Texas turned its attention today to a gubernatorial race that no novelist could have plotted better: the tough-talking woman from Austin versus the rough-hewn oil man from Midland.


The Fame Lives On (In Fact, It Lives Here)
LEAD: FINDING a suitable, affordable place to live in New York is a job to be approached with caution: land mines of all kinds lurk in unlikely corners; awful woes are discovered only after one has moved in.


Walsh Leaves the Door Open For New Iran-Contra Cases
LEAD: Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, said today that he was at least several months away from completing his three-year-old inquiry, and he left open the possibility of still further indictments of Reagan Administration officials.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ANTONINA TUMKOVSKY, a strict but beloved teacher at the School of American Ballet, has been appointed to the Mae L. Wien Memorial Chair.
The chair, awarded for one year to a distinguished teacher at the school, was established by LAWRENCE WIEN in honor of his wife, a patron of the dance.
Mrs.
Tumkovsky began teaching at the school in 1949, when she emigrated from the Soviet Union.


An Old Liberal, a New Sermon
LEAD: Robert B. Reich is on the stump again.
His audience is a cross section of the Washington establishment: nearly 80 lobbyists, politicians, businessmen, economists, union leaders and journalists.
They hurried through their luncheon of salmon and asparagus, leaving ample time to hear Mr.
Reich speak and to cross-examine him.


U.S. Pilots in Peru Join Battle Against Forces of Coca Trade
LEAD: American civilian helicopter pilots who are part of the anti-drug effort at this Peruvian jungle base took part in a fierce two-hour firefight Saturday with guerrillas supporting coca growers, American officials said today.


Jury Gets Family-Slayer Case
LEAD: The jury in the John List murder trial deliberated for six hours today before being sent home for the night by Judge William L'E.
Wertheimer of Superior Court.


Chancellor Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chancellor Group Ltd.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
93,745,000
89,169,000
Net inc
11,153,000
8,766,000
Share earns
.83
.66
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Yanks: Another Opening, Another Snow
LEAD: On their second attempt at opening night, a few things went right for the Yankees: Dave Winfield seemed to put a troublesome spring behind him with a single that drove in the first run of the season, Don Mattingly hit a double and scored a run and Tim Leary struck out three batters in his debut with his new team.


One Reason It's Hard To Keep Off Lost Weight
LEAD: A change in body enzymes may be one reason that many people who lose weight regain it quickly, according to a new study.


Duratek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duratek Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,286,000
2,232,000
Net loss
650,000
b301,000
Share earns
-
.08
Yr sales
6,233,000
5,567,000
Net loss
999,000
b260,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income and included extraordinary tax credits of $73,000, or 2 cents a share, for the quarter and $87,000, or 2 cents a share, for the year.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION - 10 A.M.


A Kind of Treachery
LEAD: Muammar el-Qaddafi orders the release of three hostages kidnapped more than two years ago by one of the bands of terrorist killers that he controls.


Avantek reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avantek (OTC)
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Sales
34,534,000
34,857,000
Net inc
b136,000
c517,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $44,000.
c-Net loss


Mead Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mead Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
1,141,400,000
1,128,900,000
Net inc
39,500,000
52,600,000
Share earns
.62
.81
Shares outst
67,000,000
67,300,000


Violence in Kashmir Intensifying; India-Pakistan Relations Worsen
LEAD: The Muslim campaign for the independence of Kashmir from India spread to Bombay today with a bomb attack that wounded 34 people and brought Indian relations with Pakistan to an angrier level.


Del Webb Settles Webcott Dispute
LEAD: The Del Webb Corporation and its largest shareholder, Webcott Holdings, said they had settled differences over board representation and would avoid a proxy fight for control of the company.


Cuban-American Is Apprehended In Slaying of Chilean Exile in '76
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested a Cuban-American in Florida today on charges that he detonated the car bomb that killed Orlando Letelier, a Chilean exile leader, in Washington in 1976.


Reporter's Notebook;   Nepal's Mix: It's Protests And Tourists
LEAD: Komal Lamichane, a sturdy 31-year-old farmer, lay on the bed, his right leg in a cast, and told a visitor to this Buddhist town near Katmandu how he was detained by the local police and kicked and beaten last week for backing the pro-democracy movement.


Twin Killing In College Game
LEAD: The shot heard round the world -at least, the lacrosse world - was fired by Gary Gait of Syracuse in a playoff game against Pennsylvania two years ago.


Diagram
LEAD: IN early spring, it is a good idea to inspect your home's exterior for winter damage.
Performing minor maintenance and repairs now can often prevent the need for major repairs later.
And if large-scale work is necessary, you may still be able to beat the warm-weather rush to hire professional help.


Osborne K. Taylor, Executive, 88
LEAD: Osborne K. Taylor, a retired assistant deputy treasurer of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, died of heart disease on Monday in a nursing home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 88 years old and lived in Caldwell, N.J.


BF Enterprises reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BF Enterprises
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,487,000
3,478,000
Net loss
337,000
b41,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income and included an extraordinary tax credit of $3,000.


Park Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Park Communications Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
36,149,000
36,572,000
Net inc
2,810,000
2,845,000
Share earns
.14
.14
Share earnings are restated to reflect a 3-for-2 stock split effective Sept.


Port Authority Set to Name Ex-Byrne Aide as Chairman
LEAD: Richard C. Leone, a former New Jersey State Treasurer, is expected to be elected today to head the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the far-flung agency that runs everything from the World Trade Center to its own rail line under the Hudson River.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Cracked Floor Tiles


Group Holds 6.6% Of Pic 'N' Save
LEAD: An investment group led by David H. Batchelder, a former top adviser to T. Boone Pickens, said that it had acquired a 6.6 percent stake in the Pic 'N' Save Corporation and that it would solicit consents from shareholders for control of the company's board.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the group, called Girard Partners L.P., said that if it gained control of the board it would ''solicit offers for Pic 'N' Save.


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomas Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
120,092,000
87,450,000
Net inc
3,125,000
b5,318,000
Share earns
.31
.52
Shares outst
10,239,203
10,165,806
b-Included non-recurring gains of $2,175,000, or 21 cents a share, related to the sale of a distribution and the receipt of a discounted note.


Transcontinental Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transcontinental Realty (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,100,000
9,000,000
Net loss
7,700,000
15,000,000
Yr rev
29,727,000
32,898,000
Net loss
6,950,000
17,653,000
Shares outst
12,564,787
12,279,940


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The Director of the F.B.I. said fraud at savings and loans seized by Federal regulators was ''pervasive'' and warned that pursuing the hundreds of cases would be a costly effort stretching out over several years.
William S. Sessions said the agency was investigating criminal fraud at 234 failed institutions.


Currents;   Knockoff! Knockoff! Price Wars Are No Joke
LEAD: THE furniture knockoff wars escalated in March when Atelier International, which has licenses to reproduce many classic designs, announced that it had reduced prices up to 40 percent for more than 200 items in its Atelier International/Cassina Master's Collection.
Major competitors, like Palazzetti, gloated.


How to Protect New York's Future
LEAD: Gov.
Mario Cuomo's proposed $1.9 billion bond act to protect New York's environment has many more friends than enemies.
The danger that the act would be torpedoed by the general budgetary turmoil in Albany is now receding.
But the proposal's considerable promise could still be corrupted by narrow, local interests.


WHITE HOUSE BARS A UNITED GERMANY IN BOTH ALLIANCES
LEAD: In its first detailed comment on a Soviet proposal that a unified Germany belong to NATO and the Warsaw Pact, the Bush Administration rejected the idea today as a guise for making a united Germany neutral.


New Agency Planned For Moosehead Beer
LEAD: The Guinness Import Company said yesterday that it would soon name a new agency for its Moosehead brand beer, which had been advertised by McCann-Erickson.
Guinness acquired the brand earlier this year when it bought All Brand Importers from Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.
A spokeswoman for McCann-Erickson said the account had billed $3 million to $4 million.


Tax-Return Pace Better
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service is ahead of last year's pace in processing income tax returns.


Graf Routs Temesvari
LEAD: Steffi Graf, who seems able to live without her sport as easily as she dominates it, said tonight that the only thing she missed about tennis during her two months away from it was the competition.
Ironically, she did not get much of that from Andrea Temesvari today in their third-round match at the Bausch &amp; Lomb championships.


Oldest DNA Analyzed


Currents;   Homages To Nature From City Designs
LEAD: IN the 1960's, when Chicago was undergoing major urban renewal, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville bought a large collection of architectural ornaments designed by the Chicago-based architect Louis H. Sullivan.
Now, said David Huntley, director of the university's museum, ''We thought it was time to make the collection available to the public.


First Federal Savings Bank (Salt Lake City) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank (Salt Lake City)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
290,616
b686,035
Per share
.25
-
9mo net inc
559,679
b572,582
Per share
.49
-
b-Net loss
The bank attributed the rise in earnings to an increase in net interest income.


De Klerk and Tutu Talk On Ending Black Strife
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk met today with Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu and other church leaders to discuss how to end black warfare in Natal province that has killed 400 people in the last two months.


Craig Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Craig Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,981,000
1,187,000
Net inc
1,450,000
1,220,000
Share earns
.32
.29
Shares outst
4,581,000
4,271,000
The company said it restated its previously announced earnings for the first quarter to reflect its share of a non-recurring loss of $278,000 at Reading Co.


No Date Set for Shuttle Flight
LEAD: Space agency officials met today to discuss the problems that prevented the launching of the space shuttle Discovery on Tuesday, but they did not reschedule the mission.


An Exciting Ground Cover Needn't Rip the Shingles Off
LEAD: THE dullest word I can think of in the gardener's vocabulary is ground covers - those plants, other than turf grasses, that fill in spaces where weeds would otherwise grow or the sight of dirt might offend the tidy eye.


Bank South Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank South Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
11,528,000
10,442,000
Per share
.34
.31


Harold Ballard, 86, Feisty Owner Of Toronto Maple Leafs, Is Dead
LEAD: Harold Ballard, the owner of the Toronto Maple Leafs of the National Hockey League and a man described by his team's fact book as ''one of the most loved and hated men in Canada,'' died yesterday in Toronto.
He was 86 years old and had spent most of the last two years in and out of hospitals because of diabetes-related heart problems.


Healy Gets 3 Clues and Bad Answer
LEAD: Glenn Healy, without a notion where the puck was, stood still in his goal crease and began to piece together reality, bit by painful bit.


Comdial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comdial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
20,231,000
19,143,000
Net inc
40,000
b1,638,000
b-Net loss


Bank of South Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of South Carolina
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
169,612
123,806
Per share
.32
.23


Market Place;   Rulings May Aid Waste Companies
LEAD: IN the next few months, the Environmental Protection Agency is expected to set stiff new standards for the nation's 6,000 landfills, which store 160 million tons of municipal solid waste, mostly household trash, every year.
That could be good news for the handful of publicly traded companies that have invested in high-tech holes in the ground, including Waste Management Inc., Browning-Ferris Industries, the Chambers Development Company and Laidlaw Inc.


Burlington Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Resources Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
513,800,000
438,931,000
Net inc
b87,728,000
c69,221,000
Share earns
.60
.46
b-Included gains on sales of $19,190,000, or 13 cents a share.


Shell Offers a New Gasoline In 10 Cities to Aid Air Quality
LEAD: The Shell Oil Company announced yesterday that it had introduced a reformulated gasoline to reduce tailpipe and evaporation emissions from automobiles in 10 cities, including New York, where air quality is a problem.


Raytheon Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raytheon Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,225,000,000
2,073,000,000
Net inc
130,900,000
120,800,000
Share earns
2.00
1.83
Shares outst
65,400,000
66,000,000


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Willamette Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
469,889,000
437,816,000
Net inc
42,437,000
39,793,000
Share earns
1.67
1.57


Transworld Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transworld Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b615,000
497,000
Per share
.55
.45
b-Included a $66,000 gain from sale of lease rights.
The latest per share earnings adjusted to reflect 5 percent stock dividend payble April 18.


Farley Seeks Revision In Debt of Pepperell Bid
LEAD: William F. Farley, the majority shareholder of West Point-Pepperell Inc. who failed last year to acquire all the textile maker for $1.56 billion, has proposed to revise the debt of the company he created to finance the takeover.


Linear Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linear Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
5,478,000
5,003,000
Net inc
484,000
411,000
Share earns
.12
.10
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Novell Beginning Japanese Venture
LEAD: Novell Inc., a Provo, Utah, producer of software for operating computer networks, has started a joint venture with the Softbank Corporation, a leading software and computer peripherals distributor and technical publishing house in Japan.
The joint venture, Novell K.K., will market and support Japanese versions of Novell's Netware products, adapted to run on


1,500 Attend Funeral of Courageous AIDS Fighter
LEAD: More than 1,500 friends and admirers, including Barbara Bush and Michael Jackson, attended the funeral today for Ryan White, the 18-year-old AIDS patient who taught the nation a lesson in courage.


Why Risk Start Now, Needlessly?
LEAD: At the eleventh hour, Washington and Moscow have introduced ill-timed complications into their strategic arms reduction talks.
Both sides are now reaching for a lot more than they can quickly resolve.
Maybe they believe they're doing the right thing, though belatedly.
Maybe they're just bargaining or maneuvering for internal political reasons.


Vivigen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vivigen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,907,500
1,897,500
Net inc
286,200
353,300
Share earns
.11
.15


Currents;   From London, Works of 3 Newsmakers
LEAD: IN London's design world, three names keep making news: Ron Arad, Danny Lane and Tom Dixon.


RJR Nabisco Bonds Jump
LEAD: Prices of some bonds of RJR Nabisco Inc. jumped more than three points yesterday on heavy volume amid rumors that Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company was planning to buy back an entire issue of the bonds.


Review/Dance;   A 'Cinderella' Sprinkled With Sugar
LEAD: Paul Mejia, who was a soloist at the New York City Ballet until he and his wife, Suzanne Farrell, resigned from that company in 1969, became interested in choreography a few years later while dancing in Europe.


French-Libyan Hostage Deal Draws Fire in Press
LEAD: France came under sharp criticism today for its decision to normalize relations with Libya after French officials said they had negotiated the release of three hostages Tuesday in direct talks with the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.


Artist Challenges Design Boundaries
LEAD: Is it furniture or sculpture?
When the piece in question was designed by Wendell Castle, the answer is sometimes ambiguous.


Security Pacific's Net Increases 5%
LEAD: The Security Pacific Corporation, the nation's fourth-largest banking company, reported today that first-quarter earnings increased 5 percent, to $188.4 million, from $179.3 million in the period a year earlier.


Teledyne Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Canada
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
17,527,000
16,259,000
Net inc
630,000
850,000
Share earns
.29
.39
Results are in Canadian funds.


CBS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CBS Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
851,000,000
730,600,000
Net inc
85,300,000
b56,100,000
Share earns
3.31
2.18
b-After an extraordinary charge of $200,000 from an extinguishment of debt.


Rowan Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rowan Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
59,423,000
50,658,000
Net loss
6,163,000
11,129,000


Reporter's Notebook;   Case Against Sharpton: An Insomniac's Dream?
LEAD: It has been three weeks since the Rev. Al Sharpton went on trial in Manhattan.


Why Not Just Ban All Political Ads From TV?;   Seniority Counts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Philadelphia Utility Sees Cut in Payout
LEAD: The Philadelphia Electric Company will not be able to prevent a decrease in its dividend, the company's chairman, Joseph F. Paquette Jr., said at the annual meeting.
Later, in answer to a shareholder's question, he said the size of the cut will be set at the board's meeting on April 23.
The company paid a quarterly dividend of 55 cents on March 30.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Talman Home Fedl S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Talman Home Fedl S&amp;L (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,513,000
6,051,000
Per share
.47
.62


Suburban Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suburban Bankshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
196,000
140,000
Per share
.17
.12


Strong Rise in Spending Set
LEAD: American businesses plan to increase spending on plant and equipment by a strong 7.6 percent this year, the Government said today in a report reflecting renewed optimism about the economy.


Bond Corp. Reports Big Loss
LEAD: Alan Bond's beleaguered flagship company, Bond Corporation Holdings, today reported a loss of 758.15 million Australian dollars ($580 million in United States currency) for the second half of last year.


Damages Set For Quantum
LEAD: A Federal judge in Manhattan Tuesday ordered the Quantum Chemical Corporation to pay $24.3 million in damages plus interest to Delta Holdings Inc. for breach of contract in the sale of the Elkhorn Insurance Company in 1983.
Federal District Judge John


Review/Art;   An Eccentric With a Direct Line to the Soul
LEAD: In the famous 1913 Armory Show in New York City, Albert Pinkham Ryder, then 66 years old, was the only American artist whose work was hung in the honored Old Masters gallery.
His small visionary landscapes and marine paintings shared the walls with works by Cezanne, van Gogh, Gauguin and Redon, as well as by Ingres, Delacroix and Manet, the French fathers and grandfathers of the modern movement.


2 Right-to-Die Groups Merging for Unified Voice
LEAD: The nation's two largest right-to-die groups are moving toward a merger.


Sutton Is Hired
LEAD: Eddie Sutton, out of basketball for a year after his forced resignation from Kentucky, was hired yesterday as the Oklahoma State coach.
The board of regents met for almost 90 minutes and then voted by 7-1 to hire Sutton as the school's 16th basketball coach.


Metro Matters;   Sadly, a Far Cry From the City He Helped Save
LEAD: Felix G. Rohatyn, the investment banker, was briefing young executives on Tuesday about New York City's future when one asked him to measure conditions today against 15 years ago, when Mr.
Rohatyn helped rescue the city from bankruptcy.


Russell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Russell Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
159,062,000
146,884,000
Net inc
14,358,000
12,992,000
Share earns
.35
.32


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MOTHER TERESA, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1979 for her work with the poor and sick in Calcutta, India, resigned yesterday as head of the Missionaries of Charity.
Citing health reasons, she said it was time for ''younger hands.''


With Subway Crime Up, Transit Police Get a New Chief
LEAD: The Chief of the New York City transit police, facing a major increase in subway crime, resigned yesterday, and the head of a much smaller state police agency in Massachusetts was named to replace him.


Kurt Masur to Head New York Philharmonic
LEAD: The East German conductor Kurt Masur has been appointed to succeed Zubin Mehta as music director of the New York Philharmonic, starting with the 1992-93 season.
The appointment, which surprised many in the music world, was announced yesterday by Stephen Stamas, the chairman of the Philharmonic's board.


Affiliated Banc Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Banc Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
518,000
1,154,000
Per share
.14
.30


Washington Talk;   Execution Case Poses Classic Test for Court
LEAD: If a panel of Hollywood screenwriters - or law professors, for that matter - set out to create a case to test the premises of the current debate over death penalty appeals, they could hardly top the case of Robert Alton Harris.


Ames Layoff Plan
LEAD: The troubled Ames Department Stores Inc. said it planned to lay off about 50 employees at its headquarters.
The company also said an additional 150 vacant positions would not be filled.
Ames, which is based in Rocky Hill, Conn., near Hartford, announced earlier this week that it expected to lose $228 million for the year that ended on Jan.


Eastern Plan Is Said to Fail
LEAD: The unsecured creditors committee of Eastern Airlines voted to reject a bankruptcy reorganization plan that had been submitted by the airline's preferred shareholders committee, a person close to the bankruptcy said.


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
143,600,000
119,600,000
Net inc
12,500,000
13,100,000
Share earns
.46
.48
The latest quarter figures included a gain of $1.3 million, or 5 cents a share, from a ship sale and sale-leaseback transaction.


Pioneer Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,517,000
b13,675,000
Per share
.44
-
b-Net loss and included one-time charge for restructuring of investments and borrowings in the after-tax amount of $14,789,000.


Stocks in a Slight Retreat As Volume Continues Light
LEAD: Stocks fell slightly yesterday in the wake of a sharp drop in oil prices, with the Dow Jones industrial average dipping by 1.35 points, to 2,729.73.
Volume continued light, rising to just 141.1 million shares, from 136 million on Tuesday.


Caere Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caere Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,215,000
4,033,000
Net inc
1,328,000
348,000
Share earns
.25
.10
Shares outst
5,239,000
3,459,000


U.S. Trust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Trust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,600,000
8,900,000
Per share
.79
.88


L. Luria &amp; Son Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* L. Luria &amp; Son Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 3
1990
1989
Revenue
92,190,000
89,274,000
Net inc
4,556,000
3,350,000
Share earns
.85
.63
Yr rev
221,017,000
215,886,000
Net inc
3,854,000
3,897,000
Share earns
.72
.73
Shares outst
5,385,000
5,355,000


Bruins, Fall Behind by 5-2, but Win, 6-5
LEAD: Dave Poulin scored the winning goal with 1 minute 44 seconds remaining tonight to cap a four-goal outburst as the Boston Bruins rallied from a three-goal deficit to defeat the Hartford Whalers, 6-5.


Reitmans (Canada) Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reitmans (Canada) Ltd.
Year to Feb 3
1990
1989
Sales
368,261,000
353,577,000
Net inc
6,976,000
8,103,000
Share earns
.75
.87
Results are in Canadian funds.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Jordan Keeps Bulls On a Roll
Michael Jordan scored 22 points as the Chicago Bulls won their eighth consecutive game last night, beating the Cleveland Cavaliers, 107-86.
Chicago, which won for the 24th time in 28 games since the All-Star break, is 33-5 at home.
Cleveland fell one game behind Atlanta for the final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference.


Compumat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compumat Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
23,340,158
20,172,650
Net inc
195,524
228,116
Share earns
.10
.12
Shares outst
1,949,103
1,935,756


Hawkeye Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawkeye Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,624,000
4,312,000
Per share
.40
.37


Eric Mower To Buy Firm
LEAD: Eric Mower &amp; Associates, a marketing communications agency based in Syracuse, has reached an agreement to acquire Levy, King &amp; White, an advertising and public relations firm based in Buffalo.


Infrasonics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Infrasonics
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,056,000
1,183,200
Net inc
82,000
b72,500
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
4,861,000
3,648,000
Net inc
246,900
b236,100
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Personal Health
LEAD: Although most childhood ailments are minor, they are often sufficiently bothersome to prompt parents to try some form of drug treatment to relieve symptoms or foster a rapid recovery.


Penn Central Yield at 10.691%
LEAD: The Penn Central Corporation yesterday priced $150 million in subordinated debentures, due in 2000, through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bancorp of Ohio (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
9,065,000
9,455,000
Per share
.75
.78


Decades of Pride Shattered
LEAD: The disturbances in Teaneck yesterday shattered not just one night's calm but also decades of pride in cultivated racial harmony.


Adm. Petar Simic, Yugoslav Official, 57
LEAD: Adm.
Petar Simic, a Politburo member and the political chief of the armed forces, died of a brain hemorrhage in Belgrade today, the official Tanyug press agency reported.
He was 57 years old.


Money-Fund Yields Mixed
LEAD: Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were unchanged to slightly up for the week ended yesterday.


Surgery Would Help More Epileptics, Panel Says
LEAD: Recent advances in monitoring the brain and a better understanding of how it functions mean that many more epilepsy patients with persistent seizures could benefit from surgery, specialists say.


Scherer Deal For Japanese
LEAD: The French fashion house Jean-Louis Scherrer today became the latest luxury clothing designer to agree to be bought out by a Japanese-controlled company.


First Midwest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Midwest Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,834,000
b4,685,000
Per share
.41
.40
b-Included an after-tax gain of $402,000 on the sale of a branch office.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
MONTREAL (NL) - Placed Brett Gideon, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Rich Thompson, pitcher, from Indianapolis of the American Association.
COLLEGES
MARIST - Named Kim Morison assistant to the athletic director.
MILLSAPS - Named John Busby Stroud men's head basketball coach.


Loan Bank Office Cancels Offering
LEAD: The finance office of the Federal Home Loan Banks said today that its regular debt offering, scheduled for Monday, was being canceled because of record levels of liquidity and a decline in the amount of advances being made to member institutions.


BB&amp;T Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BB&amp;T Financial (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
12,789,000
11,043,000
Per share
.66
.59


Gibson (C.R.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gibson (C.R.) (A)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
15,574,000
13,534,000
Net inc
821,000
684,000
Share earns
.22
.18


Spear Financial Services Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spear Financial Services Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,213,940
11,544,306
Net loss
615,261
1,052,308


FEDERAL OFFICIALS REPORT THE CENSUS LAGS SIGNIFICANTLY
LEAD: With hundreds of thousands of census forms not delivered to the proper addresses and with millions of people not returning the completed forms, Federal officials said today that the 1990 count of the United States population is lagging significantly.


Upheaval in the East;   In a Shuttered Museum, Stalin's Ghost Is Stirring
LEAD: Sergo Tshaudobavi cracked the door open into the dead museum, eerie as a pillaged tomb, and pointed toward a bit of glint in the darkness over in the corner, the barely enduring smile of Stalin.


Cholera Outbreaks Highlight Zambia's Plight
LEAD: In the open-air market in Luangwa Township, where Winwell Sikombe sells overripe tomatoes arranged on the ground in small pyramids and dollops of cooking oil from two bottles, health officers in rubber boots and plastic aprons came to explain how to prevent cholera.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about the financial difficulties of the Dance Theater of Harlem misstated New York State's unemployment benefits.


Repair and Restoration of Lighting
LEAD: ''I LOVE lamps,'' said Louis Mattia, who, with his wife, Regina, has been repairing and restoring lamps since 1960. ''I'm crazy about them.''


Brokers Press For Standards
LEAD: Representatives of securities dealers in the United States and four other nations have agreed to work toward international standards for settling trades.


Barry's Lawyers Ask Court to Drop Charges
LEAD: Lawyers for Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today called on a Federal court here to dismiss drug and perjury charges against him, contending that frustrated prosecutors ''manufactured the crime'' and thereby ''exceeded all bounds of propriety in terms of what is acceptable conduct of law enforcement in crime prevention.


Computer Task Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Task Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
59,150,000
58,561,000
Net inc
1,944,000
b1,480,000
Share earns
.20
.18
Shares outst
9,776,000
8,162,000
b-Included $2.1 million one-time gain from the sale of securities.


Currents;   Bringing The World To Paramus
LEAD: THE store is billed as a place for ''world-class home dressing'' and, indeed, Kalkin &amp; Company, in the Fashion Center on Route 17 in Paramus, N.J., offers shoppers an enormous selection of trappings for the home.


Upheaval in the East;   British Question Soviet Suggestion On a Status for a United Germany
LEAD: The British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said today that he found it difficult to imagine how to carry out a Soviet suggestion that a united Germany should belong to both NATO and the Warsaw Pact until a new all-European security system is developed.


Accounts
LEAD: * Angostura International Ltd., to Campbell-Mithun-Esty, for several condiments.


U.S. Memos Are Cited By Keating
LEAD: An internal Government memorandum made public today raised questions about the competence of the man appointed by the Government as chief executive of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association after the institution was seized last April.


Youths Attack Police Station Over a Killing
LEAD: Scores of blacks, angry over the fatal shooting of a 15-year-old black youth by a white police officer Tuesday evening, attacked the police station in Teaneck, N.J., last night, destroyed at least eight cars and broke windows in the public library and nearby shops as a peaceful candlelight vigil dissolved into a rampage.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Rampage in Teaneck


Happy Land Suspect Pleads Not Guilty


Security Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
188,400,000
179,300,000
Per share
1.54
1.54
Shares outst
116,500,000
112,700,000
The per share earnings reflected preferred dividend requirements of $8.7 million in latest first quarter and $5.4 million in year-ago period.


INB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* INB Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
14,193,000
12,167,000
Per share
.81
.70


Why Not Just Ban All Political Ads From TV?;   Unequal Representation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Howtek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howtek Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,550,000
3,816,000
Net inc
173,000
b1,597,877
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


People
LEAD: *
Anthony Brescia, Margaret Evans and William Katz have been given the new titles of senior account directors at BBDO New York, and Glen Gilbert, Tony LaMonte and John Lucci have been named senior vice presidents.


The Editorial Notebook;   Learning From Japan
LEAD: On the high-definition television screen in Sony's Shinagawa studio, a wine glass shimmers with spectacular clarity.
In Fanuc's canary yellow plant at the foot of Mount Fuji, an aisle of new robot arms twist and turn in the disjointed calisthenics of their test program.
In Nissan's vast automated warehouse at Oppama, a computer sends Maximas and


Peres Fails to Form Government in Israel


Bruncor reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bruncor
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
324,300,000
292,300,000
Net inc
b5,500,000
31,700,000
Share earns
.19
1.57
b-Included $25.4 million writedown in the company's 60 percent investment in Chancellor Corp.


Development Brings Discord to Flushing
LEAD: From the busy corner of Northern Boulevard and Union Street in Flushing, Queens, signs of the distant past, vibrant present and uncertain future of this changing polyglot area can be seen in a glance.


Allied Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
938,000
1,104,000
Per share
.18
.21


Gregg Gets Dual Role
LEAD: Doug Single, who was hired three years ago as athletic director at Southern Methodist University to rebuild a scandal-scarred program, resigned yesterday to head the Special Olympics International program, beginning on Monday.


Pathe Getting More Loan Aid
LEAD: The Pathe Communications Corporation said yesterday that Time Warner Inc. had agreed to help it raise $200 million for film production.


Soybean Order Is Held Proper
LEAD: The Chicago Board of Trade acted within ethics rules when it declared an emergency and ordered traders to reduce soybean holdings last July, Congressional investigators said on Tuesday.


Bob Woodward, The Washington Post And His Many Books
LEAD: After two years of burrowing, Bob Woodward says he is about to start writing what may well be his sixth best-selling book.
This time his subject is the Pentagon.
Mr.
Woodward, whose 19-year career with The Washington Post includes a Pulitzer Prize for his Watergate coverage, now carries the title of assistant managing editor for investigations at the paper.


James McConnell, Psychology Teacher And Researcher, 64
LEAD: Dr.
James V. McConnell, a retired professor of psychology at the University of Michigan who wrote ''Understanding Human Behavior,'' a textbook used widely in college psychology courses, died of a heart attack on Monday at St.
Joseph's Mercy Hospital in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 64 years old and lived in Scio Township,


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-15


Ranger Victory Puts Islanders on the Brink
LEAD: Many of the 16,297 fans filed out of Nassau Coliseum throughout the third period tonight, and a good number who remained cheered for the visiting Rangers.


Soviets Buy More Wheat
LEAD: The Soviet Union has bought an additional 175,000 metric tons of United States wheat at subsidized prices for delivery through mid-May under a long-term grain supply agreement, the Agriculture Department said today.
F.
Paul Dickerson, general sales manager for the department's Foreign Agricultural Service, said the wheat had been sold by three private companies, which would receive subsidies under the department's Export Enhancement Program.


Profit Up 68% At Fannie Mae
LEAD: The nation's largest investor in home mortgages, the Federal National Mortgage Association, today reported a record first-quarter profit of $277 million, a rise of 68 percent from the comparable period last year.


Calendar: Where Radicalism Took Root
LEAD: From Tenement to Town House, Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; 212-534-1672, extension 206.


RSI Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RSI Holdings Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
15,155,000
15,306,000
Net inc
b62,000
c337,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
29,473,000
30,861,000
Net inc
b100,000
c174,000
Share earns
.01
-


Ex-PTL Minister Cleared of Perjury Counts
LEAD: A Federal district judge has dismissed perjury charges against a former clergyman of the television ministry PTL for lack of evidence.


First Colonial Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Colonial Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,466,300
2,455,400
Per share
.28
.28


Colombia Blast Kills 16; Drug Cartel Blamed
LEAD: A car bomb killed 16 people and wounded 73 today in Colombia in what appeared to be swift retaliation from drug traffickers for a new crackdown on their multibillion-dollar business.


Nets Give a Big Effort, but Still Lose
LEAD: The Nets did not lose tonight because of lack of effort, lack of poise or lack of confidence.
The only thing they lacked was a healthy lineup.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about the JVC Jazz Festival, to be held June 22 to July 1, misstated the address for information.
It is JVC Jazz Festival Productions, Box 1169, Ansonia Station, New York, N.Y. 10023.


Two Enter Guilty Pleas In Tax-Fraud Scheme
LEAD: Two businessmen have pleaded guilty to engaging in a tax-fraud scheme that involved more than $4 billion in rigged and bogus transactions in Treasury bills and other Government securities, the United States Attorney in Manhattan announced yesterday.


Omens of Intolerance Among Cairo's Muslims
LEAD: At dusk the streets are empty and the traffic dies down and a calm settles on this most rambunctious of cities, for this is Ramadan, the Muslim month of daytime fasting that represents one of Islam's sacred duties.


Upheaval in the East;   Dial 'A' for Albania
LEAD: Albania, whose hard-line Communist Government is known for jealously preserving the country's isolation, will soon allow citizens to accept telephone calls from the United States.


Income Opportunity Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Income Opportunity Realty (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,500,000
3,700,000
Net loss
1,100,000
4,900,000
Yr rev
12,307,000
12,250,000
Net loss
6,002,000
6,719,000
Shares outst
3,811,832
3,692,073


A Proposal And An Idea
LEAD: President Bush at last has seized the lead in arms control negotiations by proposing the ultimate abolition of land-based missiles with more than one nuclear warhead.
It's to be hoped that the Soviet Union's first, negative reaction will not turn Congress and the Administration in the other direction.


Wang to Sell Unit
LEAD: Wang Laboratories Inc. agreed in principle to sell its Wang Financial Information Services Corporation unit for an undisclosed amount.
Wang said it expected to record a book loss on the transaction, which would be reflected in third-quarter results.
The buyer is a new corporation formed by Infotechnology Inc.


Teledyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
836,900,000
864,300,000
Net inc
b58,300,000
b70,500,000
Share earns
1.05
1.26
b-After income from discontinued operations of $25.6 million, or 46 cents a share, for the latest quarter and $35.3 million, or 63 cents a share, for year-ago period.


Westinghouse Credit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westinghouse Credit Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1980
Net inc
41,972,000
35,612,000
Westinghouse Credit is the principal subsidiary of Westinghouse Financial Services Inc.
Westinghouse Financial is owned by Westinghouse Electric Corp.


BSD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSD Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,000,000
750,000
Per share
.27
.21


Currents;   A Silver Anniversary Of Landmark Status
LEAD: THIS month the New York Landmarks Preservation Commission, the agency devoted to preserving the city's architectural heritage, is celebrating the 25th anniversary of its procreator, the Landmarks Preservation Law.
The Urban Center is helping with a monthlong photography exhibit of the city's landmarks.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
46,700,000
43,000,000
Net inc
12,700,000
11,000,000
Share earns
.66
.57


Stuarts Department Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stuarts Department Stores Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 3
1990
1989
Sales
49,264,000
43,204,000
Net loss
336,000
62,000
Yr sales
150,273,000
140,367,000
Net loss
548,000
b883,000
Share earns
-
.21
b-Net income


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.12
9.76
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.78
8.68
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.79
8.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.62
8.66
9.39
30-YR.


Brazil Reform Seen Hurting U.S. Earnings
LEAD: Brazil's new economic reform program, which in three weeks has brought Latin America's largest economy to a near standstill, is expected to have a significant impact on American companies as well.


In Angel Debut, Langston Shares in No-Hitter
LEAD: Mark Langston, the $16 million free agent, made his Angels debut by combining with Mike Witt on a no-hitter tonight in California's 1-0 victory over the Seattle Mariners.


Prices Inch Higher; Trading Light
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities inched higher in light trading yesterday, as dealers cautiously bought securities in advance of reports on retail sales and producer prices.


Davis Gets Save No. 1 for Royals
LEAD: Mark Davis, the National League's Cy Young Award winner last season, got his first American League save tonight, pitching a perfect ninth inning to preserve the Kansas City Royals' 2-1 victory over the Baltimore Orioles.


Spine Treatment to Be Publicized
LEAD: Federal health officials said today that they were preparing to send physicians and hospitals detailed information about an important new treatment for patients with spinal cord injuries.


Snagged Freighter Leaks Fuel
LEAD: A freighter ran aground yesterday off Nassau County in Long Island Sound and spilled about 1,000 gallons of its diesel fuel, officials said.
They said most of it was dissipated by choppy waters, but cleanup crews were trying to contain a small slick near Hempstead Harbor, about two miles east of where the 570-foot freighter, registered in Chile and carrying timber, went aground about 6 A.M.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Friday about the recent strength of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company misstated the company's relationship to Capital International.
In 1985 Morgan acquired the rights to the research firm's market indexes, not the firm itself.


Pepsico Out of South Africa Following Failure of Bottler
LEAD: Pepsico Inc. is ending its small soft-drink business in South Africa, following the failure of its Cape Town bottler.


Israeli Coalition Cracks at Last Minute
LEAD: The Labor Party failed to present a new government for parliamentary approval this morning after two members of the prospective Labor-led coalition from religious parties said they were withdrawing.


Beijing Journal;   Painting America: The Unbeautiful and Damned
LEAD: The Chinese press has been writing of late about a pugnacious but morally decrepit nation that wantonly invades other countries, a land where citizens kill family members for insurance money and dogs can serve as elected officials.


Synovus Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synovus Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
8,349,000
7,562,000
Per share
.25
.23


CHRONICLE
LEAD: After serving 15 1/2 months of a six-year sentence in the State Park Correctional Center in Columbia, S.C., a new public awaits the soul singer JAMES BROWN.
Instead of giving concerts, the Godfather of Soul will be giving talks to young people on the dangers of drug and alcohol abuse as he completes the work-release terms of his sentence.


Unrest Reported in Muslim Areas of China; Foreigners Are Barred
LEAD: Reports of unrest in Muslim areas of western China and of a ban on visits by foreigners to the area continued to circulate today, but the Foreign Ministry declined to comment.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Latin Double Bill


Blacks' Views of Bush
LEAD: Adults Who...
$
Say Bush cares
Approve of
Approve of
a great deal
the way
the way
or some about
Bush is
Bush is
people like
handling
handling
themselves
foreign
the drug
policy
problem
All Blacks
45
41
46
AGE
Black 18-29 year olds
53
45
39
Black 30-44 year olds
42
46
45
Blacks 45 and older
42
32
53
SEX
Men
46
47
50
Women
45
35
42
EDUCATION
Less than High School
41
35
54
H.S.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.12
9.88
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.76
8.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.78
7.76
8.82
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.64
8.62
9.41
30-YR.


Shuttle Launching Is Planned For April 25, a 15-Day Delay
LEAD: Another attempt to launch the space shuttle Discovery with the Hubble Space Telescope will not be made until April 25, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said yesterday.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Akiyoshi Orchestra


Weis Markets reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weis Markets (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1989
1988
Sales
313,971,000
301,503,000
Net inc
18,980,000
20,399,000
Share earns
.42
.45
Shares outst
45,163,969
45,326,435


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Parliament admits joint responsibility on behalf of the people for the humiliation, expulsion and murder of Jewish women, men and children.
We feel sad and ashamed and acknowledge this burden of German history.
We ask the Jews of the world to forgive us,''
- The East German Parliament in a declaration.


Winners of the 1990 Pulitzer Prizes in Journalism and the Arts
LEAD:
Public Service
The Philadelphia Inquirer


Corrections
LEAD: The Sports of The Times column on Wednesday about the Yankees' signing of Don Mattingly referred incompletely to the legal status of Howard Spira and his relationship with with George Steinbrenner.
Mr.
Spira has been indicted, but not yet tried, on charges of extortion.


George Haslerud, 83, Psychology Professor
LEAD: George M. Haslerud, a retired psychology professor at the University of New Hampshire, died Tuesday at Wentworth-Douglas Hospital in Dover, N.H., after a short illness.
He was 83 years old and lived in Durham.


'Dial-a-Porn' Industry Battles U.S. Restrictions
LEAD: Companies offering telephone lines that specialize in sexually explicit recordings and conversations are challenging a new Federal law that is meant to restrict them.


Estonia Defies Moscow
LEAD: The Parliament of the Baltic republic voted to bar compulsory service by Estonians in the Soviet armed forces.
Page A6.


Glatfelter (P.H.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glatfelter (P.H.) (A)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
158,507,000
155,421,000
Net inc
19,964,000
24,386,000
Share earns
.84
1.00
Shares outst
23,700,000
24,287,000


The Bushes' Tax Bill: $101,382
LEAD: President Bush and his wife, Barbara, paid $101,382 in 1989 Federal income taxes, about 22 percent of their income of $456,780 for the year, according to a copy of their tax return released by the White House today.


King World Productions reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* King World Productions (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
102,376,000
94,530,000
Net inc
17,914,000
16,544,000
Share earns
.69
.66
6mo rev
270,728,000
231,050,000
Net inc
51,434,000
b47,837,000
Share earns
1.98
1.90


Cattle Prices Climb to Highs With Supply Seen as Tight
LEAD: Live cattle futures made record highs yesterday for the second consecutive day on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange amid perceptions of tight near-term supplies and reports of spot cattle prices as high as 82 cents a pound in the Texas panhandle.


GORBACHEV BRIEFS VISITING SENATORS
LEAD: Visiting American senators said today that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had talked to them of making radical plans to reform the stagnant economy, but that he had also indicated he had no hard timetable for making such critical changes as price reform.


Lydall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lydall Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
32,354,000
32,641,000
Net inc
2,221,000
1,947,000
Share earns
.75
.67


Review/Film;   'Vital Signs,' On Doctors In Love And Conflict
LEAD: Martians watching ''Vital Signs'' would surmise that doctors are earthlings who look cute in blue jeans, stalk purposefully as they talk and are careful to have every hair in place, especially around the eyebrows.
They might also imagine that medicine is an offshoot of the military, since this film's doctors often engage in supercompetitive tough talk - that is, when they aren't flirting madly or indulging in operating-room humor.


Lippincott Sale Seen By Harper
LEAD: Harper Collins, the publishing subsidiary of Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, announced yesterday that it would sell its J. B Lippincott unit as part of an effort to raise about $500 million to reduce Harper's debt.


New York Police Need a New Academy
LEAD: The Koch administration wisely approved a plan for a new police academy to replace the cramped, outmoded one in Gramercy Park.
It also hoped that putting the academy in the South Bronx would improve the area.
Now the Dinkins administration asks whether the city can afford the project.
The issue involves more than money.


SHL Systemhouse reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SHL Systemhouse (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
180,800,000
156,900,000
Net loss
b34,300,000
c4,400,000
Share earns
-
.17
6mo rev
347,600,000
311,300,000
Net loss
b30,900,000
c5,900,000
b-Included a $6.9 million provision against amounts receivable from Kinburn Corp.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
LOUIS TIFFANY'S ART


Stocks Rise And the Dow Gains 22.07
LEAD: Stock prices advanced yesterday to their best gain in more than a week, with the Dow Jones industrial average climbing 22.07 points, to 2,751.80.


Excerpts From East Berlin Statement of Apology
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the statement approved today by the East German Parliament, as translated by Reuters:


Jusco Buys Rights For Chain in Japan
LEAD: The Jusco Company, a supermarket operator, agreed with Britain's Body Shop International P.L.C. to set up a chain of franchised shops selling Body Shop toiletry products in Japan.
Jusco will set up a subsidiary to manage Body Shop franchises and plans to open its first outlet in Tokyo this fall, it said in a statement.


Goaltending Looming As Crucial for Devils
LEAD: Since neither the Devils nor the Capitals have been consistently prolific offensively, goaltending will probably decide their playoff series.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about King Michael's plan to return to Romania misstated his age and the date of his forced abdication.
He is 68, not 67, and abdicated on Dec. 30, 1947, not 1945.


Crash Kills Son, Officer Finds
LEAD: A California Highway Patrol officer responding to a traffic accident on Tuesday found that his 16-year-old son had been killed in the crash, the authorities said.
The victim, Timothy Brown, was killed when the truck he was riding in overturned outside this village in Santa Barbara County, said Kevin Dougherty, a Highway Patrol spokesman.


Auctions
LEAD:
A Racy Red Ferrari


Trial to Begin For 2 in Killing In Bensonhurst
LEAD: A computer programmer from Park Slope and a secretary from Williamsburg were chosen to fill the last two seats in a Brooklyn jury box yesterday, clearing the way for the start of the Bensonhurst murder trial on Monday.


Jerusalem Melee With Christian Prelates
LEAD: Twenty Orthodox Jewish families moved into a vacant complex in the Christian quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem overnight, setting off a protest today by hundreds of Christian clerics that ended when the clerics were sprayed with tear gas by soldiers guarding the settlers.


Florafax International reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florafax International (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
2,431,000
2,284,000
Net loss
139,000
b250,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
4,454,000
4,380,000
Net loss
358,000
267,000
b-Net income


Lin Seeks Change In Cellular Deal
LEAD: The Lin Broadcasting Corporation said it had entered talks with the Metromedia Company to modify the terms of Lin's pending acquisition of Metromedia's 46 percent interest in the cellular telephone system serving New York City.
Under the proposal, the $1.9 billion that Metromedia would receive would consist of $1.05 billion in cash and $850 million of stock in a subsidiary of


Dancer's Death Inspires Creation of Crisis Fund
LEAD: Monika Beerle came to New York City from St.
Gallen, Switzerland, to become a dancer.
She had been studying at the Martha Graham School of Contemporary Dance in New York for about a year when she moved into an apartment on the Lower East Side.
Two months later, last August, she was killed.
A roommate she hardly knew has been charged with her murder.


At the Movies
LEAD:
Hutton's Other Hats


Goodrich Net Slides In Quarter
LEAD: The B.F.
Goodrich Company, now a specialty chemical company and a major producer of resins, yesterday reported a 69.4 percent drop in first-quarter earnings, a result of lower prices and higher costs for raw materials.


Havana Journal;   When Castro Talks, the Generation Gap Yawns
LEAD: As Fidel Castro ended a 30-minute speech here recently, aimed primarily at Cuba's youth, many young people in the audience leaped from the seats to shout, ''Socialism or death!''


Entronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entronics Corp.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
4,718,725
1,695,538
Net loss
245,247
b159,963
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
4,965,999
4,206,250
9mo rev
11,284,828
4,176,013
Net loss
510,084
b226,076
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
4,750,171
4,206,250


Police Officer Is Suspended; Tougher Response Is Vowed
LEAD: The white police officer who fatally shot a 16-year-old black youth here Tuesday night was suspended from duty today.
And the authorities, reacting to a protest vigil that turned violent Wednesday night, vowed a tougher police response to further lawlessness.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-7
The East German Parliament formally installed the country's first democratic Government and ended 40 years of official denial by accepting joint responsibility for Nazi crimes.
Page A1


Britain Beginning Prison Inquiry As Inmates' Unrest Winds Down
LEAD: As the unrest that has swept Britain's prison system winds down, Government officials are turning to the task of assessing the causes and taking steps to prevent new outbreaks.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPC International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,354,836,000
1,263,166,000
Net inc
78,873,000
67,651,000
Share earns
1.01
.86
Shares outst
75,395,000
78,345,000
Share earings are based on net income reduced by ESOP preferred stock dividends net of taxes in 1990.


Potlatch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potlatch Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
326,722,000
297,375,000
Net inc
37,007,000
35,912,000
Share earns
1.28
1.30
Shares outst
28,878,000
27,538,000


Witness for Prosecution Praises Sharpton for 'the Good Things'
LEAD: A prosecution witness in the criminal fraud case against the Rev.
Al Sharpton lauded the minister yesterday for helping poor people in times of crisis and grief.


Southeast Banking reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southeast Banking (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
56,792,000
b33,005,000
Share earns
-
1.04
Shares outst
32,977,000
30,441,000
b-Net income


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 508 money market mutual funds decreased by $667.60 million, to $389.86 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 160 institutional funds decreased by $246.20 million, to $91.27 billion.
The assets of the 246 general-purpose funds were up by $285.10 million, to $133.52 billion.


Sale of Eakins Work Won't Be at Sotheby's
LEAD: The Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth announced late yesterday that it had withdrawn Thomas Eakins's ''Swimming Hole,'' painted about 1885, from Sotheby's in New York, where it was to have been auctioned on May 24.


Mongolia Cuts 'Communism'
LEAD: The world's second-oldest ruling Communist Party dropped the word communism from its constitution today and set a new goal of building ''democratic humane socialism.'' An extraordinary congress of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party adopted a new party constitution and platform to reflect its recent acceptance of democratic changes and opposition parties.


A Clarification
LEAD: A recent editorial said Senator Jake Garn had ''demanded'' that last year's savings and loan bailout legislation include the appointment of his longtime aide M. Danny Wall as director of the new Office of Thrift Supervision, and that ''the White House didn't fight him.'' The editorial incorrectly implied that the proposal came from Senator Garn.


Britain's Inflation Spurts
LEAD: Britain's inflation rate, the scourge of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Conservative Government, rose sharply in March, to 8.1 percent, from 7.5 percent in the previous month, the Government announced today.
The annual increase in the retail price index, Britain's main measure of inflation, was the highest since last summer.


Retail Sales Fell by 0.6% In March
LEAD: In the first back-to-back decline in more than three years, retail sales fell six-tenths of 1 percent in March, as business declined in virtually all sectors except for food stores, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
In February, seasonally adjusted sales had fallen three-tenths of 1 percent from


How Can Taxi Courts Be Just if Accusations Are Anonymous?;   'Oh, That's Too Much'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Americans Find Many Excuses For Not Being Part of the Census
LEAD: From Los Angeles to Des Moines to Boston, one in four people questioned today in an informal sampling around the country told of either not receiving a census form or receiving one but finding it too intrusive, too long and too complicated to fill out.


Youth Is Killed By Theft Victim In Subway Car
LEAD: One of four youths attempting to rob a man at gunpoint on a subway train in Brooklyn was shot and killed last night when the robbery victim pulled out a pistol and fired several shots at the youths, the police said.


Lecture With Music
LEAD: The pianist Dick Hyman will give a lecture program called ''And Then I Wrote . . . '' at the 92d Street Y, on Lexington Avenue, tomorrow evening at 8.
Among Mr.
Hyman's works are the scores for the films ''Moonstruck,'' ''Zelig'' and ''The Purple Rose of Cairo'' and several ballet scores.
Mr.
Hyman will be joined by the pianist Derek Smith for a demonstration of two-piano jazz improvisation.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
''THE PANCAKE KING,'' a new musical by Phyllis LaFarge and James Valcq about a boy's passion for pancakes, presented by On Stage Productions, 1 and 3:30 P.M. on Saturdays, at Hartley House Theater, 413 West 46th Street.
Tickets: $6.
Information: 666-1716.
''THE SLEEPING BEAUTY,'' a musical by the Theater Workshop, 10:30 A.M.


Against the Grain
LEAD: The Soviet Union, which has always promptly paid hard cash for the commodities it purchases in the West, seems to have fallen almost one half-billion dollars behind in payments due to grain exporters in the past month.


A Former President Receives a Piece of History


Order for Hughes
LEAD: Hughes Communications International Inc., a unit of the Hughes Electronics Corporation, a subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, received a $155 million contract from Brazil to build the country's second-generation telecommunications satellite system.
The contract includes two satellites, improvements to a ground control station and training.


Fans Salute Winfield And LaPoint
LEAD: Dave Winfield and Dave LaPoint made conspicuous returns to the Yankees' lineup yesterday, and the fans acknowledged them with conspicuous salutes.
For Winfield, the reception produced a ''surge of energy, surge of strength.'' For LaPoint, the fans' positive reaction provided relief.


Lakeland Industries reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lakeland Industries (OTC)
Year to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
37,851,000
37,458,000
Net loss
38,000
b1,208,000
Share earns
-
.47
b-Net income


On Stage
LEAD:
After 'Sarafina!'


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Savings Bank, White Plains, said it had authorized Kropschot Financial Services, Philadelphia, a merger and acquisition advisory firm, to solicit offers for Amsave Credit Corp., its wholly owned unit that specializes in commercial and leasing finance.


Air Force Accuracy in Panama
LEAD: Truth, it is often remarked, is the first casualty of war, but the Air Force has massacred the facts with unusual abandon in the matter of the Panama invasion.
It let the Secretary of Defense announce last December that two F-117A Stealth fighters had bombed their targets with perfect accuracy.
But Michael Gordon of The New York Times recently photographed a bomb crater way off target, and Mr.


Review/Theater;   50's 'Fanny' Is Revived With All Due Sentiment
LEAD: ''Fanny,'' Harold Rome's musical adaptation of Marcel Pagnol's dramatic trilogy, ''Marius,'' ''Fanny,'' and ''Cesar,'' is a quintessential 1950's musical of the more solemnly romantic sort.


Kentucky Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kentucky Utilities (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
133,131,000
136,005,000
Net inc
21,839,000
b34,196,000
Share earns
.54
.87
b-Included a gain from an accounting adjustment of $11,470,000.


For Polonia, A New Leaf And Season
LEAD: The Milwaukee County House of Corrections wasn't that bad, Luis Polonia said: ''Never a jail, never behind bars.
It was like a medical center.''


Ewing Is Too Much For Pacers to Handle
LEAD: Patrick Ewing has been the Knicks' inspiration all season.
At times his play is so dominant, he is what winning and losing are all about.


After 11 Games, Tigers Top Red Sox
LEAD: Lou Whitaker hit his 150th career home run and Tony Phillips had four hits today as the Detroit Tigers ended an 11-game losing streak against the Boston Red Sox with an 11-7 victory in their home opener.


Hilton Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hilton Hotels (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
266,500,000
225,100,000
Net inc
25,100,000
13,100,000
Share earns
.52
.27


Treasuries Slip in Thin Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds dipped in extremely thin trading yesterday, as dealers ignored a weaker-than-expected report on retail sales and focused on a long holiday weekend instead.


Karen S. Druckman, a Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Karen Sue Druckman, the daughter of Muriel Topaz Druckman and Jacob Druckman of Milford, Conn., was married yesterday in a civil ceremony at the Municipal Building in New York to Patrick Jeanneret, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Willy Jeanneret of Geneva.


Sea Containers' Offer
LEAD: Sea Containers Ltd. said this week that it and its affiliates had received about 12 million shares in response to their $70-a-share tender offer for seven million Sea Containers shares, which expired on Monday.
It said about 58.4 percent of the shares tendered would be bought.
The actual proration factors, according to Sea Containers, are expected to be announced next Thursday and payment for purchased shares will be made promptly thereafter.


Lilly Ends Output Of 60 Products
LEAD: Eli Lilly &amp; Company has discontinued manufacturing 60 products and versions of products, according to a notification letter sent to drug wholesalers around the country.
Representatives of several pharmaceutical wholesaling companies said that the products involved were either old or slow-selling and that the manufacturing halts would have little or no financial impact.


Gordon F. Vawter, 67, Pediatric Pathologist
LEAD: Gordon Fuller Vawter, a pediatric pathologist, died of lymphoma on Wednesday at a cancer center in Gloucester, Mass.
He was 67 years old and lived in Newton, Mass., and Gloucester.


The Pulitzer Prizes
LEAD:
THE ARTS
Drama: 'The Piano Lesson,' August Wilson.
Drama about a brother and sister and their dispute over whether to sell a family piano that dates back to slavery.
Fiction: 'The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love,' Oscar Hijuelos.
Novel about two brothers from Havana who become minor celebrities as musicians in New York nightclubs.


Door Revolves Again At Top of Winnebago
LEAD: The revolving door at Winnebago Industries turned again yesterday, and out went Richard D. Conner as president and chief executive.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Promotions Announced By Jordan, McGrath
LEAD: Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor yesterday announced the promotion of eight employees to executive vice presidents.


In Capital, Vows to End Drug War Finger-Pointing
LEAD: William J. Bennett, the national drug policy adviser, and city officials in Washington have informally agreed to end their public quarreling out of fear that it could undercut their already failing showcase effort to curb drug abuse in the nation's capital, Federal and city official say.


3 Seized in Killing of Envoy
LEAD: Three Surinamese men have been arrested in connection with the slaying of a Soviet diplomat, apparently in a robbery, the police said.
The three were captured Wednesday while trying to sell the diplomat's car.
Stasis Obukauskas, 41 years old, the consul and second secretary in the Soviet Embassy, left home Monday night in the car, and his body, with three bullet wounds in the head, was found Tuesday in a gutter.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Roger W. Yost has been appointed vice president for advertising and sales promotion at Jantzen.


Keating Blames U.S. Delays for Lincoln's Seizure
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr. asserted in court today that Federal regulators held up approval of two transactions that would have brought the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association into compliance with the Government's capital requirements in December 1988, four months before regulators seized it.


Frederick K. Daniel, Chemist, 79
LEAD: Frederick K. Daniel, a chemist who founded Daniel Products, a paint manufacturing company in Jersey City, died of complications of Parkinson's disease on March 27 at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 79 years old.


All-Mozart Concert
LEAD: Jens Nygaard will conduct the Jupiter Symphony in an all-Mozart program, tonight at 8 at Alice Tully Hall.
The program includes the Overture to ''La Finta Giardiniera'' (K. 196), the Divertimento in D (K. 251), German Dances and the Piano Concerto No. 9 in E flat, with Claude Frank as soloist.
Mr.


Stop the Shell Game With Pension Funds;   A Better Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Gunshot in the Dark Links 2 Disparate Lives: Officer Gary Spath
LEAD: George Spath, a township police officer for 26 years, sat with neighbors in his living room today and remembered how he had told his son, Gary, that being a policeman could be tough.


Former Teacher Is Charged In Abuse of Pupils in Bronx
LEAD: A former elementary school teacher was arrested yesterday and charged with fondling six students at a Bronx public school, the police said.


Stop the Shell Game With Pension Funds;   Mostly Employee Money
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stop the Shell Game With Pension Funds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan Trade Surplus Up
LEAD: After 11 months of decline Japan's trade surplus climbed in March, but economists said it was because the month's imports were being compared with an unusually large amount of imports in March 1989.


'Piano Lesson' Wins Drama Pulitzer as 21 Prizes Are Given
LEAD: ''The Piano Lesson,'' August Wilson's Broadway-bound play about the black experience in America as seen through a prism of conflict between a brother and sister over their family's slavery-era heirloom piano, won the 1990 Pulitzer Prize for drama yesterday.


Dollar Mixed and Gold Up In Quiet Pre-Easter Trading
LEAD: The dollar finished narrowly mixed yesterday in quiet trading ahead of the Easter holiday weekend.
Gold prices rose worldwide.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASKETBALL
PHOENIX (NBA) - Activated Jeff Hornacek, guard, from the injured list.
FOOTBALL
GIANTS (NFC) - Signed Thornton Chandler, tight end.
JETS (AFC) - Announced they would not offer contracts to Wesley Walker, Phillip Epps and Michael Harper, wide receivers.
Waived Pat Ryan, quarterback.


Cash Found, Spending Ensues
LEAD: Residents of this coastal community found large amounts of money in steel drums buried in a farmer's field, probably by drug traffickers, the United States attorney said today.


TV Weekend;   Recalling Tudor's Dance Mastery
LEAD: One of the most influential figures in the history of 20th-century dance, the choreographer Antony Tudor achieved maximum impact through remarkably few masterworks.
His two greatest ballets - ''Jardin aux Lilas'' (1936) and ''Dark Elegies'' (1937) - were created five decades ago.
They are being performed with adoring care in tonight's ''Tudor Evening With American Ballet Theater.


Dinkins Offers Reward In Killing of Cabdrivers
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins announced a $10,000 reward yesterday for information leading to the arrest of what the police say is a serial killer who has robbed and killed three livery-cab drivers in the Bronx in the last five weeks.


Derby Contenders in Action This Weekend
LEAD: Mister Frisky heads almost every list of favorites for the Kentucky Derby on May 5 off his victory in the Santa Anita Derby last Saturday and his 16-for-16 record.
Just about everyone's next four choices will be racing today and tomorrow.


Soviets Admit Blame in Massacre Of Polish Officers in World War II
LEAD: Moscow admitted for the first time today that the Soviet secret police, not the Nazis, carried out the massacre of 15,000 Polish Army prisoners in the early months of World War II.


Ex-West Virginia Governor Admits Corruption Schemes
LEAD: Former Gov.
Arch A. Moore Jr. has been indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of extortion, mail and tax fraud and obstruction of justice and has agreed to plead guilty in a bargain with the Government.


Chemical Banking reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Banking (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b151,700,000
117,900,000
Per share
1.55
1.49
Shares outst
85,900,000
65,200,000
b-Included pretax restructuring charge of $52 million and a pretax gain of $115 million from the sale of investment in Florida National Banks of Florida Inc.


The Magic of Hollywood Math
LEAD: ''Coming to America,'' the Eddie Murphy film that was one of the top-10 grossing films in 1988, has brought in worldwide revenues of more than $275 million, including at least $125 million to Paramount Pictures, which made and distributed the movie.


First Wachovia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Wachovia Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
71,300,000
67,300,000
Share earns
1.01
.96
Share earnings are fully diluted.


Soviet Military Is Reported To Reassert Itself at Kremlin
LEAD: The Soviet military, unhappy over President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reforms and its diminished status, is trying to reassert itself in Moscow, specialists from the Rand Corporation said today.


Franco-Nevada Mining reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franco-Nevada Mining
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,933,000
1,384,000
Net inc
1,311,000
630,000
Share earns
.11
.05
Yr rev
5,828,000
3,203,000
Net inc
3,518,000
1,516,000
Share earns
.29
.13


Against the Sea And the Odds
LEAD: From day one, the odds that the Soviet yacht Fazisi would make it round the world were slim.


Japan Banks Face Credit Rating Cut
LEAD: The credit ratings of several major Japanese banks may soon be downgraded because of their exposure to real-estate loans, Moody's Investors Service said today.


NBD Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBD Bancorp Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
66,622,000
63,479,000
Share earns
.91
.88
Per share amounts have been adjusted to reflect the 3-for-2 split in June 1989.


New Jersey Builder Defaults on Debt
LEAD: The Union Valley Corporation, the troubled New Jersey-based home builder, said it did not expect to make interest payments due May 15 and has defaulted on a $967,000 debt payment to a mortgagee.
The company also said it was planning auctions to dispose of about 180 partly completed homes in New Jersey and would probably seek to restructure its debt.


Oil Worries Increasing For OPEC
LEAD: A number of OPEC oil ministers expressed anxiety today at the sharp fall in oil prices over the last few days, hinting at the possibility of holding a special meeting to look into ways of propping prices up.


Daniel P. A. Sweeney, Lawyer, 85
LEAD: Daniel P. A. Sweeney, a retired lawyer and former chief of the New York City Police Department's legal bureau, died on Wednesday at his home in Breezy Point, Queens.
He was 85 years old.


New Leader Looks To Past At American Symphony
LEAD: ''I DON'T put together programs to show off an orchestra,'' said Catherine Comet, the new music director of the American Symphony Orchestra. ''I hope that the orchestra will be showed off by the program, yes, but it is the music that really comes first.''


Bush Suffers Early Glaucoma In His Left Eye, Doctors Say
LEAD: President Bush was found to have ''an early glaucoma of his left eye'' in a routine physical examination yesterday at Bethesda Naval Hospital, the White House said in a statement.


Gambling Profits Give Lift To Earnings at Hilton Hotels
LEAD: The Hilton Hotels Corporation reported yesterday that gambling profits had nearly doubled its first-quarter earnings to $25.1 million, or 52 cents a share, compared with $13.1 million, or 27 cents a share, for the corresponding period last year.
Revenues rose 18.4 percent, to $266.5 million from $225.1 million.


U.S. Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1989
1988
Net inc
42,154,000
35,184,000
Share earns
.85
.71


Hill Injury Cancels Bout
LEAD: Virgil Hill, the World Boxing Association light-heavyweight champion, broke his hand in training and will not fight Guy Waters of Australia as scheduled April 29, promoters said yesterday.


The Secret Sex Life of the Skunk Cabbage
LEAD: To the Editor:


SmithKline To Sell Yardley
LEAD: SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. said that it had agreed to sell its British-based Yardley-Lentheric Cosmetics business to the Old Bond Street Corporation of the United States for $180 million.
SmithKline, the British-


Review/Film;   Romance Blooms in a Yogurt War
LEAD: On the evidence of several recent films, the world is full of button-down businessmen ready to turn weak as kittens when the right woman comes along.
Or the wrong woman - and the more wrong, the better, as in ''Pretty Woman'' and ''Too Beautiful for You,'' in which a prostitute and a plain-looking secretary are the respective temptresses.


After Racial Melee, Teaneck Questions Its Proud Self-Image
LEAD: ''This is a good town, a model town,'' Drew McPherson was saying this afternoon. ''I feel very patriotic about Teaneck.
But we've got to speak to these racial problems.
Things are just getting out of hand.
Things are at the boiling point.''


Automatic Data Processing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automatic Data Processing (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
470,818,000
454,019,000
Net inc
65,030,000
56,150,000
Share earns
.88
.76
9mo rev
1,288,214,000
1,259,634,000
Net inc
152,040,000
134,560,000
Share earns
2.07
1.80


GOOD FRIDAY
LEAD:
NEW YORK
Government offices: Federal, state and municipal open.
Post office: Open, regular delivery.
Banks: Open.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Sanitation: Normal collection schedule. No street sweeping.
Schools: Closed.
Financial Markets: closed.
Transportation: Transit Authority, L.I.R.R and Metro-North, regular.


Captain Admits Sinking Lobster Boat in Plot
LEAD: The captain of the Stonington lobster boat Sophie G, which sank in deep waters south of Long Island in December 1988, pleaded guilty today to charges that he had scuttled the 56-foot vessel in a scheme with the boat's owner to collect $220,000 in insurance.


Economic Scene;   Why Gorbachev Delays Reforms
LEAD: EMBROILED in the political crisis initiated by Lithuania's bid to secede from the Soviet Union, which hard-liners and anti-reformers are exploiting for their own purposes, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has deferred the decision on whether and how to carry out a ''radical'' reformation of the Soviet economic system.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Described by his doctor as ''in fighting trim,'' LEE ATWATER, the Republican Party chairman, was released from Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx yesterday, after 10 days of treatment for a brain tumor.


Soviet Intransigence on Arms Control? No, Just Sensible Negotiating
LEAD: Until last week's meetings between Secretary of State James Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, the talks on limiting strategic arms seemed a succession of triumphs for our side.
Agreement has already been reached on a series of restraints tailored to fit our force structure while constraining that of the Soviet


Hull Scores 2 Goals As Blues Win Series
LEAD: Brett Hull had two goals and Peter Zezel a goal and two assists as the St.
Louis Blues beat the Toronto Maple Leafs by 4-3 tonight to win the first-round series.


Ames Stock Drops On Vendor Report
LEAD: The stock of Ames Department Stores Inc. fell 25 percent yesterday amid reports that vendors may halt merchandise shipments because of fears of not being paid.
The stock dropped 62.5 cents, to $1.875, on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the most actively traded issue.
On Tuesday, Ames said it would report a loss of $228 million for the fiscal year that ended in


EA Engineering, Science and Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EA Engineering, Science and Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
9,761,000
7,149,000
Net inc
94,000
90,000
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
2,467,000
2,465,000
6mo rev
19,491,000
14,882,000
Net inc
507,000
438,000
Share earns
.21
.18


Restaurants
LEAD:
Paper Moon Milano


Books of The Times;   Sisters in Hollywood and Art Too Much Like Life
LEAD:
His Little Women
By Judith Rossner
367 pages. Summit Books. $19.95.


New Taiwan Chief: Signal of Change?
LEAD: When he is inaugurated in May, Lee Teng-hui will step into a six-year presidential term that could oversee a dramatic transformation of this nouveau riche island.


Cake for Sale to Keep Legal Aid Free
LEAD: Public defenders here, whose job is to represent poor people, are unhappy with a Missouri state policy requiring them to ask clients for voluntary cash contributions.
So this week they found another way to raise money, and to signal their displeasure: They held a bake sale outside the municipal courthouse.


3 Nominated for Expanded Board To Consider Conflicts of Interest
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday nominated three lawyers to serve on the New York City Conflicts of Interest Board, the five-member body that considers questions of ethical conduct involving city officials and employees.


BUSH AT G.O.P. HIGH IN BLACK APPROVAL
LEAD: After more than a generation of unswerving loyalty to the Democratic Party and its leaders, black Americans have given George Bush the highest level of sustained approval for any Republican President in 30 years, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll and a series of follow-up interviews.


Gains Exceed Expectations At Chemical
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation surprised investors and analysts yesterday by issuing its first-quarter earnings report sooner than expected.
The results were also stronger than expected, thanks to a decline in the level of problem loans and to a profit at its Texas bank subsidiary.


Digital Sound Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Sound Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
9,254,000
4,044,000
Net inc
1,727,000
41,000
Share earns
.11
-


Felton L. Gibbons, 60, Art History Professor
LEAD: Dr.
Felton Lewis Gibbons, an art historian who taught at Princeton University for more than 20 years, took his own life on Tuesday at his home in Hopewell, N.J., family members said.
He was 60 years old.


Market Place;   Air Bag Maker A Big Wall St. Hit
LEAD: OEA Inc. makes a small explosive device that triggers the inflation of an automobile air bag milliseconds after a crash, and the Denver-based company's stock price has shot up nearly as fast.


Alcan's Net Falls Off by 36%
LEAD: Alcan Aluminum Ltd., the world's largest producer of aluminum, said yesterday that lower prices and reduced demand had contributed to a 36 percent drop in first-quarter earnings.


Sweet Nothings, for Spring or Anytime
LEAD: EASTER weekend invites the indulgence of a leisurely late-morning or late-afternoon pastry with a coffee or tea.
While New York cannot boast the number of eat-in bakeries or pastry shops found in European cities, it nonetheless has its share.
Here is a sampling, divided geographically; shops on the West Side and East Side of Manhattan are listed from north to south.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Chefs on the Move


At Last, Yankees Open Season, and Win, Too
LEAD: After a lockout, a rainout and a snowout, the Yankees stepped into their season with a 6-4 victory over the Cleveland Indians yesterday before 50,114 fans at the Stadium.


Net of Times Co. Halved in First Quarter
LEAD: The New York Times Company reported yesterday that its net income in the first quarter of 1990 dropped by 50 percent, to $16.6 million, or 22 cents a share, from $33.5 million, or 42 cents a share, in the 1989 period.


Southland Sees Losses
LEAD: The Southland Corporation, the troubled owner of 7-Eleven convenience stores, said today that it did not expect to become profitable until the end of 1993 even if its bondholders agreed to forgo about $1.6 billion in interest payments through 1997.


3 Companies to Stop Selling Tuna Netted With Dolphins
LEAD: The nation's three largest sellers of canned tuna announced today that they would stop buying tuna that is caught in nets that also trap and kill dolphins.


Collapsing Housing Market Is Taking an Emotional Toll
LEAD: Across the metropolitan region, thousands of people who bought homes during the long housing boom of the 1980's are suffering wrenching emotional and financial hardships as the value of their single largest investment slips away.


Britain Seizes Pipe Going to Iraq
LEAD: A big forged-steel tube ordered by Iraq was seized by British customs officers today after military experts determined that it could be used to build a gun capable of hurling a warhead hundreds of miles.


Review/Theater;   Just a Song at Twilight (of the Gods)
LEAD: As an irrepressible recycler of other people's art, Charles Ludlam rewrote ''The Ring of the Nibelung'' to suit the Ridiculous Theatrical Company's purpose.
Everett Quinton's revival of ''Der Ring Gott Farblonjet,'' a tragedy turned into a comedy, is the funniest ''Ring'' cycle one is likely to see.


New President Named At Software Toolworks
LEAD: Software Toolworks Inc., a five-year-old software company in Chatsworth, Calif., has named Elizabeth Barker as president and chief operating officer.


Peripatetic Mayor Barry Is Back, but What's Up?
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. is running.


Profits Rise by 48% at Intel On Demand for Its PC Chips
LEAD: Despite a continuing slump in the personal computer market, the Intel Corporation today reported record first-quarter earnings.
Intel's strong earnings, which exceeded the highest Wall Street estimates, were driven by demand for its 32-bit microprocessors, the 80386 and 80486, which form the heart of the most powerful


Marriott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marriott Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 23
1990
1989
Sales
1,684,000,000
1,627,000,000
Net inc
28,000,000
b46,000,000
Share earns
.27
.41
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $8,000,000, or 7 cents a share.


UAL to Cut Some Fares
LEAD: United Airlines said on Wednesday that it was reducing its discount fares between points in the Northeast and California by an average of 15 percent for travel on May 1 through June 11.
The new round-trip fares will be $358 from noon on Mondays through noon on Thursdays and $398 for the rest of the week.


No Form? What to Do
LEAD: Those who have still not received census forms should call the Census Bureau hot line, 1-800-999-1990, give a name and an address and report failure to receive a form.


Garrison Aims to Shape Up
LEAD: For Zina Garrison, tennis has become a balancing act.
She wants to enjoy life as a newlywed, but she doesn't want to be assigned a crash diet before every important tournament. ''My husband,'' she explained, ''is thin.
And when we go out to dinner, I try to eat everything he eats.''


Year's Best Named
LEAD: Curtis Middleton of St.
Thomas Aquinas College was named player of the year and Darrell Halloran of Pace was named coach of the year for the New York-New Jersey area in Division II of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics.


Savings-Fraud Cases Seen Clogging U.S. Courts
LEAD: The Federal court system, already overloaded with drug-related cases, will be burdened further in the years ahead with the hundreds of criminal cases now being prepared against former executives of failed savings institutions, Government officials said today.


Hunt (J.B.) Transport (O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hunt (J.B.) Transport (O)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
137,288,000
111,276,000
Net inc
6,049,000
4,934,000
Share earns
.26
.21


Quietly but Intensely, Bombing Inquiry Is Pursued
LEAD: The investigation into mail bombings that killed a Federal judge in Alabama and a Georgia civil rights lawyer has become more low-keyed if no less persistent in recent weeks as investigators present evidence to two grand juries while quietly pursuing other leads.


Iomega Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iomega Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
29,112,000
24,799,000
Net inc
2,495,000
1,590,000
Share earns
.15
.09


McDonald's Opens 2d Budapest Unit
LEAD: Hungary's second McDonald's fast-food restaurant opened in an airy railroad station that was built by the company that put up the Eiffel Tower. ''Without exaggeration I can say it is the most beautiful McDonald's in Europe,'' said Endre Fazekas, managing director of the United States-Hungarian joint venture.


A Gunshot in the Dark Links 2 Disparate Lives; Phillip C. Pannell
LEAD: On good days, Phillip C. Pannell's friends say, he was an easygoing young man, a movie buff and sports fanatic whose dream was to be a sports star.
On bad days, they said, he was a fighter in turf battles between teen-agers from Englewood and Teaneck whose nightmare was being shot by the police.


Review/Art;   By Jackson Pollock, With and Without Drips
LEAD: In 1950, Jackson Pollock was riding high, widely considered the leader of Abstract Expressionism, America's first truly international art movement.
His exhibition that year at the Betty Parsons Gallery included such classic ''drip'' paintings as ''Autumn Rhythm'' and ''One,'' works that now occupy pride of place, respectively, in the permanent collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern


Mellon Bank Adds Automated Tellers
LEAD: The Mellon Bank Corporation purchased a regional automated-teller-machine network from the Ameritrust Corporation, Cleveland, for undisclosed terms.
Mellon will process transactions for the 19 financial institutions and their 171 machines in the Instanet network.
The deal adds 650,000 to 700,000 transactions a month to


Broad Revision Enacted for Kentucky Schools
LEAD: The Governor of Kentucky has signed a bill making sweeping changes in running the public schools, setting a minimum spending level for each of the state's 570,000 students and giving principals, parents and teachers more responsibility.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Wednesday misstated the ownership of the Joseph &amp; Feiss Company, a clothing manufacturer.
It is owned by Hugo Boss A.G. of West Germany, not by Phillips-Van Heusen.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article on the Company News page of Business Day yesterday about a struggle for control of the Del Webb Corporation referred incorrectly to a newly nominated director, Hugh F. Culverhouse Jr.
He is a director of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers football team.
His father is the owner.


Syracuse Player Quits
LEAD: Tony Scott, Syracuse's best 3-point shooter, has quit school for academic reasons and is expected to transfer, Coach Jim Boeheim said in Syracuse yesterday.


Jose De Vega Jr., Actor and Choreographer, 56
LEAD: Jose De Vega Jr., an actor and choreographer who worked to eliminate ethnic stereotypes from show business, died of AIDS on Sunday at Veterans Memorial Hospital in Westwood.
He was 56 years old.


BUCHAREST BLOCKS KING FROM VISITING
LEAD: King Michael, who was forced from his throne by the Communists in 1947, was barred from the country today after the Romanian Government withdrew his visa.


Service Merchandise reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Service Merchandise (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
625,447,000
565,402,000
Net loss
15,507,000
4,416,000
The company said the increase in net losses resulted from expenses associated with the company's recapitalization, which totalled $21.2 million, or 25 cents a share, in the latest quarter.


Vincent Bans Rose From Phillies' Reunion
LEAD: Pete Rose, the career leader in hits, will not be allowed to take part in the 10th-anniversary reunion of the Philadelphia Phillies' only World Series champions Aug. 3 and 4 because of his lifetime ban from baseball for gambling on several sports.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Newspaper Ad Growth
LEAD: Expenditures for newspaper advertising rose 3.8 percent, to $32.37 billion, in 1989, according to preliminary estimates of the Newspaper Advertising Bureau.
The increase last year was smaller than in 1988, when newspaper advertising rose about 6 percent from the previous year.
For 1989, retail advertising was up 4.4 percent, to $16.88 billion; classified ad spending increased 2.8 percent, to $12.24 billion, and national advertising rose 3.7 percent, to $3.24 billion.


Hostile Bidder Drops Offer for Bond Assets
LEAD: Alan Bond, whose huge Australian business empire has been tottering under a heavy debt burden, escaped today from a difficult situation when the billionaire Kerry Packer withdrew a takeover bid for Mr.
Bond's media assets.


'Yuppie 5' Firm Fined
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange specialist firm Marcus Schloss &amp; Company was fined $480,350 yesterday for conspiracy and securities fraud.


Theme Park For California
LEAD: A British and American group said this week that it would develop in Northern California a $2 billion resort and theme park that is a cross between Disneyland and Williamsburg, Va., the re-created Revolutionary War community.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Common Stock


Poindexter: Disclosure With Justice
LEAD: The successful prosecution of former national security adviser John Poindexter is a triumph for valued but often conflicting principles.
One is the public's right to know, which is keenest when a scandal like Iran-contra erupts.
Another is the need to bring wrongdoers to justice.
A third is the constitutional protection against self-incrimination.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bertelsmann Music Group, the music and video subsidiary of the West German media company Bertelsmann A.G., named Lou Maglia president of its new music label, still unnamed, which will be based in Los Angeles.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Soviet Military Rumblings
Some American students of Soviet affairs say the Soviet armed forces are trying to regain some of the power lost in the Gorbachev era.
Page A6.
Jerusalem Christian Protest
Easter Week observances in the Old City were marred by a dispute over a Jewish settlement in the Christian quarter.





Sherwin-Williams Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwin-Williams Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
499,460,000
464,781,000
Net inc
9,995,000
8,810,000
Share earns
.23
.20


Nicklaus Leaves Field Behind in Senior Championship
LEAD: The pressure of winning his first senior event is off.
His game is in tune.
He designed the course, and his chief 50-and-over competitors have gone off their games.


Detroit Drops Convention Bid
LEAD: Debt-ridden Detroit, one of five finalists as the site for the 1992 Democratic National Convention, has withdrawn from consideration, leaving Cleveland, Houston, New Orleans and New York still in the running.
The Democratic National Committee has asked that a city seeking the convention commit itself to spending $15 million, said Dorothy Brodie, an assistant to Mayor Coleman Young, and Detroit, which faces a $50 million deficit, cannot afford it.


Review/Film;   Things That Can Happen When People Fall in Love
LEAD: Love that blooms in Murky Springs, Mo., may be no more predictable than it is anywhere else, but it is positively more apocalyptic.
Elaine, a petty thief, is the daughter of country-and-western singers who emigrated from central Europe, and Joe is a gun-carrying young man who seems descended from James Dean.


A Broken Arm Ends the Season for Nilan
LEAD: Chris Nilan, his bluff having lasted nearly two full periods, finally called a halt to the charade early in the third period of the Rangers' 6-1 triumph over the Islanders on Wednesday night.


3 Plead Guilty In Bolt Testing
LEAD: A military contracting company and three individuals pleaded guilty this week in Federal court to charges of failing to test bolts for use in combat aircraft, including the F-16 fighter and the B-1B bomber.


NEW YORK AGREES TO END BORROWING FOR ROUTINE COSTS
LEAD: The Governor, the State Comptroller and New York's legislative leaders said today that they had agreed to abandon the state's longstanding practice of borrowing billions of dollars each spring to cover routine expenses like tax refunds and payments to local school districts.


Jesse Helms Museum Drive Draws Quiet Support and Loud Criticism
LEAD: Senator Jesse Helms, whose outspoken views about what constitutes art has put him at odds with museum curators around the country, is now being honored with a museum of his own.


DH Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DH Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,511,000
9,480,000
Net inc
1,717,000
1,224,000
Share earns
.34
.25


Unaffordable Pork
LEAD: New York State's gaping budget deficit is forcing painful tax increases and cuts in services.
An unselfish Legislature would share the pain by forgoing ''member items'' - the annual grab-bag of pet projects for members' home districts.


Electronic Technology Group reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Technology Group
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,657,670
1,272,000
Net inc
108,141
50,463
Share earns
.10
.05
6mo sales
3,042,529
2,379,385
Net inc
182,656
53,816
Share earns
.17
.05


Review/Music;   A Lyricist Gives Voice To Words Of His Own
LEAD: Although Sheldon Harnick has been writing lyrics for Broadway musicals for almost 40 years, including one of the most memorable shows of the last quarter-century, ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' and a Pulitzer Prize winner, ''Fiorello!,'' his name does not usually bring immediate recognition.
But in the program of his songs that opened on Tuesday night at Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller


Big Dipper Combines Punk With Melody
LEAD: Big Dipper, a rock-and-roll quartet from Boston that will perform tonight at the Knitting Factory, pulls its inspiration from sources as varied as punk-rock, American history, the Billboard charts, romantic poetry and PBS.
Its members are musical contortionists: they love to toy with extremes, juxtaposing ferocious guitar noise with celestial vocal harmonies or planting a delicate melody in jagged rhythm.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Economy


Suitor of Norton Hints at Higher Bid
LEAD: BTR P.L.C., a British maker of industrial products, indicated it might be willing to sweeten its $1.64 billion hostile bid for the Norton Company if the plastics and ceramics company based in Worcester, Mass., could demonstrate it was worth a higher price.
The London-based conglomerate said in United States Government filings that it had asked for confidential information and was prepared to meet with Norton, which so far has resisted the $75-a-share cash bid.


Islanders Evasive as Sutter Sits Out
LEAD: Two days ago, after leading the Islanders to victory with two goals in an overtime game that lasted more than four hours, Brent Sutter practiced with as much energy as he had displayed the night before.


Nepal's King Invites Head of Opposition To Engage in Talks
LEAD: In an effort to end a four-day political stalemate, King Birendra invited the leader of Nepal's opposition to join him in direct talks today, apparently on the formation of a new transitional government.


Medellin Mayor Urges Talks To End Drug War After Blast
LEAD: The Mayor of Medellin called for negotiations to end Colombia's drug war today, a day after a car bomb explosion near the city that the Red Cross said killed 21 people.


Estonian Parliament Votes To End All Military Service
LEAD: The Estonian Parliament has voted overwhelmingly to end all military service in the republic, in a move certain to increase tension between Moscow and the independence-minded Baltic republics, Estonians said today.


Intel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intel Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
894,457,000
713,083,000
Net inc
143,768,000
97,004,000
Share earns
.73
.52
Shares outst
196,741,000
185,444,000
The company attributed the improved results to strong demand for its 32-bit microcomputer components.


Maxwell Harrison, Surgeon, 76
LEAD: Dr.
Maxwell Harrison, an eye, ear, nose and throat surgeon who helped pioneer the use of microsurgery in Queens in trying to restore hearing loss, died of coronary artery disease on Sunday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in Queens.
He was 76 years old and lived in Woodmere, L.I.


Review/Photography;   Fashion and Glamour in 3 Shows
LEAD: AS if egged on by increasing doses of sunlight, exhibitions of photography seem to have sprung up like so many rogue narcissus this month.
Appropriately, many of the shows that are on view this weekend are fashionable blooms, in that they take their cues largely from fashion and its amiable cohort, glamour.


Family Slayer Found Guilty Of Top Counts
LEAD: Eighteen years after methodically killing his wife, his mother and his three teen-age children in their Westfield house, John Emil List was convicted today of five counts of first-degree murder.


THE EAST GERMANS ISSUE AN APOLOGY FOR NAZIS' CRIMES
LEAD: As it formally installed the country's first democratic Government, the East German Parliament also ended 40 years of official denial today by accepting joint responsibility for Nazi crimes and expressing willingness to pay reparations to victims and seek diplomatic ties with Israel.


A Schuller Premiere
LEAD: The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is to give the world premiere of Gunther Schuller's ''Impromptus and Cadenzas'' on Sunday afternoon at 5 o'clock at Alice Tully Hall.
The five-movement work is to be performed by Stephen Taylor, oboist; David Shifrin, clarinetist; Frank Morelli, bassoonist; Robert Routch, hornist; Ida Kavafian, violinist, and Leslie Parnas, cellist.


Black Factions Continue Combat Despite Pretoria's Efforts to Halt It
LEAD: Despite recent promises of action by President F. W. de Klerk, the South African Government has yet to show significant progress in stopping factional fighting that has pushed black communities in Natal province to the brink of civil war.


CBS Sets Role for News Technicians
LEAD: CBS will allow technicians assigned to its news division to continue working exclusively on news programs, a CBS executive said yesterday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Age Hasn't Mellowed This Agency
LEAD: CONTROVERSIAL advertising campaigns are typically the province of young, upstart agencies trying to distinguish themselves in the cluttered precincts of Madison Avenue.
The brash ''. . .
And she drinks Johnnie Walker'' campaign, whose slice-of-life dialogues have managed to outrage feminists and intrigue gay organizations, may be the older folks' revenge.


Umpire Opens Door And Pirates Walk In
LEAD: Barry Lyons, the catcher for the Mets, thought it was a strike.
Sid Fernandez, the pitcher, did not want to comment.
Neal Heaton, the Pirates' batter, said it was ''right down the middle.''


The Grande Bande
LEAD: Frederick Renz will conduct the Grande Bande, an early-instruments orchestra, in an Easter program that includes Haydn's ''Passione'' Symphony and Mozart's Symphony No. 40 and Piano Concerto No. 17 (K. 453), tomorrow evening at 8 o'clock at Alice Tully Hall.
John Gibbons will be the fortepiano soloist in the concerto.


Brazil Congress Passes Anti-Inflation Plan
LEAD: Brazil's Congress gave a major victory to President Fernando Collor de Mello late Wednesday by passing intact the heart of his Draconian anti-inflation plan.
Economists said a severe recession was a certainty.


Time for Change
LEAD: To return to the United States from a visit to South Africa is to experience a drastic difference in political climates.
In South Africa, the most profound assumptions of the society are changing.
In the United States, the political system is frozen.


Prenatal Nightmare
LEAD: A Bette Davis fan who had longed to see ''The Great Lie'' found it recently in a video store.
She thought she was renting a romantic drama; what she got was a horror movie.
Every time Sandra Novak, the hard-as-nails concert pianist played by Mary Astor, pulled out another cigarette, the fan shrank.


One Brooklyn Rabbi's Long Shadow
LEAD: The last-minute failure of the Israeli Labor Party to form a new government has again focused attention on the role of a charismatic Brooklyn rabbi who asserts an unusual amount of influence in Israel.


Changes Urged to Cut Delays at Airports
LEAD: Alarmed by the growing number of flight delays in the New York area, airlines are pressuring the Government to revise the region's air traffic control system, much the way it did in Chicago last year.
But some of the proposed changes are already meeting resistance from controllers.


Rubbermaid Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rubbermaid Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
359,469,000
348,963,000
Net inc
33,110,000
29,305,000
Share earns
.13
.11


Walker and Ryan Are Dropped As Jets Move in New Direction
LEAD: The Jets, who have a new coach and new general manager, will have a new look on the field, too.
Yesterday, they cut loose 34-year-old Wesley Walker, their outstanding wide receiver for his 13 pro seasons, and 34-year-old Pat Ryan, their mostly backup quarterback for his 12 pro seasons.


A Lawyer With AIDS Wins a Legal Victory, and Gives His Employer Some Unwelcome Publicity
LEAD: Hyatt Legal Services Inc. provides more legal advice to more Americans than any other law firm.
But if the company's behavior in a recent AIDS discrimination case is any indication, Hyatt's own legal judgment isn't always so sound.


Review/Music;   An Austrian Composer in 1933 and 1951
LEAD: One of the happier ideas for cultural exchange has been the three-year-old Ensemble for Viennese Music New York, which promotes Austrian composers in this city while its sister organization, the American Music Ensemble Vienna, provides corresponding services abroad.


Gap Provides Disclosure Respite
LEAD: The top 11,000 employees in the executive branch of the Federal Government, who have previously been required to file financial disclosure forms, have been told that they might not have to do so this year.


Review/Theater;   After 11 Years, Easter Returns to Radio City
LEAD: The Easter show has returned to Radio City Music Hall, after an 11-year absence, with all the splendor inherent in both holiday and locale.
The brisk and awesome 90-minute ''Easter Extravaganza'' accords the holiness of the occasion cathedral-like attention at the outset but then goes its own jolly way, celebrating the holiday in particularly New York terms.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Jazz Rallies to Beat Lakers
Karl Malone scored 45 points and grabbed the game's key rebound and the Utah Jazz, after squandering a 23-point lead, came back to beat the visiting Los Angeles Lakers, 107-104, in the final eight seconds last night.
John Stockton had 15 points and 23 assists.(AP)
Rockets 117, Hornets 110: Akeem Olajuown scored 34 points and had 19 rebounds, lifting Houston to the .500 level for the first time since Dec.


Computer Networks Open New Worlds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 29
1990
1989
Revenue
118,016,000
111,333,000
Net loss
8,909,000
b4,197,000
Share earns
-
.23
Shares outst
18,696,000
18,544,000
Yr rev
511,314,000
445,867,000
Net inc
5,551,000
20,767,000
Share earns
.30
.97
Shares outst
18,781,000
21,504,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co. of Canada Ltd., to Bozell Palmer Bonner, Toronto, with a budget of $3 million to $4 million.


Why Langston Left
LEAD: Even the lure of a no-hitter against his former team could not keep Mark Langston from taking himself out of the game.


Corrections
LEAD: An art review in Weekend on March 16 about the installation by the artists' group General Idea at the Koury-Wingate Gallery misidentified the materials used to make the figures of three baby seals.
As a letter from the gallery has pointed out, they were synthetic fibers, not lambskin.


Review/Film;   Sequel to South African's 'Gods Must Be Crazy'
LEAD: Jamie Uys, the South African film maker, broke into the world market in a big way in 1984 with ''The Gods Must Be Crazy,'' a small, beguiling comedy about Xixo, an African bushman, and the Coke bottle he finds in the middle of the Kalahari Desert.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
19,957,000
19,774,000
Share earns
.90
.89
All figures have been restated to account for the acquisition of M&amp;I First National Bank of Cudahy in October 1989 and accounted for on the pooling of interests basis.


Our Towns;   The Big Audition: Gotta Sing! Gotta Study!
LEAD: The third and fourth grade boys waiting to audition for the Newark Boys Chorus School were so nervous their synapses were popping out loud.
Chris Wiggins had produced a tub of surplus adrenalin and could not sit down. ''I got to walk around,'' he said.


Par Plans to Buy Rest of Quad Stock
LEAD: The generic-drug maker Par Pharmaceutical Inc. said it would buy the 40 percent of Quad Pharmaceuticals Inc. it does not already own.
The deal would make Quad, based in Indianapolis, wholly owned by Par.
Par's stock slipped 12.5 cents today, to $5.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


How Can Taxi Courts Be Just if Accusations Are Anonymous?
LEAD: To the Editor:


The New York Times Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* The New York Times Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
431,188,000
423,068,000
Net inc
16,589,000
b33,516,000
Share earns
.22
.42
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $1,975,000, or 2 cents a share.


Note to Readers
LEAD: The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the expected merger of the nation's two largest ''right to die'' groups misstated the address where they have started joint operations as the National Council on Death and Dying.
It is 250 West 57th Street in New York.


A Sylvan Sliver of Spring


Industrial Funding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Industrial Funding Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
12,362,000
7,734,000
Net inc
1,541,000
846,000
Share earns
.21
.15
Shares outst
7,333,000
5,625,000


Oakland Journal;   Raiders Now Find Welcome Mat Thin
LEAD: The city that fought so bitterly to keep the Raiders from moving to Los Angeles nine years ago is no longer sure it wants the swaggering football team back.


Review/Music;   Haydn in a Sly Mood
LEAD: Maybe it was the news of its new music director, Kurt Masur, that put the New York Philharmonic in such a good mood on Thursday evening at Avery Fisher Hall.
Then again, there was Leonard Slatkin as its guest conductor, who has the musical elegance and skill to tune this orchestra's messages with great fineness.


Crucial Differences Seen In 2 Subway Shootings
LEAD: Echoes of the Bernhard H. Goetz case reverberated in the gunfire that rang out on a subway train rolling through Brooklyn Thursday night as a middle-aged white man shot and killed one of several black youths who surrounded, beat and robbed him.


Karcher Will Sell 40 Carl's Jr. Units
LEAD: Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc. will sell or franchise its 40 company-owned Carl's Jr. restaurants in Arizona, which were losing $5 million a year.
The regional fast-food outfit said it would take a $14.5 million special charge against its earnings to cover the costs.


Hungering for Art in New Delhi
LEAD: This capital city, long scorned by many Indians as a dull bureaucratic town, is suddenly in the middle of an art boom.
Almost weekly, private galleries open in shopping areas, around cultural complexes and in homes, giving contemporary Indian artists, sculptors and photographers more exposure than they have ever enjoyed in modern India.


Ex-Senator Ends Retirement And Faces an Election Issue
LEAD: Former Senator Lawton Chiles came out of retirement on Thursday to enter the Democratic race for governor and was immediately confronted with a new disclosure that he was taking medication for depression.


International Research &amp; Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Research &amp; Development Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,492,400
5,668,545
Net inc
650,272
897,569
Share earns
.12
.16
Latest figures included quarterly results of Carme Inc., which International Research bought on Jan.


George Theodore Golding, Urologist, 83
LEAD: Dr.
George Theodore Golding, a urologist in Queens for almost 50 years, died of an aneurism on Tuesday at his home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 83 years old.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


New Discipline in Albany;   Struggling With $5 Billion Deficit, New York Tries to End Its Cycle of Spring Borrowing
LEAD: In New York State politics, bad habits are generally not broken through gentle persuasion.
It takes a crisis instead.
This was well demonstrated on Thursday, when the Governor, the Comptroller and the State Legislature's leaders agreed to abandon the longstanding practice of borrowing billions of dollars each spring to pay for routine expenses like aid to school districts and local governments.


Torchmark Gains In Board Fight
LEAD: A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, issued a ruling on Thursday that allows the Torchmark Corporation of Birmingham, Ala., to solicit proxies for its proposed slate of nominees for election to the board of the American General Corporation at the company's annual meeting on May 2.


Upheaval in the East;   On Forgiving the Germans
LEAD: Invoking the spirit of Good Friday and Easter, President Bush said today that people ''ought to forgive'' Germans for the Holocaust but should not forget history's lessons.


Upheaval in the East;   Li Peng to Visit Gorbachev
LEAD: Prime Minister Li Peng will visit the Soviet Union from April 23 to April 26, becoming the first Chinese head of government to travel to Moscow since 1964, the Foreign Ministry said today.
Mr.
Li was invited to the Soviet Union last May, when President Mikhail S. Gorbachev made the first trip to Beijing by a Soviet leader in three decades.


Homestyle Buffet reports earnings for Qtr to March 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homestyle Buffet
Qtr to March 28
1990
1989
Sales
8,587,029
4,890,237
Net inc
663,038
354,316
Share earns
.14
.09
Shares outst
4,871,600
3,861,348
Latest shares outstanding reflects retroactive adjustment for 15 percent stock dividend to shareholders of record on March 16.


A Big Hit for Marshall As Mets Win in 10th By JOSEPH DURSO
LEAD: Like everybody else, the Mets were still groping for answers to baseball's shortened spring training today.
The hitters, who were supposed to be ahead of the pitchers, were hitting .194.
And the pitchers, who were supposed to be hurting for more work, were keeping the team in games waiting for the hitters to hit.


Coping: With What You Spend on Your Home
LEAD: Income-tax time, when all your records are at hand, is a convenient time to gather receipts and other papers documenting home or apartment renovations and major appliance purchases.
Warranties and manuals should also be stored safely.
This is a chore that ought to be done regularly.


Bairnco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bairnco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
51,060,000
47,793,000
Net inc
1,133,000
b3,234,000
Share earns
.11
.30
Shares outst
10,442,000
10,769,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $347,000.


Postal Service Should Be Doing More, Not Less
LEAD: To the Editor:


Action Staffing reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Staffing
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
39,442,000
27,760,000
Net inc
143,000
113,000
6mo rev
77,422,000
54,847,000
Net inc
342,000
179,000
Share earns
.01
-


Fortune Gordien, Discus Thrower, 67
LEAD: Fortune Gordien, who set a world record in the discus throw in 1953 and represented the United States three times in the Olympic Games, died on Tuesday in Fontana, Calif., after having been in the hospital since January with a blocked artery.
He was 67 years old.


Teaneck Youths Say BB Gun Was Waved Just Before Killing
LEAD: Teen-agers who were with Phillip C. Pannell when the black youth was shot dead by a white policeman said today that they had been ''fooling around'' with a BB pistol before officers confronted them.


Sandberg Stays Hot As Cubs Top Pirates, 2-0
LEAD: Ryne Sandberg is supposed to be a horrible April hitter.
Greg Maddux rarely pitches well against the Pittsburgh Pirates.
The Chicago Cubs never get off to a fast start.
So much for popular theories.
Sandberg continued his hot start with three hits, including a two-run homer, and Maddux allowed two hits in seven and two-thirds innings as the Chicago Cubs, now 3-1, beat Pittsburgh, 2-0, tonight in the Pirates' home opener.


From Zion, Not From Brooklyn
LEAD: A Hasidic rabbi in Brooklyn -one of the few New York City rabbis never to have set foot in the Holy Land -has again obstructed the formation of a government in Israel.


Graziano: The Brawler As Artist
LEAD: Everyone knew Rocky Graziano was dangerous.
There was a time, for example, several summers ago when the former pugilist broiled hamburgers on a grill on the patio of a friend's brownstone in Manhattan.
Rocky found a chef's hat to wear, and, in loafers without socks - he rarely wore socks because he had developed gout and his feet were happier sockless - he proceeded to cook up a storm.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about the new President of Taiwan referred to the island incorrectly in some editions.
It is not a colony.


Who's Monitoring Cosmetics Safety?
LEAD: How safe are cosmetics?
Does the consumer have to worry that ''anti-aging'' cream may be carcinogenic or hair spray flammable?


Butler Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Butler Manufacturing (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
127,575,000
130,556,000
Net loss
117,000
b2,494,000
Share earns
-
.55
b-Net income


Upheaval in the East;   Text of Kremlin's Letter of Warning to the Lithuanians
LEAD: Following is the text of a letter to the Lithuanian leadership sent today by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov, as translated by Tass, the official Soviet press agency:


Dorset Exploration reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dorset Exploration
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,982,000
5,841,000
Net loss
852,000
b362,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $348,000.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Nunn Favored in Bout
LEAD: The oddsmakers in Las Vegas, Nev., have made Michael Nunn a 6-1 favorite to retain his International Boxing Federation middleweight title against Marlon Starling tonight at the Mirage.


Too Often, the Buck Stops in the Appeals Court
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Other constituent republics are asking quite aptly why they should continue supplying products to Lithuania at the expense of their own needs.''
- President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. [1:6.]


Exxon Trial Set for June
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation and its shipping subsidiary are scheduled for trial on June 18 on Federal charges stemming from the Alaska oil spill of March 1989.
The date was set in an order filed Wednesday in United States District Court.
Exxon and the Exxon Shipping Company pleaded not guilty to the charges on Monday.


Utah Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Utah Medical Products (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,004,761
3,770,781
Net inc
767,573
409,201
Share earns
.10
.05


Cinram Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cinram Ltd.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,500,000
12,600,000
Net inc
b700,000
1,200,000
Share earns
.07
.16
Yr sales
42,000,000
40,000 000
Net inc
b2,600,000
3,400,000
Share earns
.28
.45
Shares outst
9,263,000
7,643,000


BOEING TO FINANCE NEW 767-X AIRLINER WITHOUT JAPANESE
LEAD: The Boeing Company said today that it would finance by itself the development of its proposed 767-X aircraft.
Three Japanese aerospace companies will be substantial suppliers for the 300-seat twin-engine plane but will not be partners, Boeing said after months of industry speculation about possible


BUSINESS DIGEST:
LEAD:
Companies


Rubbermaid Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rubbermaid Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
359,469,000
348,963,000
Net inc
33,110,000
29,305,000
Share earns
.45
.40
Corrected from yesterday's editions.


Damson Energy reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Damson Energy (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
68,285,000
71,825,000
Net inc
2,219,000
b33,796,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss and included a charge of $32.8 million related to a writedown of properties to the securities and exchange commission's defined net carrying value.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When the shiny Glasgow International Concert Hall opens on Oct. 8, THEA MUSGRAVE, the Scottish composer who is a distinguished professor at Queens College in Flushing, will herald the occasion with ''Rainbow,'' an orchestral piece commissioned by the city.
For her, it is ''a metaphor that comes after stormy times to signify a beautiful future,'' she said.


Rev. Virginio Rotondi, Vatican Adviser, 78
LEAD: The Rev.
Virginio Rotondi, a Jesuit who helped handle the Vatican's postwar relations with Italian politicians, died today.
He was 78 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Father Rotondi, who wrote several books, was the host of two radio shows and often contributed to newspapers and magazines, suffered a stroke about a year ago.


Pope Leads Procession in Remembrance of Good Friday


Murdoch to Curb Purchases
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch says he is intent on improving earnings at the News Corporation and has no plans for more big acquisitions.


Mr Gasket Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mr Gasket Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
20,835,000
28,645,000
Net loss
1,640,000
b313,000
Share earns
-
.03
Yr sales
106,584,000
119,245,000
Net loss
1,801,000
14,687,000
Shares outst
10,525,000
10,543,000


Injury to Leg Muscle Sidelines Tartabull
LEAD: Danny Tartabull, who was the Kansas City Royals' hottest hitter in spring training with a .443 batting average, will be lost to the team for at least 15 days after suffering a freakish injury before a game Wednesday night.
The outfielder was shagging flies in the outfield when he tore the plantaris muscle, which connects the calf muscle with the


Easter Parade
LEAD: Fifth Avenue will be closed to traffic tomorrow from 44th through 57th streets from 11 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. for the promenade known as the Easter parade.


NHD Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NHD Stores (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 27
1990
1989
Sales
14,348,000
14,151,000
Net inc
103,000
478,000
Share earns
.08
.36
Yr sales
55,256,000
51,444,000
Net inc
166,000
1,036,000
Share earns
.13
.79


Lower Manhattan Calls for More Parks
LEAD: Lisa Crafts, a painter and film animator who lives in TriBeCa, began eating lunch in her local park on nice days about five years ago.
Back then, she says, Washington Market Park may have been virtually the only park around, but in the sparsely populated area it was enough.


Theater Club Benefit
LEAD: Members of the casts of ''City of Angels,'' ''Gypsy,'' ''Closer Than Ever'' and ''Forbidden Broadway'' will take part in a special performance at 9 P.M.
April 30 at the New York Hilton, 1355 Avenue of the Americas, at 53d Street.
Proceeds from the show will benefit the Manhattan Theater Club, which is in its 19th season.


Bennett Refuses to Admit Failure In War on Drug Abuse in Capital
LEAD: William J. Bennett, the national drug policy adviser, acknowledged today that the results of a showcase Federal effort to curb drug abuse in the nation's capital were ''not nearly as good as anyone would like,'' but he insisted that the campaign was not a failure.


New England Bank
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation agreed to sell its mutual fund custody business to the Investors Bank and Trust Company.
The price was not disclosed.
Bank of New England oversees mutual funds valued at $22 billion.
Investors Bank, which is 77.3 percent controlled by the Boston-based Eaton Vance Corporation, already holds custody assets worth an estimated $9 billion.


Graf Is Tested but Prevails
LEAD: There are days when Steffi Graf disposes of challengers the way a shark disposes of its dinner, in one silent gulp.
This wasn't one of them.


Late Soviet Payments Irk Sellers
LEAD: Frustrated by slow bill payments by the traditionally prompt Soviet Union, some American companies are slowing shipments to Moscow or avoiding new export commitments, various industry, Government and other sources said today.


Review/Dance;   New Look At Dancers Of Miami
LEAD: The Miami City Ballet was founded in 1986 with Edward Villella as its artistic director and barely two years later it made an impressive New York City debut at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.


Carnegie Hall Schedule For Boston Symphony
LEAD: Appearances by the pianists Martha Argerich and Peter Serkin and by the violinist Midori are to be among the highlights of the Boston Symphony Orchestra's 1990-91 Carnegie Hall season, the orchestra has announced.
Seiji Ozawa, the orchestra's music director, is to conduct three pairs of concerts, at 8 P.M.


Review/Music;   Amici Rarities and a Staple
LEAD: Music Amici, a conglomeration of 11 players from various symphony, ballet and theater orchestras, offered three rarities and one repertory staple in a Weill Recital Hall program on Sunday evening.


An Extra Day for the Mad Tax Rush
LEAD: If you have not filed your Federal and state income tax returns yet, there is a little extra time this year.
Because April 15 falls on a Sunday, you have one more day to file.
But if you are not ready now, plan a concentrated session with your papers because things are not the same as they were last year.


Bethlehem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bethlehem Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,834,000
3,365,000
Net inc
84,000
b68,000
Share earns
.06
.05
b-After income from discontinued operations of $87,000.
Year-ago results are restated to reflect discontinued operations.


A Museum That Looks to the Future
LEAD: This city, which has a reputation of being the elderly custodian of the Liberty Bell and other national heirlooms, is about to exhibit 90,000 square feet of the future.


How to Achieve Fairness in Puerto Rico
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beliefs
LEAD: Three of the world's major faiths are in the midst of holy seasons.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,199,000,000
2,306,000,000
Net inc
172,000,000
269,000,000
Share earns
.74
1.16
Year-ago share earnings are adjusted for a 3-for-2 stock split paid in June 1989.


Campeau Store Plan Approved
LEAD: The Federated and Allied retailing companies, operating under Federal bankruptcy court protection, won approval on Thursday for a two-year, $25 million plan intended to keep key managers from leaving.
Federal Bankruptcy Judge J. Vincent Aug Jr. approved the plan, which seeks to benefit about 2,300 managers of Federated Department Stores Inc.


5 Charged in Bank Robberies
LEAD: A gang has been charged with holding up 31 banks in Manhattan, Queens and Brooklyn from June 1988 to last month, using the subway for their getaway, a Federal prosecutor announced yesterday.
Five men were named in the indictment, which was filed on April 5 in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The accused ringleader was identified as Richard Jackson, 35 years old, of 124 Humboldt Street, Brooklyn.


Four Double Bogeys Knock Nicklaus Out of Lead
LEAD: Maybe Jack Nicklaus got bored.
Or maybe he didn't want to keep embarrassing his friends on the senior tour.
Perhaps he was even trying to set up the much-anticipated senior shootout with Lee Trevino.


How Boiled Is That Egg?
LEAD: Coloring eggs may be synonymous with Easter, but boiling them is often a matter of trial and error.


Audio-Video Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audio-Video Affiliates (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
48,335,000
68,204,000
Net inc
47,000
1,802,000
Share earns
.01
.16
Shares outst
6,461,000
10,950,000
Yr sales
143,660,000
194,347,000
Net loss
b2,577,000
c3,056,000
Share earns
-
.27
Shares outst
7,194,000
11,226,000


In China, Literature Continues to Suffer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hallmark Extends Offer
LEAD: Hallmark Cards Inc. said yesterday that it had extended its cash tender offer for $270 million worth of Univision Holdings Inc. ''junk bonds'' because 85 percent to 90 percent of bondholders have tendered their securities.


Don't Break Faith With Landlords
LEAD: In the face of a shortage of low-cost housing, ''housing preservation'' means something besides keeping treasured structures.
It also means retaining the low-rent character of habitable buildings.
These include New York's Mitchell-Lama developments, built by private investors with government mortgages and tax concessions.


Lotus-Novell Link Fought
LEAD: Two stockholders have gone to court to block the proposed $1.4 billion merger of two big software companies, the Lotus Development Corporation and Novell Inc., the companies said yesterday.
The class-action lawsuit in


Health Concepts IV reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Concepts IV (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
3,882,805
2,607,434
Net inc
240,170
211,996
Share earns
.10
.09
Shares outst
2,428,950
2,453,000


Israelis Are Reported to Sink Dinghy Carrying 4 Guerrillas
LEAD: The Israeli Navy sank a dinghy carrying four Palestinian guerrillas trying to enter northern Israel from the Lebanese coast, members of the Lebanese and Israeli security forces said today.


Tokyo Stocks Down by 1.38%
LEAD: Stock prices fell today in light trading on the Tokyo stock exchange.


Interspec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interspec Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
14,322,000
14,709,000
Net loss
1,221,000
b360,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
6,105,000
6,135,000
b-Net income and included an extraordinary tax credit of $227,000, or 4 cents a share.


About New York;   Together Again, These Sly Foes Of Nazi Resolve
LEAD: They came as old men, shoulders stooped, smiling through wrinkles.
They exchanged hugs, sipped drinks and recalled that ancient and glorious time when they were brash young comrades-in-arms.


Upheaval in the East;   New Soviet Threat 'Disturbing' to Bush
LEAD: Speaking with unusual force about the Lithuanian crisis, President Bush said today that he and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain found reports of a Kremlin ultimatum to the Baltic republic ''deeply disturbing.'' Mr.
Bush said imposition of economic sanctions against Lithuania would violate Moscow's stated policy of seeking to resolve the stalemate over


Review/Music;   A Free Spirit's Legacy
LEAD: Continuum celebrated Henry Cowell at Alice Tully Hall last Saturday night.
Cowell, who died 25 years ago after a long, rich and bizarre career, is one of those American originals who both earned the profits and felt the losses of lives largely unencumbered by formal education and societal regulation.


Tiananmen Protest Leader Credits 'Lots of People' for Escape to West
LEAD: A leader of the Chinese student movement that was crushed in Tiananmen Square in June said here today that she was able to avoid arrest for 10 months thanks to the help, protection and encouragement of ordinary Chinese citizens.


Review/Theater;   Oh, to Be Able to Drive Into Oblivion


Tender Said to Yield 64.1% of Norton Stock
LEAD: BTR P.L.C., the British industrial conglomerate, announced today that almost two-thirds of the common stock of the Norton Company had been tendered under BTR's $1.64 billion buyout offer.


In Appalachia, Vast Change but New Troubles
LEAD: In Harlan County, where the coal tipples jut out from the black hills like ungainly prehistoric birds, coal is still king, but it rules a forlorn, beleaguered kingdom.


Marion Merrell Stock
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company said on Thursday that it would purchase an additional four million shares of Marion Merrell Dow Inc. stock.
Dow currently owns 186.3 million shares of Marion Merrell Dow.
At the end of the year there were 278.3 million shares outstanding.
The stock will be bought either on the open market or in private transactions, the company said.


Spare Those Trees On the Cross Island
LEAD: To the Editor:


Storytelling to Be Theme Of Performance Series
LEAD: Storytelling and its many influences will be the theme of a free performance series beginning May 16 at 7:30 P.M. at the Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris, Park Avenue and 42d Street.


Los Angeles Area to Get All-News Channel
LEAD: Come Labor Day, people in Orange County, Calif., are likely to see on television live surf reports from Huntington Beach, traffic jams on Interstate 5 and local weather forecasts for sun-drenched Anaheim and ocean-cooled Irvine.
Their window will be Orange County Newschannel, a planned 24-hour all-news cable channel that reflects a growing appetite for regional cable programming.


A Financing Delay For Home Builder
LEAD: A Federal bankrupcty judge extended the deadline for the General Development Corporation's financing plan and ordered the troubled real estate giant to honor back paychecks.
United States Bankruptcy Judge A. Jay Cristol gave General Development until Monday to present a short-term financial plan.
The company, which pleaded guilty last month in connection with a scheme to sell overpriced homes, was also told it must pay wages earned before the bankruptcy filing.


A New Case of Subway Revenge: Beating Victim Is Sought as Killer
LEAD: A subway rider who was beaten and robbed Thursday night on a Brooklyn express train drew a pistol from beneath his trench coat, shot one of his four assailants to death and then calmly walked off into the night at the next station, the police said.


NDL Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NDL Products (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,832,230
1,383,583
Net loss
132,095
32,153
6mo sales
4,245,763
3,584,733
Net loss
92,289
b101,393
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income and included a $33,000 gain from a change in the method of allocating overhead.


Review/Theater;   Everything One Might Want to Know About Nikolai Gogol
LEAD: The stage has never been the most comfortable vehicle for biography, and the lives of writers, even great and eccentric ones like Nikolai Gogol, usually provide fairly flimsy material around which to build a drama.


Suspect Held in Slaying of 6
LEAD: A 22-year-old Kansas City man, Ray Shawn Jackson, was charged today with killing six of seven women strangled here since September and with the assault Monday night of another woman whose attack was interrupted by a passer-by.
The Police Chief, Larry Joiner, said the six strangled women had all been lured to the midtown areas where they were slain by the promise of obtaining crack.


Stein Barred From Voting On Cable TV
LEAD: The long battle over the renewal of cable television franchises in Manhattan took an unexpected twist yesterday after the New York City Conflicts of Interest Board ruled that City Council President Andrew J. Stein may not vote on the renewals as a member of the Board of Estimate.


Margaret Atwood Reflects on a Hit
LEAD: Family and friends gathered in the home of Margaret Atwood in November to celebrate her 50th birthday.
With the lights off and joy and wine flowing freely, everyone was waving sparklers and singing - until the smoke alarm sounded and no one could find the switch to silence it.


Champagneforashley Wins by 12 1/2
LEAD: Champagneforashley would probably have had to fall down to lose the DeWitt Clinton Handicap yesterday at Aqueduct, but he won it even more impressively than anyone expected.


Review/Ballet;   A Boston Celebration
LEAD: The Boston Ballet has established a reputation over its 26 years for encouraging new and lesser-known choreographers.
Its ''Choreographers' Celebration'' on Saturday night at the Wang Center for the Performing Arts carried on that tradition with ballets from David Bintley, Monica Levy and that grand old perennially emergent choreographer, George


NBS National Benefit Services reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBS National Benefit Services
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
989,435
845,409
Net loss
154,097
151,161
9mo rev
2,752,007
2,537,105
Net loss
430,290
642,699


Profiles From Cincinnati: Cutting Edge of Art Scrapes Deeply Held Beliefs;   The Curator; High Profile Makes Inviting Target
LEAD: For years, the Contemporary Arts Center was a lone bastion of the avant-garde here, little known in a city of straight-arrow conservatism.
It had only 800 members, and most Cincinnatians probably did not know where it was.


Specialty Retail Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Specialty Retail Services
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,260,000
7,164,000
Net loss
b499,000
c254,000
Shares outst
5,512,500
3,888,888
Yr sales
30,522,000
30,720,000
Net loss
b323,000
d133,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
4,407,496
3,888,888


Diagnostic Medical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostic Medical
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,314,801
1,530,400
Net inc
32,474
b90,990
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
2,539,774
3,310,034
Net inc
3,281
b106,685
b-Net loss


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JUDITH ROSSNER's new novel appeared this week, but lighter by several words.
And Ms.
Rossner, who is reputed to be fiercely protective of her prose, was not amused.


Unilab Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unilab Corp.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
31,170,000
10,299,000
Net loss
3,253,000
168,000
9mo rev
76,902,000
12,276,000
Net loss
3,735,000
786,000
The company said year-ago results do not include two acquisitions made since that time.


Chattem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chattem Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
17,892,000
15,047,000
Net inc
514,000
550,000
Share earns
.41
.39
Shares outst
1,260,000
1,427,000


Upheaval in the East;   Hungarian Opposition Party Plans Coalition Government
LEAD: The party that finished first in this week's elections said today that it hoped to form Hungary's first non-Communist government in four decades by mid-May.


VLSI Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VLSI Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
78,800,000
64,855,000
Net inc
2,300,000
b6,200,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


CONSUMER GUIDE: Guidepost;   Cooking Easter Lamb
LEAD: The cuts of lamb usually roasted for Easter are the whole or boned leg, the rack, several racks tied into a crown roast, and the saddle or double loin.
Spring lamb and whole baby lamb are available now through October.
Many cookbooks recommend cooking lamb to 140 degrees and say it will be rare.
It won't; it will be medium.


Luis Trenker, 97, Dies; Made Films Since 30's
LEAD: Luis Trenker, a film maker whose career spanned five decades, died in his sleep early Friday at a hospital here, his family said.
He was 97 years old.


Dolphins and Double Hulls
LEAD: It may be no more than an effort by big companies to shine up their image as Earth Day, April 22, approaches.
But friends of the earth can surely cheer two corporate decisions this week.
The first was Conoco's announcement that it would order two new oil tankers with double hulls.
The second was the declaration by the three largest sellers of canned tuna that they would stop buying tuna trapped by nets that kill dolphins.


Dyansen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dyansen Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,144,000
8,711,000
Net loss
1,826,000
c90,000
Shares outst
5,540,000
5,291,000
Yr sales
37,089,000
29,731,000
Net loss
869,000
bc333,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
5,672,000
5,277,000


Penalty for Purdue
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I basketball committee decided yesterday to withhold $10,000 of Purdue University's share of the 1990 tournament revenue and reprimanded Coach Gene Keady for his outburst against the game officials after the Boilermakers' second-round loss to Texas on


Poe &amp; Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poe &amp; Associates Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,404,000
9,926,000
Net inc
1,250,000
1,231,000
Share earns
.32
.32


Claude Bolling Concert
LEAD: The French composer and jazz pianist Claude Bolling will give a free concert at 7 P.M.
Thursday in the Winter Garden at the World Financial Center in Battery Park City, bordered by the Hudson River and West, Vesey and Liberty Streets.
The concert will be Mr.
Bolling's only New York appearance this season.


Simple Request by Zaire's Leader Spurs Troubling Torrent by Critics
LEAD: It all seemed innocuous enough.
In January, President Mobutu Sese Seko announced that he would hold a series of public hearings throughout Zaire, ''a direct dialogue with the people,'' to better gauge their concerns.


Climbing Tuition Tied to Shrinking Student Pool
LEAD: Competition for students and a decline in government support were the main reasons for huge tuition increases at private and public colleges in the 1980's, a new study says.


Upheaval in the East;   Gorbachev Hands Over Katyn Papers
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today gave President Wojciech Jaruzelski of Poland cartons of documents that the Soviet leader said ''indirectly but convincingly'' proved that the Soviet secret police killed thousands of Polish officers in Katyn Forest in the spring of 1940.


Producer Prices Down 0.2% in March
LEAD: Producer prices, helped by a record drop in vegetable costs and lower gasoline prices, fell in March for the first time in seven months, the Labor Department reported today.


Introductory Fare By Northwest Air
LEAD: Northwest Airlines said it would offer low introductory fares for round-trip travel between San Jose and other points through June 15.
The carrier will start service in San Jose on May 15.


What Lenin Really Said
LEAD: To the Editor:


Space Seeds No Threat, NASA Says
LEAD: Responding to a report that tomatoes grown from seeds exposed for six years to radiation in space could be dangerous, the space agency said yesterday that such fruit would be as safe to eat as ordinary tomatoes bought in the store.


Patents;   A Machine To Disable Spy Devices
LEAD: A physicist and a former Federal official have invented a device that uses powerful bursts of microwave energy to disable electronic eavesdropping devices planted in walls, floors or ceilings.


Met-Coil Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Met-Coil Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
12,358,000
19,981,000
Net loss
385,000
b635,000
Share earns
-
.32
9mo rev
40,165,000
51,630,000
Net inc
51,000
1,380,000
Share earns
.02
.68


Pennslyvania R.E.I.T.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennslyvania R.E.I.T.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
5,371,556
5,068,115
Net inc
2,669,584
2,505,924
Share earns
.32
.30
Shares outst
8,215,053
8,199,207
Yr rev
10,582,013
10,206,761
Net inc
5,351,601
5,265,581
Share earns
.65
.64
Shares outst
8,213,921
8,192,302


INSIDE
LEAD:
The Curator vs. the Sheriff


Dinkins Paid Taxes Totaling One-Third of Income
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins and his wife, Joyce, paid Federal, state and city income taxes amounting to a third of their total income in 1989, according to copies of tax returns made public yesterday at City Hall.


TIE/Telecom Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TIE/Telecom Canada
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,492,000
17,203,000
Net loss
b20,205,000
753,000
Yr sales
53,828,000
66,697,000
Net loss
b24,898,000
654,000
b-Included restructuring costs of $17,145,000 for the quarter and $18,593,000 for the year.


Consolidated TVX Mining reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated TVX Mining
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
54,000,000
45,000,000
Net inc
6,300,000
13,300,000
Share earns
.15
.44
The company said the decrease in earnings was due to the write-off of its interest in Golden Shield Resources Ltd.


The Decline of Bonwit Teller: Did Time Pass Retailer By?
LEAD: Twenty years ago, Bonwit Teller and Saks Fifth Avenue, two of the nation's most celebrated fashion retailers catering to affluent customers, were roughly equivalent in size and approach.


When Art Triumphs
LEAD: For all the summits and conferences, the great event of the season is the van Gogh expositions in the Netherlands.
Unknown in his lifetime (he sold only one picture), Vincent van Gogh 100 years after his death is acknowledged around the world, also by the modern measure of success.
His pictures have sold for the highest prices ever.


Visa Rules Eased for Foreigners With AIDS
LEAD: The Bush Administration today further eased restrictions on foreigners infected with the AIDS virus who want to attend conferences in the United States, but opponents of the restrictions said the move fell short of the changes needed.


Stryker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stryker Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
67,582,000
53,946,000
Net inc
6,310,000
5,065,000
Share earns
.27
.22
Shares outst
23,690,000
23,528,000


Criticare Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Criticare Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,944,214
3,809,601
Net inc
164,471
106,451
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
6,026,704
6,219,712
9mo sales
12,678,982
10,198,487
Net inc
95,840
192,177
Share earns
.02
.03


Books of The Times;   Mankind as Aggressor In the War on the Planet
LEAD:
Making Peace With the Planet
By Barry Commoner
292 pages. Pantheon Books. $19.95.
Deadly Deceit
Low-Level Radiation, High-Level Cover-Up
By Jay M. Gould and Benjamin A. Goldman
222 pages. Four Walls Eight Windows. $19.95.
The Green Life Style Handbook
Edited by Jeremy Rifkin
202 pages.


News Summary
LEAD:
International#2-5
Lithuania received an ultimatum from President Gorbachev.
He said that if the republic did not rescind its major independence measures within 48 hours, he would order other republics to cut off supplies.
Page 1
Imposition of economic sanctions against Lithuania would violate Moscow's stated policy of seeking to resolve the stalemate without force, President Bush said.


Capital Centre Is Sued
LEAD: The mother-in-law of Kevin Loughery, a former coach of the Washington Bullets, has filed a $500,000 suit against the Capital Centre in Landover, Md., saying she was crushed by an ''obese'' and ''drunken'' man at a game in 1987.
In her suit, Julia Quinlan said the unidentified man lunged forward to retrieve an airborne basketball that was thrown into the crowd as part of a promotion by the Delicious Cookie Company on Dec.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article yesterday about responses to the census misattributed three statements by Boston residents.


Inventories Decline as Sales Jump
LEAD: Business inventories fell in February for the second time in three months, while sales surged, in another sign that the economy has avoided a recession, the Government said today.


Patents;   Device to Bar Disease In Resuscitation Efforts
LEAD: William Wollenhaupt, an official in the Dayton, Ohio, wastewater treatment plant, has invented a disposable wallet-sized device that he said permits mouth-to-mouth resuscitation without fear of contracting contagious diseases.


Medicaid Tail, Hospital Dog
LEAD: New York City hospitals have good reason to complain about Albany's efforts to limit payments under Medicaid, the Federal-state health insurance for the poor.
Medicaid payments are part of a broader hospital reimbursement policy best considered apart from the artificial forces of pressing budget deadlines.


Arbour Shuffles to Insufficient Avail
LEAD: Coach Al Arbour, with his Islander team one defeat away from Stanley Cup playoff elimination, took some drastic measures last night.


Baker Presses Lawmakers to Back A Strategy of Talks in El Salvador
LEAD: Hoping to prevent Congress from cutting aid to El Salvador when lawmakers return to work next week, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d is lobbying Democratic leaders to give the Administration time to encourage peace negotiations between the Salvadoran Government and leftist guerrillas.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: As president of the J. M. Kaplan Fund, JOAN K. DAVIDSON is more accustomed to giving than receiving.
The fund, founded by her late father, gives several millions of dollars annually to such diverse causes as the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, the New York Botanical Garden and dozens of New York


Hard-Hitting Rangers Reach Patrick Final
LEAD: The Rangers, playing against a backdrop of often heartbreaking history but in front of one of the National Hockey League's more astonishing acoustic accompaniments, last night overpowered and outlasted the Islanders, 6-5, sending Madison Square Garden into a prolonged fit of joy and advancing themselves to the Patrick


Anthem Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anthem Electronics (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
100,006,000
70,020,000
Net inc
5,683,000
3,012,000
Share earns
.48
.27


I.R.S. Keeps Lines Open
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service will keep its toll-free telephone lines open through Saturday afternoon to help taxpayers rushing to meet the midnight Monday deadline for filing 1989 tax returns.
The I.R.S. said today that telephoned tax questions would also be taken into the evening on Monday.
Numbers to call are listed in the instructions for filling out Forms 1040, 1040A and 1040EZ.


American City Business Jourals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American City Business Jourals Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,453,000
12,065,000
Net inc
2,578,000
b363,000
Share earns
.60
-
Shares outst
3,338,000
4,068,000
b-Net loss
The company said income in the latest first quarter included a one-time gain of $3,236,000 from the sale of assets.


General Motors Is Recalling 65,200 Cars Over Fuel Hose
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation is recalling 65,200 Pontiac Grand Am, Oldsmobile Cutlass Calais and Buick Skylark automobiles to repair a faulty fuel hose that has caused fires in engine compartments.


The Prosecution In Racial Killing Is Facing Snags
LEAD: A major prosecution witness in the Bensonhurst murder case who has a history of drug abuse has left a drug-treatment program, creating potential difficulties for prosecutors on the weekend before the trial is to begin.


Colombian Rebels' Arms Go, But Where's Bolivar Sword?
LEAD: Where is Simon Bolivar's sword?


John Graham, 81, Pioneer in Treating Headaches, Is Dead
LEAD: Dr.
John Ruskin Graham, a physician and educator who was a pioneer in the treatment of headaches, died of a blood disease on Wednesday at Faulkner Hospital in Boston.
He was 81 years old and lived in Brookline, Mass.


Jay Jacobs reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jay Jacobs (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
29,365,000
25,688,000
Net inc
964,000
1,230,000
Share earns
.16
.21
Yr sales
111,731,000
101,657,000
Net inc
3,125,000
2,926,000
Share earns
.53
.50


Religious Groups Step Out on a Good Friday Walk for Peace


Upheaval in the East;   Poles Urge Charges in Katyn Massacre
LEAD: Poles called on the Soviet Union today to prosecute the perpetrators of the Katyn massacre, and several said the Soviet admission of guilt was not enough to redress more than 50 years of lies.


Genlyte Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genlyte Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
131,734,000
129,253,000
Net inc
3,166,000
2,922,000
Share earns
.24
.22
Share earnings are fully diluted.


U.S.-Soviet Meeting Set
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union have tentatively agreed to hold trade talks in Paris from April 24 to 26, a United States Embassy spokeswoman said today.
The meeting will be the fourth in a series aimed at gaining most-favored-nation trade status for Moscow, allowing its exports to enter the United States with lower duties.


2 Bay Area Universities Bar Grateful Dead
LEAD: The Grateful Dead, a musical institution in the San Francisco Bay Area since the mid-1960's, has been barred from the University of California at Berkeley and from Stanford University.


Truth and Healing in Eastern Europe
LEAD: In this spring of their rebirth, Eastern Europe's societies seek to build a future of peace and democracy in a region that has known little of either for decades.
That requires a solid foundation of truth -for which a cornerstone has now been laid, in a matter of only days.


Used-Jet Prices Are Beginning to Fall
LEAD: The sellers' market for older, smaller passenger jets is fading.
Prices for the used jets, which had been rising for several years despite their advancing age, are now beginning to fall.


LVI Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LVI Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
93,820,000
131,224,000
Net loss
b6,019,000
c17,479,000
Shares outst
21,283,000
19,807,000
Yr rev
446,704,000
471,669,000
Net loss
b17,981,000
c25,100,000
Shares outst
20,430,000
19,778,000


Nabisco to Sell Pet Snacks Division
LEAD: Nabisco Brands plans to sell its pet snacks division, which makes Milk Bones dog biscuits, to concentrate on making ''human foods,'' a company official said.
John Manfredi, a senior vice president of the RJR Nabisco Inc. subsidiary, said the company had not yet received offers.


F.C.C. Proposes New Rules That Ease Curbs on A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission yesterday released a detailed proposal to loosen curbs on the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
The new rules for long-distance services used by large customers are likely to make competition even more fierce in an already cutthroat market, industry executives and analysts say.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about tuna fishing methods referred incorrectly to the president of the American Tuna Boat Association.
He is August Felando.


The Dollar Is Little Changed In Slow Holiday Trading
LEAD: The dollar was little changed yesterday in virtually motionless trading as most world financial centers closed early for the Easter weekend.


Upheaval in the East: Moscow Journal;   U.S. Passport Takes Gulag Survivor Halfway Through the Looking Glass
LEAD: Wary as only a gulag survivor can be, Morris Hershman stands alone and theoretically triumphant amid the throngs of Soviet citizens who wait outside the American Embassy these troubled days, taunted by the hope of emigration.


Arson Ruled Out in Miami Beach Hotel Fire
LEAD: Fire officials today ruled out arson as the cause of the fast-moving fire that killed nine residents of a hotel here.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on Thursday on a review of a music-theater work by William Bolcom and Arnold Weinstein misstated its title.
It is ''Casino Paradise,'' not ''Cinema Paradise.''


Capitals Defeat Devils and Lead Series
LEAD: The Devils played without much urgency or fear at crucial times tonight against an inspired Washington defense and suffered their second consecutive loss to the Capitals.


T.C.C. Beverages reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* T.C.C. Beverages
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Revenue
186,513,000
162,508,000
Net loss
3,565,000
4,958,000
The results are in Canadian funds.


Dallas Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dallas Semiconductor (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
23,876,000
17,104,000
Net inc
3,282,000
2,149,000
Share earns
.13
.09
Shares outst
24,909,000
24,688,000


TIE/Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TIE/Communications (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
48,430,000
63,289,000
Net loss
b59,105,000
4,363,000
Yr sales
223,118,000
255,299,000
Net loss
b69,825,000
16,953,000
b-Included charge for writeoff from intangible of $21,724,000, restructuring of Canadian subsidiary of $18,014,000, domestic restructuring of $6,802,000 and inventory writedown of $7,529,000.


Cognos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cognos Inc.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
35,007,000
36,093,000
Net inc
1,068,000
3,265,000
Share earns
.10
.32
Yr rev
112,532,000
107,912,000
Net loss
17,109,000
b6,346,000
Share earns
-
.62
b-Net income


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
California State Bank said it would acquire Empire Bancorp, Cucamonga, Calif., through an exchange of common stock.


2 Senators Say Peace Bonus Should Pay for Social Needs
LEAD: with President Bush and leaders in their own party, some prominent Democrats have begun to argue that the money cut from the Pentagon in the next several years should be earmarked for education, medical care and other social problems and should not merely be set aside to reduce the Federal deficit.


Donald Leroy Sloan Jr., Biochemist, 45
LEAD: Dr.
Donald Leroy Sloan Jr., a biochemist and chairman of the chemistry department at City College of the City University of New York, died yesterday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 45 years old.


Orange-Co Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orange-Co Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
30,343,000
36,224,000
Net loss
b5,199,000
c994,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo sales
54,744,000
74,946,000
Net loss
b6,973,000
c2,848,000
Share earns
-
.28


U.S. Rocket Launches Indonesian Satellite
LEAD: An Indonesian communications satellite plucked from orbit by shuttle astronauts more than five years ago was launched back into space today aboard a Delta rocket.


Profiles From Cincinnati: Cutting Edge of Art Scrapes Deeply Held Beliefs;   Sheriff: When a Crusade Is a Career
LEAD: There is a reason why Cincinnati has no adult bookstores and no peep shows, why you cannot buy Hustler or an X-rated video here, why the Playboy Channel was run out of town and why, after uneventful showings from Hartford to Berkeley, an exhibition of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe is a criminal matter here.


Micropolis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micropolis Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
75,888,000
80,629,000
Net loss
1,051,000
13,294,000


Miracle All Over Town
LEAD: Bus doors have an eerie effect on New Yorkers.
I mean the doors toward the back of the bus that passengers open for themselves to get off.
They do something odd after opening the doors and stepping off.


Theodore Hafner, Electronics Physicist And an Inventor, 88
LEAD: Theodore Hafner, an electronics physicist and a patent lawyer, died of complications from Parkinson's disease on March 26 at Warren (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Media, Pa.


Review/Film;   Gallic Charm With a Kick
LEAD: According to ''Angel Town,'' one antidote to gang violence in Los Angeles might be to import French graduate students in engineering who happen to be world-champion kickboxers.


Your Money;   I.R.S. Loses Cases On Home Offices
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service's tough stance against deductions for offices at home has been rejected in two recent Tax Court decisions.
Now, accountants report, many clients are asking whether they can file amended returns.


Too Often, the Buck Stops in the Appeals Court;   An Elitist Forum
LEAD: To the Editor:


Plasti-Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plasti-Line Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
18,345,000
18,707,000
Net inc
20,000
543,000
Share earns
.01
.15


GORBACHEV WARNS LITHUANIA OF BAN ON MAJOR SUPPLIES
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev issued an ultimatum to Lithuania today, saying that if the republic does not rescind its strongest independence measures within 48 hours, he will order other republics to start cutting off needed supplies.


Pact in Pittsburgh With Rail Unions
LEAD: An investment group trying to buy assets of the Pittsburgh &amp; Lake Erie Railroad Company said today that it had reached tentative labor agreements with the railroad's unions.
The Railroad Development Corporation said the agreements cover 80 percent of the union-represented work force.
The railroad announced on Feb.


Merrimac Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrimac Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Sales
3,001,245
3,194,202
Net inc
206,687
143,902
Share earns
.09
.06


India-Nepal Accord on Ending Trade Dispute Is Near Collapse
LEAD: An agreement to end a yearlong trade dispute between India and Nepal is in danger of falling victim to the unsettled political situation in Katmandu and to India's preoccupation with a steadily worsening crisis in Kashmir.


Standoff Ends, but Not Mohawk Defiance
LEAD: When both sides put down their guns and took down their roadblocks earlier this week, an 11-day standoff between a community of Mohawks and a squad of investigators appeared to be at an end.


U.S. Care for Chernobyl Hero
LEAD: A Soviet hero in the struggle to stop radiation that spewed from the Chernobyl nuclear reactor four years ago has arrived here for a life-saving bone-marrow transplant after developing early symptoms of leukemia.


Reports of Faulty Shuttle and Weapons Parts Prompt U.S. Inquiry
LEAD: A Federal investigation has begun into allegations that a Florida company provided faulty parts for the space shuttle program and numerous crucial weapons systems.


Thomas Higginson, 70, A Corporate Lawyer
LEAD: Thomas Lee Higginson, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling who specialized in corporate and securities law, died yesterday at his home in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., after a long illness.
He was 70 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


Taiwan's Mainland Efforts Widen
LEAD: For four decades, one of the world's most bitter rivalries has magnified the distance between the island of Taiwan and the Chinese mainland 90 miles away.
While the political conflict remains unresolved, thousands of Taiwan businesses are flooding into China and establishing important economic links.


Mortgage Rates Decline
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages averaged 10.25 percent this week, down from 10.26 percent last week, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation said today.
One-year adjustable-rate mortgages averaged 8.50 percent this week, down from 8.56 last week.


Genetics Institute reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genetics Institute (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
8,555,000
12,365,000
Net loss
6,977,000
3,934,000
Shares outst
14,174,853
13,970,773


Logic Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Logic Devices (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,075,000
2,312,000
Net loss
1,577,000
b688,000
Share earns
-
.16
Yr sales
14,491,000
8,329,000
Net inc
1,292,000
1,601,000
Share earns
.29
.44


Bridge
LEAD: When a team trails substantially in a match, it has to swing a little, since routine results that match the other room will not help.
There is an art in doing this: Outrageously optimistic bidding does not make sense, and neither do plays that go clearly against the odds.
The experienced player will make bids, leads and plays that are likely to differ from the other room, but are almost equally attractive.


Soviet Documents Reveal Role in Katyn Killings


American Health Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Health Properties (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,325,000
4,440,000
Share earns
.43
.40
Shares outst
14,649,165
11,108,808


Democracy Without Taxation
LEAD: Throughout our history, protest and revolt against taxes have taken strange twists and turns.


Perez Looks Like a Million Dollars in First Start for the Yankees
LEAD: Pumping his fist after every strikeout, racing to the dugout after each inning and setting down the Texas Rangers with ease, Pascual Perez made a memorable American League debut last night by pitching the Yankees to a 3-0 victory before 21,505 at Yankee Stadium.


Nepal King Opens Way to Democratic Government
LEAD: King Birendra met today with the principal Nepalese opposition leader and reportedly approved the formation of a new government that could be led by the opposition.


Wood Talks: No Accord
LEAD: Trade negotiators ended talks today without reaching an agreement on United States demands that Japan remove restrictions on imports of wood products, officials on both sides said.


Patents;   A System to Improve Car Air-Conditioning
LEAD: By adapting technology used to purify air in rooms like those in which semiconductors are made, a Colorado company has patented a system to make air-conditioned cars more comfortable.


Canadiens Take a 3-2 Lead in Series
LEAD: Stephane Richer scored his fifth and sixth goals of the playoffs and Bobby Smith had a goal and an assist as the Montreal Canadiens beat the Buffalo Sabres by 4-2 tonight to take a 3-2 lead in their Adams Division semifinal series.


Amisco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amisco Industries
Qtr to March 2
1990
1989
Sales
5,270,385
6,108,026
Net inc
b553,270
c312,202
Share earns
.12
-
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $171,656, or 3 cents a share.
c-Net loss and after a loss from discontinued operations of $383,379.


Creditors at Eastern Pressing for a Trustee
LEAD: The unsecured creditors of Eastern Airlines pressed ahead yesterday with their effort to oust Eastern's management and have a trustee appointed to run the airline while trying to sell it.


Larry King, Composer And Organist, 58, Dies
LEAD: Larry Peyton King, a composer and organist who was the music director at Trinity Church in lower Manhattan for 21 years, died Thursday at his family's home in Fullerton, Calif.
He was 58 years old.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Peete Ties for Lead In Heritage Classic
Calvin Peete, who struggled with back problems the last three years, shot a five-under-par 66 yesterday to tie Steve Pate for the second-round lead in the Heritage Classic at Hilton Head Island, S.C.
Peete and Pate were tied at six-under-par 136 after two rounds.(AP)


Patents;   Efforts to Help Players Perfect Basketball Shots
LEAD: Two inventors patented devices this week to help aspiring basketball players improve their aim.
Bob J. Ackerman, who coaches women's basketball at Spoon River Junior College in Canton, Ill., has invented a device that automatically rebounds the ball to players every time they sink a basket.
The device is intended to reward shooters for good throws, as well as to help a person practicing alone to perfect the motion of a particular shot through repetition.


Part Replaced That Delayed Hubble Launch
LEAD: Technician opened the cargo bay of the shuttle Discovery today and replaced a part that delayed the launching of the Hubble Space Telescope.
The workers also removed the telescope's batteries for recharging in preparation for an April 25 liftoff.


Campuses See a New Spirit of Involvement
LEAD: Joseph Hilliman says he is not too familiar with the writings of Eldridge Cleaver, but he nonetheless ascribes to the slogan attributed to the former Black Panther: ''You're either part of the solution or part of the problem.''


A MUSEUM FOR THE BRAND-NEW
LEAD:
REBELS ON EIGHTH STREET
Juliana Force and the Whitney Museum of American Art.
By Avis Berman.
Illustrated. 572 pp. New York:
Atheneum. $29.95


Style Makers;   Junichi Arai, Textile Designer
LEAD: Fashion designers like Issey Miyake, Rei Kawakubo and Ronaldus Shamask have made clothes from Junichi Arai's fabrics.
Interior designers have turned his fabric into canopies.
But for Mr.
Arai, 58 years old, textiles are not just functional materials but also a medium for art.
Mr.
Arai, Japan's pre-eminent textile designer, has woven silk to look like a gossamer spider's web and, using computer-aided technology, has woven wool and nylon to make fabric with squares on one side and triangles on the other.


Despite the Lockout, Pitchers Are Far Ahead of the Hitters
LEAD: Three weeks of spring training might be enough time for hitters to get ready for the season, the prevailing thinking went at the end of the lockout, but pitchers would most likely need more time.


Color Imaging, Step by Step
LEAD: At $700 for each new color photograph, last-minute additions of new products in The Hobie Catalog, published by the Hobie Cat Company of Oceanside, Calif., seemed out of the question - at least until Hobie Cat discovered ''color photo imaging.''


Q and A
LEAD:
Sublet Fees in A Co-op


Lifestyle;   Yes, It's Too Late to Call Peter Rabbit
LEAD: Easter is a fine day for hunting eggs that presumably were hard-boiled before they were hidden between the cushions of the new sofa.
It's also a good day for bonnets and banquets and song, sacred and secular.
But it's a sad day for Peter Rabbit: he no longer has a telephone listing of his very own.


Humorous Sages of the Human Condition
LEAD: Some 36 years ago Albert Einstein requested the pleasure of Sid Caesar's presence at Princeton.
This performer, a kind of pyrotechnic of comedy, was lighting up the television screen for 90 minutes, 39 weeks a year with a show that had the elements of timing the universe relies on.
Einstein died before Caesar could come to him, but Robert Oppenheimer later told Mr.


Frank Welt, 82, Dies; Lawyer to Kean Family
LEAD: Frank A. Welt, a founding partner of a New Jersey law firm and a lifelong lawyer for former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean's family, died of congenitive heart failure on Friday at the Elizabeth (N.J.) General Medical Center.
He was 82 years old and lived in Cranford, N.J.


A Model of Self-Reliance Asks for Help
LEAD: HIGH WATCH FARM is known for the serenity it provides for recovering alcoholics.
But these days the place is less serene than usual.
Along with the chirping of birds and the rustling of daffodils, the occasional sound of the hammer is heard, as the rural treatment center undergoes the first major building renovation in its 50-year history.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about obscenity law described a Supreme Court ruling incorrectly in some copies.
In its 1974 decision on the film ''Carnal Knowledge,'' the Court said a trial judge could rule that a work was not obscene without submitting the issue to a jury.


IN EAST GERMANY, TRAUMA BETWEEN 2 ERAS
LEAD: For more than 20 years without interruption, East Germany produced world-class athletes at a stunning pace, churning them out of a highly structured, state-run system that provided everything they needed, leaving nothing to chance.


SYNDICATED TV: HARDBALL WITH THE BIG GUYS
LEAD: For the smaller companies that develop television shows for syndication, the schedule is shrinking these days.
Increasingly, the major Hollywood studios and one independent company have taken a dominant role by locking up the most lucrative time slots.


POSTING: Covering 17 Acres;   Chain Warehouse
LEAD: ShopRite stores, a rapidly expanding supermarket chain with 178 stores in the Northeast, has entered into a joint venture to build a 700,000-square-foot warehouse on a 56-acre site near the New Jersey Turnpike in South Brunswick, N.J.
When completed 16 months from now, the $50 million facility will have more than a mile of computer-controlled conveyor belts that will transfer containers of merchandise from storage to trailer trucks for distribution.


Saddened Professional
LEAD: To the Editor:


Single-Lever Faucets
LEAD: SINGLE-LEVER faucets like those found in many kitchens vary greatly in design.
Rotating-ball faucets are one common kind, distinguishable by the dome-shaped base of the handle.


Strife Continues in Pakistan
LEAD: Gunmen killed an ambulance worker and a bomb wounded two people in Karachi today, the Pakistani police reported.
More than 20 people were killed in gun battles last week between followers of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party and the opposition Mohajir National Movement, a former coalition partner that represents immigrants from India.


Jackson Assails 'Outrage' in Teaneck
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson and a lawyer representing the family of Phillip C. Pannell, the black teen-ager who was fatally shot last week by a white police officer in Teaneck, N.J., yesterday called for the appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the killing.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house has a den whose walls are covered with vertical 1-by-8-inch, beveled-edge pine boards with quarter-round molding over each of the joints.
The ceiling consists of exposed joists with the 1-by-6-inch subflooring exposed from the room above.
Dark-brown stain has been used on all the woodwork, making the room dark.


Combined Impact In Central Nassau
LEAD: The article ''Assessing Impact Of New Projects on Environment: How Hard a Look?'' [March 18]  deals with an issue of the utmost importance for central Nassau civic leaders.


Ominous Embers From the Fire of 1989
LEAD: A silence has settled over China a year after a few fragile white flowers appeared at Tiananmen Square to ignite the student democracy movement, but it is an eerie calm and a potentially explosive one.


Business Diary/April 8-13
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Soda for Ships
Now this is a floating exchange rate.
American Pepsi for Soviet ships.
In a $3 billion deal - the largest ever between an American company and the Soviet Union - Pepsico will vastly expand its sales there in return for a flood of Stolichnaya vodka and a fleet of freighters and tankers.


A Railroad Seating Primer
LEAD: LET'S start with a basic truth.
No one likes it when someone sits in the middle.
Still, there are limits.
The other night on a rush-hour Metro-North train boarding at Grand Central Terminal, a woman stretched herself across two-and-a-half of the three connected seats, sneakers proudly planted on the seat cover.


MUTILATED IN THE NAME OF TRADITION
LEAD:
PRISONERS OF RITUAL
An Odyssey Into Female Genital
Circumcision in Africa.
By Hanny Lightfoot-Klein.
Illustrated. 306 pp. Binghamton, N.Y.:
The Haworth Press. Cloth, $24.95.
Harrington Park Press. Paper, $14.95.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Plant lettuce, spinach, peas, onion sets, radish and set out seedlings of cabbage, broccoli and other hardy vegetables.
It is much too early to set out seedlings of other vegetables and bedding annuals; wait for a month.
Hunt the egg masses of gypsy moth, which resemble tan suede; scrap them off stones, shingles, fences and other places where found and either burn the bags in the fireplace or soak the egg masses in a coffee can filled with a strong dilution of laundry bleach.


A YUPPIE IN KING CHARLES'S COURT
LEAD:
RESTORATION
A Novel of Seventeenth-Century England.
By Rose Tremain.
371 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


Undefeated by Storm, Spoleto Open to in May
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein is to open the 14th Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C., with a performance of the Beethoven Seventh Symphony offered in celebration of Charleston's rebuilding after Hurricane Hugo, which devastated parts of the city last September.
The opening concert, on May 25, also includes a performance of Mr.


Youths Grab Bus in Brooklyn And a Shot Scares Off Riders
LEAD: A group of youths briefly commandeered a Transit Authority bus on its Brooklyn route on Friday, scaring off the driver and about 30 passengers, the authorities said.


Cathy Gottlieb to Wed
LEAD: May wedding plans for Cathy F. Gottlieb and Mark S. Weiss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Weiss of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., have been announced by her parents, Phyllis Golden-Gottlieb and Jason Gottlieb of Los Angeles.
Miss Gottlieb, 25 years old, is a graduate of Arizona State University and an executive recruiter at Gregory &amp; Gregory in New York.


POSTING: Who Can Do What?;   Co-op Board Law
LEAD: A two-year battle between a plastic surgeon and the co-op board of 1 Fifth Avenue, at Washington Square North, has resulted in a New York State Court of Appeals decision that strengthens the powers of a building's directors, including their right to control renovations in shareholders' apartments.


COMPOSERS WHO HAD TO TRIUMPH OVER PREJUDICE
LEAD: Mention black American music, and most people will probably think of Ella Fitzgerald or Duke Ellington, of James Brown or Public Enemy.
But few will think of William Grant Still, or of a host of black American classical composers.
Their achievements are an integral part of the black musical heritage, however, and they have played a significant role in


Adventures in Cooking;   A RAFT OF CHOICES
LEAD: IT WAS 110 DEGREES ON THE BANKS OF THE RIO GRANDE , and I was struggling with the finishing touches on a birthday cake.
Diane Lord, one of the guides on our river-rafting tour, had prepared a chocolate cake from a package mix she had brought along to celebrate the birthday of one of the tour participants.


Ballet at The Met: A British Bundle Of Fresh Ideas
LEAD: Imagine the unimaginable - the Metropolitan Opera House in the summer without companies like the Royal Ballet from Britain, the Royal Danish Ballet, the Paris Opera Ballet, the Kirov Ballet, the Bolshoi Ballet, the Netherlands Dance Theater, the London Festival Ballet, the Stuttgart Ballet, the National Ballet of Canada, Roland Petit's National Ballet of


Despite Sanctions, Steel From Pretoria Is Entering the U.S.
LEAD: The Bush Administration has allowed thousands of tons of South African iron and steel into the United States because of the way it has interpreted a 1986 sanctions law intended by its sponsors to ban such imports.


TALKING: Default Sales;   Foreclosed Property Bargains
LEAD: A GROWING number of residential properties are being offered at below-market prices by lenders who have foreclosed on defaulting homeowners and troubled developers.
The Dime Savings Bank of New York, for example, has 600 foreclosed homes available, and other banks also have large stocks of seized houses that they want to sell quickly.


THE VALDEZ SPILL: ONE YEAR LATER
LEAD: The Alaskan spring is late but frenzied.
Alder saplings break free of tenured snow holds.
Kodiak bears, the largest carnivores on earth, rouse themselves at Katmai National Park, 300 miles from the spill, and begin searching for shellfish.
Bald eagles check nesting sites in spruce snags.


Census Problems Linked to New Methods
LEAD: Census Bureau officials, facing a sharp decline in voluntary cooperation with the once-a-decade national head count, say that some changes they made to correct the problems of the 1980 census have contributed, at least in the short run, to the troubles of the 1990 effort.


Review/Piano;   Beethoven, Schumann, Fischer
LEAD: With the 97-year-old Polish-born pianist Mieczyslaw Horszowski scheduled to perform soon in Carnegie Hall, one needn't dwell too much on the age of his Hungarian colleague Annie Fischer, who gave a stirring recital at the Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Thursday evening.


India Asserts That Pakistan Is Preparing for Border War
LEAD: Prime Minister V. P. Singh said today that Pakistan had moved radar units and armored regiments close to the Indian border and was readying its airfields.


Timothy Higginson, a Law Student, To Marry Sally Schwartz, a Teacher
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alan G. Schwartz of Highland Park, Ill., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sally Roslyn Schwartz to Timothy Bowditch Higginson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Higginson of Cohasset, Mass., and Washington.
A May wedding is planned.


Devils Feel Loose Despite Big Challenge
LEAD: The Devils were loose and in good spirits at practice today before they boarded a charter flight for Washington to face the Capitals Sunday night in what could be New Jersey's last game of the season.


Yale Heavyweights Win One for Coach
LEAD: Yale's varsity heavyweight crew gave its new head coach his first victory today, defeating Cornell and Dartmouth in a triangular regatta on a blustery Housatonic River course.


In Connecticut, Whoever Wins Will Be a Switch
LEAD: MORE than six months before Election Day, the race to succeed Gov.
William A. O'Neill of Connecticut has already turned out to be the state's most tumultuous political contest in 20 years.
No matter who wins, it will undoubtedly mark the end of the moderate-conservative Democratic Party establishment that has occupied the top state offices in Hartford since the election of Gov.


Lori J. Owings Is Wed To A. Robert Below Jr.
LEAD: Lori J. Owings and A. Robert Below Jr. were married yesterday in Wichita, Kan.
The Rev.
Max Clayton, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Botanica gardens.


THE LIFE SHE CHOSE
LEAD:
SIMONE DE BEAUVOIRA Biography.
By Deirdre Bair.
718 pp. Illustrated. New York: Summit Books. $24.95.


Foreman Bides Time
LEAD: When James (Buster) Douglas decked Mike Tyson in Tokyo, George Foreman took it on the chin.
The 41-year-old former champion, whose comeback campaign had been aimed at a title fight against Tyson this fall, suddenly found himself without a clear route to the top.


Review/Concert;   Chinese Composer Honored
LEAD: The promoters of ''A Ma Sitson Retrospective'' at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday evening no doubt hoped to win new friends for the Chinese composer, but they did little to help their own cause.
The Stagebill offered perhaps 300 uninformative words about Mr.
Ma and nothing about the works being performed.


Miss Marek to Wed M. Q. Armstrong
LEAD: The engagement of Suzanne Marek to Matthew Q. Armstrong, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Q. Armstrong of Greenwich, Conn., has been announced by her parents, Jessica Ford Marek of Saddle River, N.J., and Zdenek R. Marek of New York.
A June wedding is planned.


THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING MACHO
LEAD:
MANHOOD IN THE MAKING
Cultural Concepts of Masculinity.
By David D. Gilmore.
258 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
$22.50.


Outpatient Treatment For Drug Abuse
LEAD: Re: ''The Best Ways to Fight Alcohol and Drug Abuse'' (Opinion page, March 11):


Islanders' Weak Spots Took Fatal Toll
LEAD: Minutes after the New York-New York series began, Chris Nilan, the chief intimidator for the Rangers, skated toward Pat LaFontaine, the chief scoring threat for the Islanders, and punched him in the head on the ice at Madison Square Garden.


DON'T LOOK NOW, BUT THE SPIDERS ARE COMING
LEAD: ''This film,'' says Jeff Daniels with as straight and somber a face as the law allows, ''takes a special kind of actor.
You have to realize from day one of shooting that the spiders come first.
They're picked up first in the morning, they're first in the chair at makeup, they take lunch first.
And they've also got the biggest trailer.


Ginna Vogt Wed to Robert Hernandez
LEAD: Virginia Hoops Vogt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy S. Vogt of Dummerston, Vt., was married yesterday in Boston to Robert LeRoux Hernandez, the son of Georgette LeRoux Hernandez of Toms River, N.J., and Robert W. Hernandez of Bayville, N.J.
Michael P. Compos, a justice of the peace in Derry, N.H., officiated at the Boston Center for Adult Education.


Rikers Island Prisoner Found Hanged in Cell
LEAD: A 39-year-old prisoner at Rikers Island was found hanging from a bedsheet tied to a light fixture in his cell yesterday, a New York City Department of Correction spokeswoman said.


THE HAPPY SLUMLORD
LEAD:
MEN UNDER WATER.
By Ralph Lombreglia (Doubleday, $17.95.) This powerful first collection of stories is mostly about young men on the cutting edge of failure.
Bright, sensitive and reasonable, Ralph Lombreglia's affecting protagonists hurt profoundly as they are forced, time and again, into making barbarous contracts with a mad and maddening world.


2 Suspects in a Trooper's Slaying Were Free on Bail, the Police Say
LEAD: Two New York City men accused of killing a Maryland state trooper were free on bail and awaiting sentencing for assault and handgun convictions when the trooper was shot to death on March 29, the authorities say.


Sarah Edwards to Wed R. J. Feeney Jr.
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
David F. Edwards of Essex, Conn., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Sarah Chamberlin Edwards and Robert James Feeney Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Feeney of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.


Has Case Peaked With Poindexter?
LEAD: IF the Iran-contra prosecution is, as it appears, petering out, its lack of resolution is no less frustrating for having been predictable.
It is like a celebrated murder case in which several people have been found guilty of hiding a body that no one has been charged with killing.


Europeans Warn Sihanouk on U.N. Seat
LEAD: The 12 European Community countries have warned Prince Norodom Sihanouk that they will oppose the usual practice of giving Cambodia's United Nations seat to his coalition government-in-exile, because it includes the Khmer Rouge, which brutally ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1978, European and Asian diplomats say.


George Wyner to Wed Barbara Perkins
LEAD: June wedding plans for Barbara Diane Perkins and George Michael Wyner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Justin L. Wyner of Chestnut Hill, Mass., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Perkins of Dummerston, Vt.


Lebanon War Spurs New Emigration
LEAD: The outbreak of large-scale fighting between rival Lebanese Christian factions 12 weeks ago has prompted major new migrations of refugees, both out of the country and inside it.


The Grand Antiques Shops of Florence
LEAD: THE antiques dealers of Florence reign over shops filled with artifacts that reflect the city's medieval, Renaissance and 19th-century past and include some of the finest examples of such material found anywhere in the world.
These merchants have such abundant holdings in the decorative arts for which


Minna Ferziger, Lawyer, to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Minna Ferziger to Clifford M. J. Felig, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Felig of New York, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Ferziger of Riverdale, the Bronx.
A May wedding is planned.


Hitler-Stalin Pact Involved More Than Poland;   No Frontier, No Invasion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nets' Fans Loyal In Loss to Pacers
LEAD: From a Net fan's perspective, there has been little to cheer or smile about this season.
Tonight, however, as New Jersey was being soundly trounced by Indiana, the 9,235 spectators at Byrne Meadowlands Arena finally had a chance to whoop it up.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
CELINE
By Brock Cole.
216 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.
$13.95. (Ages 12 and up)


Blue Collars Amid White
LEAD: Croquet, once exclusively a sport of the privileged, still requires all-white outfits.
But it has begun to attract an occasional blue-collar player.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
New Rochelle, N.Y.
$440,000
125 Broadview Avenue
6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 68-year-old colonial; fireplace, sunroom, den, eat-in kitchen, playroom; taxes $7,043.
North Salem, N.Y.
$237,000
Raymond Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old raised ranch; family room, fireplace, den, deck, lake rights, 1 acre; taxes $5,566.


Angela Babin Becomes Bride of Christopher Hale
LEAD: Angela Babin, the daughter of Stanley Babin and Resa Babin of New York, and Christopher Hale were married last evening at St.
Paul's Chapel of Columbia University by Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman.
Mr.
Hale is a son of Arlene Spitzer of Playa del Rey, Calif., and Karl Smith of Los Osos, Calif.


Good Teachers Flock From the Campuses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Have Crown, Will Travel
LEAD: With the fall of the Ceaucescu Government four months ago, the exiled King Michael of Romania sent the word out from his home in Switzerland that if there was an opening for a monarch back home, he was available.
The provisional Government's response was, in effect, ''We'll get back to you on that,'' and Government officials and political leaders urged him to stay away until after the national elections May 20.


Miss Robinson to Wed J. C. Brown 4th
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Snowden Robinson of Pottersville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Louisa Law Robinson, to J. Crosby Brown 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brown of Blue Hill, Me.
An August wedding is planned.


Hitler-Stalin Pact Involved More Than Poland
LEAD: To the Editor:


States Find Income-Tax Checkoffs Aren't Such Easy Money Anymore
LEAD: LOUISIANA, which used to have 12, now has only one.
Oregon is threatening to drop any that bring in less than $50,000, which has the state arts council worried after falling $2,000 short last year.
One in Ohio is down, too, but the one in New York is a sure source of $1.7 million.


50 YEARS ON THE ROAD
LEAD: Eric Newby has written extensively on his 50 years of traveling; from 1963 to 1973 he was the travel editor of London's Sunday newspaper The Observer.
WHAT THE TRAVELLER SAW (Viking, $30) is a collection of photographs, most of which Mr.
Newby took during those 50 years, and a collection of essays.


THE 70'S REVISITED: THE NOSTALGIA TRAIL HITS ROCK BOTTOM
LEAD: Slower than sunspot cycles and as inexorable as the tides, pop-music nostalgia trails the present by about 20 years. ''Grease'' and Sha Na Na brought a 1950's revival in the 1970's, and in the 1980's rockers from the Dream Syndicate to Terence Trent D'Arby revived the 1960's.
With the awful inevitability of arithmetic, the dawn of the 1990's threatens to bring a wave of music and apologia fondly recalling the early 1970's.


In Clinical Trials, Some Contend, Big Is Beautiful
LEAD: DOCTORS were not exactly astonished when a report last week in the British journal Lancet showed that lowering blood pressure reduces the risk of heart attack.
What seemed remarkable was that for years scientists had been unable to find a shred of evidence for what cardiologists intuitively assumed was true.


Q and A
LEAD:
Meditation Vacations


Broken Leases
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Twelfth Night' to Open Juilliard Drama Season
LEAD: Shakespeare's ''Twelfth Night'' will open the spring repertory season of the drama division at the Juilliard School, 144 West 66th Street, tomorrow at 8 P.M.
The production, which is directed by Richard Hamburger, will run through Thursday.


In Tight Quarters, One-Dish Meals
LEAD: DO people who live in the country spend more time in their kitchens than city dwellers?
Manhattan apartment kitchens are so often like mine - an afterthought tucked away in a hall closet, the brilliant coup of some architect determined to make two tight little apartments fit where one would have been perfectly comfortable.


How Cuisinart Lost Its Edge
LEAD: IT IS THE SORT OF FABLED BRAND name that marketers usually only dream about.
If you were in the copier business, you would wish your name were Xerox.
If tissues were your product, it would be nice to be named Kleenex.
But if you were going to make your fortune in food processors, you couldn't do better than to possess the name


Gooden Pounded A Second Time
LEAD: Is Dwight Gooden tipping his pitches?


Karen Statman Is Engaged
LEAD: May wedding plans for Karen Dee Statman and Dr.
Keith Lewis Sommers have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Statman of Asharoken, L.I.
Ms.
Statman, 31 years old, graduated from Arizona State University.
She is the president of the Execucomp Corporation, an executive search company in the data processing field in New York.


Of Drunken Driving, Penalties And Rights
LEAD: There is an inherent irony in the persistent attacks upon the reliability of the Breathalyzer in drunken driving prosecutions (''Drunken Driving Statutes Criticized''.


Point Counter Point
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baggage
LEAD: To the Editor: My husband and I had a recent experience with luggage that might prove instructive for your readers.
We flew from Baltimore to New York to catch a flight to Trinidad.
We were scheduled to go on to Tobago after several days in Trinidad and then to return to Trinidad for a night before flying home to Baltimore.


A Slowdown for Soviet Joint Ventures
LEAD: Kaj Hober, a partner in the Stockholm office of White &amp; Case, an international law firm, has taken part in negotiations for 45 joint ventures between Soviet and Western companies.
Mr.
Hober, who teaches Soviet and Eastern European law at the University of Uppsala, is concerned about the Soviet economy but still sees opportunities for more joint ventures.


10 Years of Support and Aid From Female Entrepreneurs
LEAD: TEN years ago, two dozen female entrepreneurs started a support group to explore the problems facing women in business.
Now more than 250 members strong, the Westchester Association of Women Business Owners is able to help other entrepreneurs.
It is making five grants to area colleges and one to the Junior Achievement Program.


FICTION
LEAD:
THE PHANTOM BLOOPER.
By Gustav Hasford. (Bantam, $17.95.) In this sequel to Gustav Hasford's first novel, ''The Short-Timers'' (which Stanley Kubrick turned into the film, ''Full Metal Jacket''), James (Joker) Davis is still in Vietnam.
Only this time, instead of plying his trade as combat correspondent, he is patrolling the boonies with the Vietcong.


The Tape Is Still Red In Prague
LEAD: I WAS naive, I guess, when I went to Prague in January.
Somehow I imagined that not just a government but a society would be miraculously transformed as well.
The first inkling this wasn't true came when my friend and I tried to book a room at the Evropa, the most expensive hotel listed in our Frommer's guidebook.


Free Markets Can't Control Pollution
LEAD: Over the last 20 years, the managers of American industry have gradually become accustomed to the demands of environmental regulation.


Campus Life: Smith;   Student Senate Approves Group Opposing Abortion
LEAD: A new support group for abortion opponents was granted a charter last week by the Student Senate at Smith College.
But the Senate then voted to deny the group financing from student activities fees, agreeing with opposition arguments that it was a partisan group.


Stacy L. Sperling To Marry in May
LEAD: The engagement of Stacy Lynn Sperling to Dr.
Richard Charney, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sol Charney of Yonkers, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Peter Sperling of Houston.
A May wedding is planned.


So Much for Assumptions About Immigrants and Jobs
LEAD: MOST Americans, it is safe to say, would be worse off without all the immigrants who iron their shirts, grill their hamburgers and staff their hospitals.


Louise Gilliam Weds Arthur Lee McGrady
LEAD: At the University of Virginia Chapel in Charlottesville, Va., Louise Bell Gilliam, a daughter of Sara Brown Gilliam and George Harrison Gilliam, both of Charlottesville, was married yesterday to Arthur Lee McGrady, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Lee McGrady of Charlottesville.
The Rev.
Stuart Henderson, an Episcopal priest, officiated.


The Night Before: Where to Hang the Paintings
LEAD: LIKE visitors to any museum, viewers of the Katonah Museum of Art's current show, ''Watercolors From the Abstract Expressionist Era,'' will see in the exhibition what their education, past experiences and predelictions enable them to see.
They will also see what Arthur M. Clark wants them to see.
Mr.


Lifestyle;   Street Sports Thrive in New York, Even If a Bit of Formality Has Set In
LEAD: The scene could be from the 1940's: on a narrow street in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan, eight 11-year-old boys in starched white shirts, dress shoes and yarmulkes choose up sides for a game they call slapball. ''We don't want Abie,'' one yells. ''We had Abie last week.'' Abie does not change sides but the game begins, a variation of baseball, with a tennis ball and no bat.


Campus Life: Harvard;   Bitter Debate Ignites Over Social Sciences
LEAD: Disagreement over different approaches to the social sciences has flared into public debate at Harvard, with professors from two rival programs exchanging bitter criticisms and accusations.


Long Island Journal
LEAD:
Home Movies


Question of the Week;   How Can the N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: There must be distinctions made between penalties involved with play (a hold, a trip, a hook, etc.) and penalties that are not (stick penalties, abusive boarding, fighting, etc.).
Infractions of this latter sort must be followed with realistic - even legal - consequences.
PETER H. SODERMAN
Waldwick, N.J.


Youth Held in Attack on Subway Killer
LEAD: A 17-year-old Brooklyn youth was charged yesterday with being one of four men who tried to rob a subway rider Thursday night, just before the victim pulled a gun from his waistband and shot one assailant to death.


A Comedy Looks for the Logic in Love
LEAD: JOHN PATRICK SHANLEY is best known for his award-winning screenplay for the film ''Moonstruck.'' Anyone familiar with that movie will instantly recognize the environment of ''Italian-American Reconciliation'' and the earthy, wacky, working-class people who inhabit it.


Film Maker is Subject Of Queens Symposium
LEAD: A free daylong symposium on Pier Paolo Pasolini, the Italian film maker and writer, and his advocacy of dialects in Italy will be held on May 7 at Queens College, Kissena Boulevard and the Long Island Expressway, in Flushing.
Pasolini, who died in 1975, felt strongly about the survival of dialects and made use of them in his films and poetry.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
Krickstein Upsets Lendl: Aaron Krickstein stunned top-seeded Ivan Lendl yesterday with a 6-3, 5-7, 6-4 victory to reach the men's singles final in the Japan Open in Tokyo.
Krickstein, seeded fourth, will face the defending champion, Stefan Edberg of Sweden, seeded second.
Edberg beat third-seeded Brad Gilbert, 6-1, 7-6, in the other semifinal match.


Suzanne Vega Keeps Her Distance
LEAD: In ''50-50 Chance,'' the most compelling song on Suzanne Vega's third album, ''Days of Open Hand'' (A &amp; M 7502; all three formats), the narrator pays a hospital visit to a woman who is near death. ''I tell you/ I love you/ I sing to you/ bring to you/ anything,'' she implores softly at her friend's bedside.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: ''Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests and said unto them, 'What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?' And they covenanted him with 30 pieces of silver.'' What were the 30 pieces of silver?


De Gustibus . . .
LEAD: To the Editor:


BETTER TIMES IN BEIJING
LEAD:
LEGACIES
A Chinese Mosaic.
By Bette Bao Lord.
245 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


The Naming of Newark And Helmetta
LEAD: Abraham Resnick's recent Opinion page article, ''Where Did This Name Come From?,'' said: ''But Newark was apparently not named after England's Newark, as many people have thought.
A number of scholars have returned to an earlier theory that the New Jersey city was originally named New Ark, or New Work, by the Puritan Congregational Church.


Just How Powerful Are Those Turtles?
LEAD: Commenting on the limitations of his methods away from the couch, Sigmund Freud once said that pyschoanalysis might have to ''lay down its arms'' before the problem of understanding art.
He then proceeded to interpret the works of Dostoevsky, Ibsen and Leonardo da Vinci anyway.
So it seems viable for a modern analyst to hazard a few modest guesses about what young psyches make of Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles, the subjects of a monstrously successful movie that had earlier incarnations in a comic-book spoof, toys and a children's television cartoon show.


A South African Bruce Springsteen Blends Zulu With Rock
LEAD: Johnny Clegg sees himself as a new African crying out that South Africa's transformation, cultural as well as political, is at hand.
He and his band, Savuka, have been spreading the word in a nine-month marathon tour of Europe, the Soviet Union, Asia, Australia, North America and Brazil.


Miss Concannon Plans to Be Wed
LEAD: Carol Anne Concannon of Manhasset, L.I., has announced the engagement of her daughter Margaret Anne Concannon to Timothy Michael Joyce, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Michael Joyce 3d of New Rochelle, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.


Delays at Kennedy Airport: Summer Outlook
LEAD: AMERICAN citizens arriving at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York from overseas will soon lose the luxury of the citizen bypass, where those with valid passports were able to scoot past Immigration Service officers and submit their passports to the Customs officer who verifies their declaration and clears their luggage.


More Nicaraguans in U.S. Going Back Home
LEAD: Confident that the inauguration on April 25 of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro will usher in an era of peace for Nicaragua, a growing number of Nicaraguan exiles are restarting their lives and businesses there.


Most Who Left Mariel Sailed To New Life, a Few to Limbo
LEAD: Fidel Castro called them ''worms,'' sexual perverts and criminals.
The United States Government termed them ''excludable aliens'' and jailed hundreds of them for years with only the most minimal right of appeal.


Miss Cairns to Wed Christian Sampson
LEAD: The engagement of Megan Clifton Cairns to Dr.
Christian Edward Sampson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Sampson of Carlisle, Mass., has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur C. Cairns of Montreal.
A June wedding is planned.


THE U.S: STILL ON ITS FEET
LEAD:
BOUND TO LEAD
The Changing Nature of American Power.
By Joseph S. Nye Jr.
307 pp. New York: Basic Books. $19.95.


Of Drunken Driving, Penalties and Rights
LEAD: Re: ''Drunken Driving Statutes Criticized,'' March 11:


Review/Dance;   Fort Worth Company's 'Cinderella'
LEAD: Maria Thomas's wonderfully jaunty innocence stood her well when she stepped into the title role of the Fort Worth Ballet's ''Cinderella,'' choreographed by Paul Mejia, the company director, on Friday afternoon at City Center.
But Ms.
Thomas brought more than that to her portrayal, dancing with the clean line and simplicity required by the pas de deux and offering a nicely modulated characterization in which physical and emotional exultation gradually replaced timidity as Cinderella at last felt loved.


Tamsin Mayers, Banker, to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Paul H. Mayers of Rowayton, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tamsin Mayers to Timothy J. Sickinger Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sickinger of Omaha.
A June wedding is planned.


DATA UPDATE: April 15, 1990
LEAD:
*2*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Feb.90
Jan. 90
Feb. 89
Nation
$95,400
$96,300
$91,900
Northeast
143,400
147,100
142,800
Midwest
73,800
75,600
70,200
South
85,600
85,300
86,500
West
143,100
144,400
128,200
*4*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


On Language;   Counting Census Mistakes
LEAD: I COULD TELL I WAS GOING to have trouble with the census people from the very first sentence of their guide: ''Please use a black lead pencil only.''


Mandela Admits A.N.C. Tortured Members
LEAD: Nelson Mandela admitted today that the African National Congress had tortured dissident guerrillas within its ranks, but he said the people who were responsible had been punished and that further torture had been forbidden.


Review/Dance;   A Melange in 'Characters' by Mark Franko's Novantiqua
LEAD: Mark Franko is a Renaissance-dance scholar and a modern-dance choreographer and performer.
He has named his five-year-old company Novantiqua.
And so his newest piece, ''Characters of Dance,'' presented on Thursday at the Douglas Dunn Studio, seemed likely to be a blending of two very different styles of dance - or, as Mr.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: During the promenade known as the Easter parade today, Fifth Avenue will be closed to traffic from 44th through 57th Streets from 11 A.M. to 2:30 P.M.


Amalie Moses Is to Wed in September
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred H. Moses of McLean, Va., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Amalie Celeste Moses and William Mark Reichblum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Charles Reichblum of Pittsburgh.


A TABLOID LIFE
LEAD:
PANIC BLOOD
By Catherine Texier.
342 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


Review/Rock;   Australians and Texans In Industrial Variations
LEAD: Machines played most of the music and video screens had all the best images when Severed Heads, from Australia, and M.C. 900 Foot Jesus with D.J.
Zero, from Texas, shared a bill on Tuesday night at the RAPP Arts Center.
Each group plays its own hybrid of industrial rock, music that uses a booming dance beat to carry cynical or dire lyrics amid dense, clashing rhythms and noises.


Court Hears Appeal of $5.3 Million Libel Award to Wayne Newton
LEAD: NBC News urged a Federal appeals court Friday to reverse the $5.3 million libel judgment won by the singer Wayne Newton, saying a 1980 broadcast linking him to organized crime figures was a product of nothing more than aggressive journalism.


Alexandra Kent Plans To Wed S. H. Selesnick
LEAD: May wedding plans for Alexandra L. Kent and Dr.
Samuel H. Selesnick, a son of Dr.
Leo Selesnick of Flemington, N.J., and the late Sylvia Bass Selesnick, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Nelson Kent of New York.


POSTING: Bay Ridge Project;   From Rectory to Condos
LEAD: A 14-unit condominium apartment development is nearing completion on the former site of the rectory of Christ Church of Bay Ridge in Brooklyn near Shore Road Park and the Narrows.
Called the Ridge Terrace Condominium, the $2.3 million project at 228 74th Street near Third Avenue is due to be completed next month.


THE MAN BEHIND THE GETTY'S GETTING AND SPENDING
LEAD: Right now, the most envied man in the American museum world is probably George Goldner, curator of both paintings and drawings at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif.
His mandate in both departments - and, by the way, they are quite separate from one another - is to hunt down the best and buy it.


THE BOOKWORM TURNS
LEAD: J. B. Miller, a self-confessed egghead, writes that he and his father have recently discovered the joys of physical fitness (About Men: ''The Bookworm Turns,'' March 18).
But, he adds, ''neither of us yet knows a thing about baseball.
It's pure gibberish.''


Bob Feller Is Still Pitching
LEAD: In his first start for the California Angels last Wednesday night, Mark Langston ''hit the wall'' in the seventh inning and Mike Witt had to complete the major leagues' fifth combined nine-inning no-hitter.
But even that asterisked no-hitter against the Seattle Mariners had occurred in the Angels' third game of the season.


Intense College Recruiting Drives Lift Black Enrollment to a Record
LEAD: Black enrollment in colleges and universities reached record highs in the late 1980's largely because the schools developed extensive recruiting programs to tutor, counsel and provide financial aid to prospective students, educators and sociologists say.


Senators Critical of Moscow For Threatening Lithuanians
LEAD: The Senate majority leader and a delegation of Senate Democrats today condemned the Soviet Union's threat to cut off essential supplies to Lithuania, saying it amounted to intimidation and coercion.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house has a den whose walls are covered with vertical 1-by-8-inch, beveled-edge pine boards with quarter-round molding over each of the joints.
The ceiling consists of exposed joists with the 1-by-6-inch subflooring exposed from the room above.
Dark-brown stain has been used on all the woodwork, making the room dark.


Campus Life: Chicago;   Quantum Physics 1 From the Winner Of a Nobel Prize
LEAD: An article on particle accelerators from the April 16 issue of Time magazine loomed over the lecture hall, projected eight feet high on the wall.
The students staring at it were in Dr.
Leon Lederman's class in quantum physics at the University of Chicago. ''I'm thinking of putting this on the final exam,'' the winner of the 1988 Nobel Prize in Physics told his 120 undergraduates.


Birth Defects and Pollution: Issue Raised in Texas Town
LEAD: An unusual number of Down syndrome births in this industrious little city has propelled an investigation of pollution and set up the country's first legal test of an emerging medical theory that toxic chemicals could cause the birth defect.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: I.B.M. reports first-quarter earnings.
A suit brought by Robert Kearns, who won a patent infringement verdict against Ford for his windshield-wiper design, proceeds to consideration of damages.
TUESDAY: Consumer prices for March.
Housing starts for March.
Robert Freeman, a former executive of Goldman, Sachs faces sentencing for insider trading.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
MIME AND MORE


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Social Events
LEAD:
Easter at the Plaza


Ryan Is Good When He's Bad
LEAD: So he didn't pitch his sixth no-hitter; he didn't even pitch his 12th one-hitter.
And he struck out only four batters.
But there's something about Nolan Ryan pitching at Yankee Stadium, even if he isn't overpowering, that is right.
Two such fabled baseball institutions go together.


Tech Notes;   Here Comes the High-Altitude, Long-Flying Condor
LEAD: An unmanned aircraft, built by the Boeing Company's advanced systems division, has set a high-altitude record for a piston-powered airplane.
The plane, called the Condor, was designed by a team headed by Neil Arntz at Boeing.
The Condor reached an altitude of 66,980 feet above sea level in February in a flight lasting 29.4 hours.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Middlebury, Vt.;   A Hemmed In Landmark
LEAD: A COMMERCIAL complex at a former marble works here has left its backers with a problem: It is hard for tenants and customers to get in.


Defining Terms
LEAD: To the Editor:


Single-Lever Faucets
LEAD: SINGLE-LEVER faucets like those found in many kitchens vary greatly in design.
Rotating-ball faucets are one common kind, distinguishable by the dome-shaped base of the handle.


Robley H. Lawson, Voice Teacher, 80
LEAD: Robley H. Lawson, a music conductor and voice teacher who was a founder and artistic director of the Manhasset Bay Opera Company of Long Island, died of congestive heart failure on April 8 at his home in Fern Park, Florida.
He was 80 years old.


Managing;   The Allure of Temporary Work
LEAD: Daniel J. Fanok, a 34-year-old human resources specialist, could not decide what to do next.
He found corporate work too confining, but was uncomfortable with the financial insecurity of independent recruiting. ''I wanted something halfway between,'' he said.


POSTING: A Package for Patterson;   Shops, Offices and Movies at One Site
LEAD: A proposal to build one of the largest shopping centers in Putnam County, N.Y., is under review by the Town of Patterson.
The $20 million project would be built on Route 22 about two miles south of the hamlet of Patterson, near the boundary with the Town of Southeast.
It would contain a 30,000-square-foot office building and an eight-screen movie theater as well as 145,000 square feet of retail space.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Not a Backyard Garden: 400 Acres and a Mansion


DIGITAL SIGNALS FROM THE SKY ENLIVEN RADIO
LEAD: New ways of sending music through the sky are being developed in an effort to upgrade the quality of radio transmissions.
Receivers designed for home reception of digital satellite signals have just made a successful debut in Europe.


Owner Kills Intruder at an Auto-Body Shop
LEAD: The owner of a Brooklyn auto-body shop shot and killed a knife-wielding intruder early yesterday after two of the shop owner's employees were accosted, the police reported.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
MELLON EXHIBITION


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today discusses August Wilson and his new play, ''The Piano Lesson.'' On Thursday, after the section went to press, Mr.
Wilson was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for the play.


ECONOMY EXPECTED TO ABSORB EFFECTS OF MILITARY CUTS
LEAD: The United States economy can absorb large cuts in military spending without serious damage, economists say, although for a while, at least, tens of thousands of Americans will lose their jobs.


Brass Quintet to Offer John Cage's Silent Work
LEAD: BRASS RING may give the most convincing sampling of the sound of silence since Simon and Garfunkel when the group invades New Haven's rock and roll sanctuary, Toad's Place, for an evening of contemporary classical music.
On the quintet's program at 7:30 P.M. tomorrow is ''4'33'','' the celebrated piano composition by John Cage in which the performer sits in front of the keyboard for 4 minutes and 33 seconds without playing a note.


Paid Time and Working Time
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fashion;   For Men, Colors in Sun-Washed Shades
LEAD: Sun-bleached colors are this season's way for men to ease into warm-weather dressing, retailers in the New York area say.


When the Rich And the Powerful Were Riding High
LEAD: I am trying to create television for the 1990's.
I'm not sure I'll be as good at it as I was 13 years ago, when I didn't know anything.
Tapping into the pulse of the times is easier to explain in hindsight than to plan.


Federal Pay Linked To High L.I. Costs
LEAD: ARLENE RABENBAUER is the type of Long Island Federal worker getting a lot of attention from Washington lawmakers these days.
The 40-year-old claims development clerk for the Social Security Administration lives in Holbrook, where she supports herself, her widowed mother and her disabled brother on an annual salary of $17,975.


Question of the Week;   How Can the N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: All physical penalties, from hooking to fighting, are cumulative for the lifetime of the player.
When the penalty time reaches and exceeds 60 minutes, the player may not suit for a game until his penalty has been served.
MAURICE J. MONTI
Denville, N.J.


Warm Month Damaged Part of New York's Maple Syrup Crop
LEAD: New York farmers' maple syrup season ended this week, with reports of the 1990 crop ranging from ''dreadful'' to ''the best in the last five years.''


Japan Begins to Hear the Market's Message
LEAD: A SENIOR official at the Bank of Japan recently took a reporter aside, deeply concerned by articles saying Japan's Government bureaucrats had lost control over Tokyo's gyrating financial markets.


Beth Wang and William H. Nast Are Engaged
LEAD: Beth Amy Wang, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Wang of Newton, Mass., and William Henry Nast, a son of Alice Cycleman Nast of Mission Hills, Kan., and the late Nat Nelson Nast Jr., plan to marry in July.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a letter to the editor on April 8about Milton Babbitt misidentified two organizations.
They are Chamber Music America and New Music Consort.
The author of the letter was also misidentified.
She is Barbara A. Petersen.


The Hope of Easter
LEAD: Easter commemorates Christ's resurrection, Passover the deliverance of the Jews from Egypt.
In harmony with nature's cycle, these principal festivals in the Christian and Jewish calendars occur at the coming of spring, offering in the world's regreening a further cause of celebration.
Yet on this Easter, as on so many before, the past continues to disturb the present.


Catherine Carver To Wed in June
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
George A. Carver Jr. of Great Falls, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Ruth Carver to Robert Cuyler McCurrach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. McCurrach of Lincoln, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.


Justice for the Abstract Expressionists
LEAD: IN anticipation of its move later this year into a new building designed by Edward Larrabee Barnes, the Katonah Gallery has changed its name to the Katonah Museum.
There had been confusion about the institution's status, according to the president of its board, Linda Nordberg, who said that some ''seeking a museum experience'' had not sought it at


Fashion;   Lighthearted Dresses With a Sense of Ease
LEAD: As the weather warms up, women will want to escape from trousers and tight skirts into airy dresses or culottes that just skim the body.
Some of these lighthearted dresses are inspired by the loose, bias-cut dresses of the 20's and 30's.
Others are variations on the sun dress or sheath.
But what makes these designs modern are their clean silhouettes and sense of physical ease.


Campus Life: Bowdoin;   Students Angered By Vote to Change Grading System
LEAD: The Bowdoin College faculty voted last week to change the distinctive four-level grading system it instituted in 1967 to the traditional A, B, C, D and F system.
The action met with immediate protest from students.


3-Day Festival to Celebrate G.B.S.
LEAD: HE was interested in everything, he knew it all, or was convinced he did, and he kept changing his mind.


Question of the Week;   How Can the N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: Most of the time, the N.H.L. referees sort out melees on the ice by penalizing both teams equally.
What incentive does a player have not to fight when he knows that starting the fight will also eliminate a player (of his choice) from the opposing team?
The solution is simple: don't penalize both combatants equally; penalize the instigator only, or at least, much more heavily.


Stockton Replaces Floyd
LEAD: Dave Stockton, a two-time winner of the P.G.A. championship with a reputation as one of the most tenacious competitors in golf, was named today as the United States Ryder Cup captain for the 1991 matches at Kiawah Island, S.C.


Retired Executives Return as Volunteers
LEAD: A FEW years ago, when Thomas R. Hodge retired from American Telephone and Telegraph, the former division manager was told that as a consultant his advice would be worth $1,000 a day plus expenses, to executives anxious to tap his experience.


FICTION
LEAD:
CANNIBAL KISS.
By Daniel Odier.
Translated by Lanie Goodman. (Random House, $16.95.) In his latest book, the Swiss novelist Daniel Odier has departed from his recent series of new-wave thrillers featuring Serge Gorodish and his naive companion, Alba - a kind of Nick and Nora Charles with a dark sensibility.


HISPANIC CRITICISM OF EDUCATION CHIEF
LEAD: Hispanic educators and community leaders across the country have sharply criticized Secretary of Education Lauro F. Cavazos for saying that Hispanic parents bear much of the blame for the high dropout rate among their children.


The Executive Computer;   Bragging Rights Aside, What Did Lotus and Novell Merge?
LEAD: The proposed merger of the Lotus Development Corporation and Novell Inc., announced earlier this month, will unite two companies that dominate their respective fields.
Assuming the deal goes through, Lotus, which makes the 1-2-3 financial analysis program, and Novell, which makes the Netware operating system for networked computers, will have combined 1990 revenues of nearly $1.2 billion.


Campus Life: Claremont McKenna;   Gay Student Wins Bid to Revise Anti-Bias Policy
LEAD: After months of debate, a gay student at Claremont McKenna College has claimed victory in his effort to persuade the school to include sexual orientation in its nondiscrimination policy.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: The benefit season hasn't yet ended - some people think it never does, although that's not quite true.
This season's swan songs are now in sight, and a good thing it is because there are women, lots of them, who have just about had it, certainly for the time being.


Images of Brooklyn
LEAD: An exhibition of photographs of Brooklyn from the 1930's to the 1960's is on view through June 10 at the Prospect Park Boathouse, near Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue in Brooklyn.
The show, ''Picturing Brooklyn,'' includes 54 images of Coney Island, Fort Greene Park, Prospect Park and other sites.
Hours are 11 A.M.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Since the turn of the century, Argentina has used its stamps and a lonely post office to indirectly bolster its claim to part of Antarctica.


Elizabeth Anderson Debs Is Planning A June Wedding to Stephen C. Turner
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Debs of New York and Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Anderson Debs, to Stephen Carmichael Turner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kimball Turner of Edgartown, Mass.
A June wedding is planned Ms.
Debs ia a principal in Akselrad-Debs, a New York architecture and engineering firm.


Sanchez Vicario And Graf in Final
LEAD: If Steffi Graf were really the tennis machine she is so often accused of being, she would simply have broken down this afternoon when things began to go awry in her semifinal match against the Soviet Union's Natalya Zvereva in the semifinals of the Bausch &amp; Lomb championships.


Jane S. Kalkstein To Marry in June
LEAD: June wedding plans for Jane Stacey Kalkstein and Philip Robert Weingold, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Weingold of Cedarhurst, L.I., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Kalkstein of New York.


'Fanny' Is Staged With Elegance
LEAD: If only to reaffirm one's faith in the power of the musical theater to stir and move us, a fine revival of ''Fanny'' - no, it's not the one about Fanny Brice - opened at the Paper Mill Playhouse during the same weekend that ''Aspects of Love,'' with its $11 million advance sale, had a long-awaited


NONFICTION
LEAD:
DEEP COVER: The Inside Story of How DEA Infighting, Incompetence, and Subterfuge Lost Us the Biggest Battle of the Drug War.
By Michael Levine. (Delacorte, $19.95.) For 25 years Michael Levine was a foot soldier in the war against drugs - an undercover agent, until his retirement in 1989, for the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration.


Africa
LEAD: To the Editor: Having returned recently from Africa, I would like to acquaint your readers with certain problems with airline personnel.
We were booked on South African Airways from Cape Town to Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe.
The plane from Cape Town arrived slightly late in Johannesburg.
After collecting our luggage, we presented ourselves at the check-in counter for the flight to Victoria Falls.


The Curious Timing of Peter Lynch's Retirement
LEAD: To the Editor:


Leslie Hotchkiss To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Winchester F. Hotchkiss of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Leslie Ellsworth Hotchkiss to John Ewins Arndt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. S. Arndt of Southport, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.


Time to Stop Cold War Killing in Angola
LEAD: To the Editor:


Make That 50,000,001
LEAD: For several American Presidents, Charles de Gaulle was one Frenchman who was definitely wrong.
After all, Le Grand Charles pulled French forces out of NATO, criticized American involvement in Vietnam and once had the nerve to propose that France and Britain have veto power over America's use of nuclear weapons.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
SKETCHES FROM A LIFE, by George F. Kennan. (Pantheon, $12.95.) The man who first championed the idea of containment against Soviet expansion provides a glimpse into his diaries dating from 1927 to the twilight of the cold war. '' 'Sketches From a Life' is a book by one of the wisest men in American public life today,'' James Chace said here last year.


THROUGH GLASS LIGHTLY, COLORFUL BOTANICALLY
LEAD: The glorious glass fantasies of Louis Comfort Tiffany added a colorpulsing glow to mansions, churches and museums throughout the world over the last century.
The flower forms fashioned into vases, the impressionistic botanical images captured in lamps and windows, the mosaic-encrusted columns and the bejeweled inkwells and necklaces are esthetically and technologically among the most innovative glassworks ever produced - as can be seen in the exhibition ''Masterworks of Louis Comfort Tiffany,'' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, through Sept.


About Cars;   Some Expensive Toys at the Auto Show
LEAD: Year after year, the New York Automobile Show breaks its record for attendance, and the exposition that opened at the Javits Center in Manhattan yesterday will probably be no different.
Yet it is surprising how many people say they have never been to a show, no matter that they are keenly interested in the latest four-wheeled toys.


Gorbachev Tries to Develop Radical Economic Program
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met today with his chief advisers in an attempt to craft his long-promised plan for ''radical'' prescriptions to cure the Soviet economy.


IN THE REGION: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bay Shore
$620,000
105 South Awixa Avenue
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 42-year-old waterfront colonial; 3-car garage, 1.2 acres; taxes $8,000.
Farmingdale
$210,000
23 Leonard Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old split level; den, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.


Building a Better Air Grinder, Faster
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carol Dadakis to Wed P. T. McKeever
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine Dadakis of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carol Coleman Dadakis to Peter Thomas McKeever, the son of Mrs.
Paul B. McKeever of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Mr.
McKeever.
A June wedding is planned.


Carvel Collins Is Dead; Faulkner Authority, 77
LEAD: Carvel Collins, a professor and writer and an authority on the works of William Faulkner, died of a cerebral hemorrhage on Tuesday at Tri-City Hospital in Oceanside, Calif.
He was 77 years old and lived in Vista, Calif.


Summer Problems For L.I.R.R. Riders
LEAD: IN the opening scene of the movie ''Married to the Mob,'' two dapper hoodlums have just rubbed out an enemy on a crowded Long Island Rail Road passenger train.
As the two men squeeze through the crush of morning commuters to flee undetected, one says to the other:


Polish President Attends Ceremony to Honor Victims of Katyn Forest Massacre


Correction
LEAD: A brief article last week about homeowners with out-of-state income - and how to calculate whether they would benefit from a New Jersey court ruling letting them deduct property taxes on state income tax returns - omitted the tax rate for those earning $50,000 to $100,000 a year.
It is 3.5 percent.


Pubs in Prague
LEAD: To the Editor: Joanne Furio's article on Czech and Slovak beer pubs (Travel, March 4) brought back many happy memories, since for two years I was a Fulbright lecturer on American literature at Charles University in Prague.


Mental Health And Politics
LEAD: The New York State Office of Mental Health is terminating aftercare services for some 700 Suffolk County patients to save $1.6 million, while spending that much on 25 privileged patients in two Nassau County residences, including a new one in East Hills, Roslyn.


J.L. Neisloss to Wed Miss Conyngham
LEAD: Alison Hillard Conyngham and James Louis Neisloss plan to marry in June.
Miss Conyngham is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John N. Conyngham of Shavertown, Pa.
Mr.
Neisloss is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley L. Neisloss of Oyster Bay, L.I.


Question of the Week;   How Can the N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: The solution is simple: penalize the coach.
Assess a game misconduct to any coach whose player instigates a fight.
KEN NEUHAUS
Stamford, Conn.


Aging Can Be An Active Time
LEAD: Paul Levine's article [''Gray Hairs and Creaky Limbs: Benchmarks of Aging,'' Opinion Page, March 25]  presents a glum and depressing picture of a natural phenomenon - growing older.
Although I am four years older, I cannot share Mr.
Levine's dim view of life.





Some Chessmen Don't Make a Move
LEAD: Chess came out of Persia around the sixth century A. D., invaded medieval Europe and assumed its modern form early in the 19th century.
Scholars believe that it originally was a game of war.
Perhaps it still is, but the war is psychic, in which one strong mind strives to dominate and conquer another strong mind.


Reviews/Dance;   Diverse 2d Program By Philadanco Troupe
LEAD: Philadanco is not yet the first rate company that the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater is, but both troupes share some choreographers and a deep commitment to move an audience.


Residential Resales
LEAD:
Closings in the week ended March 31
MANHATTAN
Chelsea
$375,000
334 West 19th Street
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op in a brownstone; dining area, renovated kitchen, marble bath, fireplace, terrace, high ceilings, hardwood floors; maintenance $948, 84% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates)


STREETSCAPES: Jamaica's Valencia Theater;   A Success Story Masks A Landmarks Law Quirk
LEAD: THE baroque auditorium of the Valencia Theater in Jamaica, Queens, is one of New York City's preservation success stories.
Once threatened, it is now immaculately kept up by the Tabernacle of Prayer for All People - at a time when landmark designation of religious structures is being debated.


Mutual Funds;   Questions for the Eleventh Hour
LEAD: Tomorrow is the deadline for filing 1989 taxes, and many last-minute filers are spending the weekend putting the final touches on their returns.
In fact, so many people drag their feet that April 15 traditionally is the biggest day of the year for investors' telephone calls at the New York-based Oppenheimer Management


Sadists in Their Midst
LEAD:
A MIRACLE, A UNIVERSE
Settling Accounts With Torturers.
By Lawrence Weschler.
293 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $22.95.


PERSPECTIVES: West Side Construction;   From a Hospital Project Comes Housing
LEAD: FOR evidence that complicated development projects in Manhattan can ultimately succeed, all eyes should turn to 10th Avenue.


Every Policeman Is a Hero
LEAD: I think the social worker is envious of the inspector's funeral accorded Detective Wustenhoff [''A Police Death Raises Questions,'' Letters, March 18] .
On second thought, reading her letter, she doesn't like pomp and circumstance.
We can assume she also felt the same of President Kennedy's funeral.


Awaiting Parquet Monster
LEAD: A class in Psychology 101 would be a suitable prerequisite for studying the ramifications of today's game between the Knicks and the Celtics at the Boston Garden.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Schmidt: Symphony No. 2
Chicago Symphony Orchestra conducted by Neeme Jarvi.
Chandos CHAN 8779; all three formats.
It is hard to fathom how a composer could have written so convincingly sunny and lyrical a symphony in Vienna on the brink of World War I. Franz Schmidt's symphonies are the gorgeous and lavish final embers of dying German Romanticism, and the composer has been on the verge of revival ever since Zubin Mehta recorded the Fourth Symphony two decades ago.


THE MISTAKES IN THIS ESSAY ARE MY OWN
LEAD: To crack open a new book and read its dedication and acknowledgments is typically an occasion for me to relive an experience years ago, when I was a midshipman.
One night I was assigned to stand watch on the fantail of our ship with a young enlisted man.
While we looked over the inky Pacific, illuminated by a long strip of moonlight, he poured out a story of his sad youth, especially of his unloving parents.


Klan Challenges Law Against Hoods
LEAD: From the founding of the Ku Klux Klan after the Civil War, its ghostly white robes with peaked hoods have been indelible symbols of racial and religious hatred.


Can Harcourt Brace Survive Its Debt?
LEAD: There's a big question facing the publishing house of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. these days: What price victory?
Publishing legend William I. Jovanovich built one of America's biggest book empires over a span of nearly four decades and then, three years ago, fended off a raider's attack by borrowing nearly $3 billion.


Oilers Tie Series By Beating Jets, 4-3
LEAD: Jari Kurri scored the game-winner midway through the third period as the Edmonton Oilers beat the Winnipeg Jets, 4-3, tonight to keep their National Hockey League playoff series alive.


THE NATION: Texas Primary;   Higher Aspirations From Low Campaign
LEAD: THE fate of Western civilization probably does not hinge on the Texas gubernatorial race, but political pros were taking no chances.
After Ann Richards won the Democratic primary last week, the experts looked forward to her fall contest against Clayton Williams, a conservative oilman, as a test of the political significance of gender, the impact of suspected drug use by a candidate, the temper of the electorate on abortion, the future of liberalism and the potential for a Democratic


A Surrealist Who Was a Prism For Her Times
LEAD: Compared to other photographers of World War II, Lee Miller was not necessarily the most driven, daring or talented, although she possessed all of these attributes.
But she surely ranks as the most dazzlingly beautiful, sophisticated and colorful photojournalist ever to wear a war correspondent's patch on an olive-drab breast pocket.


Twachtman's Paintings of His Greenwich Years
LEAD: SINCE its statewide revival in 1980, American Impressionism has become a staple of the scene.
In the last few years, for example, Leonard Ochtman and Childe Hassam have had personal attention, notably at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich and the Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme.
Currently, Hassam's ''Isle of Shoals'' landscapes are on view at the Yale University Art Gallery while at the Wadsworth Atheneum there is a selection of works by John


Fashion: On the Street;   When the Shopping Gets Fun
LEAD: What are all these people dressed for?
Spring browsing, of course, at the Sunday antiques market on the Avenue of the Americas near 25th Street.
There are no rules, but nothing here happened by accident.


A MOZARTEANMUSE OF A DIFFERENT FEATHER?
LEAD: Most books about Mozart are silent about the death of his pet starling. ''Mozart in Person: His Character and Health'' by Peter J. Davies does not include the event in a seven-page chronology of his career.
Even the New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians does not let out so much as a chirp on the subject.


WHEN WILL THE BOOK BE DONE?
LEAD: I'M ALWAYS MAKING SUGGESTIONS to my husband that I later regret.
On Friday afternoon, June 16, 1972, I telephoned Neil at the Washington bureau of The New York Times to ask him about the funeral he had attended at Arlington National Cemetery that morning.
A week earlier, a good friend and influential source from his years as a correspondent in Vietnam, John Paul Vann, had been killed in a helicopter crash there.


HIS YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY
LEAD:
TRIBES WITH FLAGS
A Dangerous Passage
Through the Chaos of the Middle East.
By Charles Glass.
528 pp. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press. $22.95.


Fair Play for All (Even Women)
LEAD: On March 28, on the eve of the Final Four culmination of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championships, the University of Oklahoma announced the discontinuance of its women's basketball program.
Reason: Spending $280,000 on the women was throwing money away when they averaged only 206 spectators per game.


There Is A Method To Walesa's Meandering
LEAD: LISTENING to Lech Walesa talk politics is like staring at an Impressionist painting from two inches away: It doesn't make much sense unless you take a few steps back and view the whole canvas.


Summer Squall Fights Back to Win Blue Grass
LEAD: Summer Squall confirmed both his talent and his toughness while winning the $284,625 Blue Grass Stakes today at Keeneland in his final prep for the Kentucky Derby.


In Tight Quarters, One-Dish Meals
LEAD: DO people who live in the country spend more time in their kitchens than city dwellers?
Manhattan apartment kitchens are so often like mine - an afterthought tucked away in a hall closet, the brilliant coup of some architect determined to make two tight little apartments fit where one would have been perfectly comfortable.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
SPARKY!
By Sparky Anderson with Dan Ewald. (Prentice Hall, $18.95.) George (Sparky) Anderson has managed in the major leagues since 1970.
He is the only manager to win more than 800 games with two different teams and to win a World Series in both leagues.
Mr.
Anderson also suffered a physical and emotional breakdown in May 1989, which he says was brought on by the daily stress of managing in the big leagues.


Campus Life: Yale;   French Course, Termed Sexist, Will Be Revised
LEAD: It didn't take long for the word - a terse ''Victoire!'' - to spread among the students who have criticized Yale University's introductory French course as intolerably sexist.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: The furor about gender-based events in national tournaments was almost, but not quite, laid to rest five months ago.
After five years of legal maneuvering in California, the Board of Directors of the American Contract Bridge League modified its schedules: All men's events disappeared at national level and were replaced by open events run in parallel with women's events.


Marie-Odile Taillard Weds
LEAD: Marie-Odile Taillard and Joseph C. Yaskin Abrams were married yesterday at the bridegroom's home in Los Angeles by Presiding Justice Joan Dempsey Klein of the California Court of Appeals.
Mrs.
Abrams, 32 years old, is a daughter of Michel Taillard and Therese Taillard-Pilat, both of Paris.
She graduated from the University of Southern California and received an M.B.A.


Adam Smith's Warning to Bankers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on March 25 misidentified a building in Ettal, West Germany.
It was the monastery, not the monastery church (Klosterkirche).


INSIDE;


A Journey Into Silesia
LEAD: IN MID-NOVEMBER 1989, IN THE YEAR OF REVOLUTION, audiences around the world woke with a start to a banner held aloft in a tiny village.
It bore the following awkwardly lettered phrase: ''Helmut you're our Chancellor too.''


One Is Killed and 2 Are Hurt In Fire in a Brooklyn House
LEAD: A disabled man was killed and two women were injured yesterday in a fire in a Brooklyn house, the police said.


Elizabeth C. Fleming, an Economist, Is Married
LEAD: Elizabeth Cary Fleming, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Cornish Fleming of Mendham, N.J., was married yesterday to Malcolm Lauder Macpherson Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Macpherson of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Martha Robson officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Mendham.


Catherine Eisler Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Catherine Lea Eisler and Scott Dee Ackerson were married yesterday at the Quaker Ridge Golf Club in Scarsdale, N.Y., by John M. Friedman, a retired town and village justice of Scarsdale.


Jonna Godley to Wed Keith E. Scharf in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Godley Jr. of Frenchtown, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jonna L. Godley to Keith Elliot Scharf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank D. Scharf of Guilford, Conn., and New York.
A May wedding is planned.


Another Kid in the Kitchen
LEAD: It is crowded in the kitchen.
In a corner the baby leans back in her walker, gumming a biscuit.
In another a toddler is eating Alphabits.
A teen-age boy, a skyscraper to the little ones, passes through with that sullen silence teen-age boys own.
A teen-age girl, her hair a corn-colored tail down her back, scoops ice cream at the counter.


N.B.A. Could Pay For Educations
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


For Youths On the Edge of Trouble
LEAD: A GROUP of youngsters, from 16 to 21 years old, will take part in a weeklong job-training program this month that leads to a one-day job fair with potential employers.
What is unusual about these youngsters is that they all have been involved with the juvenile-justice system.


Dinkins, in Switch, Urges Landlord Cost Index
LEAD: In an apparent reversal of the position he took three years ago when he was Manhattan Borough President, Mayor David N. Dinkins is now pressing the Board of Estimate to approve a city contract for an annual cost survey that is an important feature of the rent-stabilization system.
The board is scheduled to vote on the issue at a special meeting on


Norine T. Nelson, Designer, to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Frederick Nelson Jr. of Little Silver, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Norine Teresa Nelson to William Horne Martin, the son of Roberta Horne Archer and William Roger Martin of Fort Wayne, Ind.
A September wedding is planned.


Canadians Cross Falls for U.S. Prices
LEAD: Canadians are coming by car, by van and even by busload to buy brand-name goods at bargain prices compared with what they pay in Toronto and its suburbs.


Wall Street;   When Zero-Coupon Bonds Point the Way
LEAD: Many traders think zero-coupon bonds, which sell far below their maturity value but pay no annual interest, are a good barometer for the broader ''junk bond'' market.
If so, recent developments may signal a slight warming trend that could send junk bond prices higher.


Kristen Peterson To Marry in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
George Peterson 3d of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kristen Bouvier Peterson, to William Brace Krag Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Krag of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich.
A May wedding is planned.


Question of the Week;   How Can the N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: Since the overall speed of the game has increased tremendously, the N.H.L. should compensate by employing three referees.
This setup (with a senior official and two partners who also perform the duties of linesmen) will help cut down on the many minor infractions that are catalysts for major brawls.


Lifestyle:Sunday Dinner;   Places Where Dreams of Soft-Shell Crabs Come True
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of New York restaurants that offer good soft-shell crabs.
The reviews, by Bryan Miller, appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
John Clancy's


Due Process in Doubt In Death Sentences
LEAD: To the Editor:


Savor Rangers' Division Title
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are beginning to see a collection of institutions, both black and white, that are helping black students understand again that the single most important route out of poverty is education.''
- Benjamin F. Payton,
president of Tuskegee
University.
[1:1.]


County and City at Odds in Mapplethorpe Case in Cincinnati
LEAD: The latest dispute here over the Robert Mapplethorpe photography exhibit involves not so much whether the authorities should prosecute as which authorities should do so.


A Trout? No, It's a Tree
LEAD: SOMEWHERE in the night a salmon rolled lazily across a pool in the Lyd River.
Then a sea trout broke the surface and leaped close by, unseen but distinguished by the whirring of its powerful tail, before splashing back into the stream.
A mist crept over the darkened meadows of England's West Country under the distant lee of Dartmoor.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: There are chess players who do not play - the problemists and creators of end-game studies.
To be sure, at some time in their youth they would have had to play the game, if only because it cannot be learned any other way.
Yet at some point they became fascinated either by the composed problem - usually the task is to find the mate in two, three or four moves - or by the remarkable possibilities in the limited clusters of pieces that make up end games.


Art-School Consortium To Show Student Work
LEAD: Twenty artists from nine art schools around the country will exhibit their work on Wednesday at 5:30 P.M. at an open house sponsored by the Alliance of Independent Colleges of Art at its loft at 451 Greenwich Street.
The exhibition is a showcase for students who have participated in a 16-week program sponsored by the alliance, a Washington-based consortium of art schools.


No More Room in the Budget For the Homeless Mentally Ill
LEAD: WHEN the losers and winners stagger from this year's fight over the state budget in Albany, those who represent the mentally ill people living on New York City's streets may be unsure which side to join.


PAN AM 103: THE GERMAN CONNECTION
LEAD: The view that German bungling is to blame for the Lockerbie bombing has been promoted by the Bush Administration and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Oliver Revell, for many months (''Pam Am 103: The German Connection,'' by Steven Emerson and Brian Duffy, March 18).
It is a dubious proposition; the bombs were disbursed before the German arrests of the Frankfurt terrorists, and it is unlikely that detaining those individuals two months before Lockerbie would have irreparably incapacitated Jabril's large, well organized group.


Six Democrats Dissent On Air Terminal's Size
LEAD: SIX Democrats on the 17-member Board of Legislators, convinced that a 41,000-square-foot terminal would be ''oversized'' for the planned modernization of the County Airport in Harrison, stunned their colleagues and dismayed county government officials last week by calling for a 24,000-square-foot structure instead.


Ms. Osborn and P. C. Jorgensen to Wed
LEAD: Judith Leslie Osborn and Paul Clayton Jorgensen, lawyers in Washington, plan to marry in October.
Ms.
Osborn is the daughter of Marcia Lontz Osborn of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Donald R. Osborn of New York.
Her fiance is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Jorgensen of Salt Lake City.


THE FIGHT FOR LIFE IN HENRY COUNTY
LEAD:
WHAT ARE PEOPLE FOR?
Essays.
By Wendell Berry.
210 pp. San Francisco:
North Point Press. $19.95.


HE KILLED HER BECAUSE HE COULD
LEAD:
THE BOOK OF EVIDENCEBy John Banville.
220 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons.
$17.95.


Who Is the M.V.P. In the N.B.A.?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Fashion;   The New Summer Basics
LEAD: Of course you can slide through the summer wearing the same kind of stuff you've always worn - T-shirts, black or khaki pants, blue jeans, a sheath dress, a short black skirt, white shirts, an oversized sweater or jacket, maybe a seersucker suit.
There's nothing wrong with any of these.
This season, though, it's possible to dress in just as basic a manner, but with a fresh kick of fashion to every item.


A COMMISSION THAT HAS ITSELF BECOME A LANDMARK
LEAD: Twenty-five years ago this week, when Mayor Robert F. Wagner signed into law legislation creating the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, New York was still reeling from the destruction of Pennsylvania Station - the single greatest act of architectural vandalism the city has ever seen.


Pornography and Politics
LEAD: To the Editor:


Military's Voice Being Heard on Lithuania, a Soviet Aide Says
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is under increasing pressure from the Soviet military for an army crackdown in Lithuania, an official of the Communist Party's Central Committee says.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house has a den whose walls are covered with vertical 1-by-8-inch, beveled-edge pine boards with quarter-round molding over each of the joints.
The ceiling consists of exposed joists with the 1-by-6-inch subflooring exposed from the room above.
Dark-brown stain has been used on all the woodwork, making the room dark.


THEN THE SPOON SPEAKS UP


Slow Growth in Grand Lists Signals Rise in Local Tax
LEAD: AS Connecticut towns complete their budget preparations, municipal officials say they are facing some of the largest property-tax increases in years.
With inflation running at 4 to 5 percent and state aid receding, municipal budgets will have to increase 15 to 25 percent just to maintain existing services, the officials say.


A Bantam Greenhouse Where Easter's in Bloom
LEAD: AT Connecticut Cut Flowers in Bantam, the Easter season starts well before Christmas, with the planting of hundreds of bulbs so that, by today, there will be hundreds of Easter lily plants all in full bloom.
A few weeks earlier, John and Joanne Creedon were busy, arranging for their delivery to churches, other florists, or for customers who had come in searching for the perfect


On Contributions Of Other Cultures
LEAD: It is quite sad that an Irvington High School social studies teacher is so uninformed about the contributions of other cultures to western civilization and the history of mankind [''Why Study History?'' Westchester Opinion, March 25] .
And he wishes others to remain so.


A Healthy Midlife Is Prescribed
LEAD: I am writing in response to Paul Levine's article.
It left me immensely depressed.


Mission Continuing
LEAD: Sometimes the saints go marching out.
Mother Teresa, the Roman Catholic nun who received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1979 for her work among the sick and dying, announced her retirement last week as head of the Missionaries of Charity, the religious order she founded in 1950.
A Vatican spokesman said that the 79-year-old nun, who had a pacemaker implanted after she suffered a heart attack in September, was stepping down for health reasons.


How the Osprey Avoided The Fate of the Passenger Pigeon
LEAD: THE 20th century, more than any other, has produced the greatest change in man's attitude toward wildlife.
It began with the likes of Teddy Roosevelt proudly shooting elephants on the African veldt and it draws to a close with a ban on the worldwide trade in their tusks.


Born of Need for Recognition
LEAD: On Oct. 1, 1948, two men met in a small second-floor office of a brick building several hundred yards from where the Berlin wall would stand years later.
The surrounding neighborhood was little more than rubble, the result of the bombing of Berlin during World War II.
Only one other building in the area remained standing, and the one Waldemar Dorde and Manfred


Struggles Over The Ancient Trees Shift to British Columbia
LEAD: THE biggest trees in Canada, some more than 300 feet high, cling to the spongy depths of the forest floor in the Carmanah Valley just north of here.
They were ignored for centuries, but now the Sitka spruce in the isolated basin are being treated like the last bison herds of the West.


An Unpredictable Playwright Reverses Himself
LEAD: George C. Wolfe is a man in the midst of transition.
A playwright (''The Colored Museum,'' his 1986 satire of black American life) and director of the forthcoming ''Spunk,'' Mr.
Wolfe says he's been feeling different lately.
At first he thought it had to do with turning 35 last September.
But he's more inclined to pin his current state of mind on New Year's


All About/Texas Real Estate;   A Glut of Office Space Turns Enticing
LEAD: Texas real estate people, dazed after the debacle of the 1980's, are now daring to brag of a rebound.
The office market in the Northeast came back, so why not Texas, they ask. ''I really believe that great fortunes will be made over the next decade in Texas real estate to rival when Olympia &amp; York made their big hit in New York in the 1970's,'' said Charles G.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Larchmont
LEAD: SINCE 1661, when John Richbell, an Englishman, bought Larchmont from the Siwanoy Indians for its secluded coves, the area has been a refuge.
While Richbell sought a safe harbor for trade, today's villagers regard Larchmont as an oasis of serenity, where young mothers pushing baby carriages fill the sidewalks on sunny days.


Review/Opera;   'Giovanni' Principals Trade Roles
LEAD: The impact of cast changes on a Metropolitan Opera production is measured less by the quality of individual voices than by the traumas inflicted on ensemble.
At Wednesday's performance of the Met's new ''Don Giovanni,'' the Don and Leporello switched roles; and given the fact that Ferruccio Furlanetto and Samuel


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: The Swiss Bank Tower;   A Building Designed to Suit Needs and Neighbors
LEAD: WHEN the architect Lee Harris Pomeroy gives a tour of the Swiss Bank Tower, nearing completion behind the Saks Fifth Avenue flagship store, he begins a block away, in the middle of Rockefeller Center.


Round Five for a Theatrical Heavyweight
LEAD: Sitting in a wooden booth at a restaurant across from the Yale University campus, chain-smoking and sipping cup after cup of black coffee, a 44-year-old bearded playwright is talking about success.


Women Cops Can Be A Cliche in Blue
LEAD: When Margaret Thatcher's Conservative Government was at its mightiest, some liberal British feminists reacted this way: We wanted a woman in power; we just didn't want that woman.
In their new films about women police officers, the directors Sondra Locke and Kathryn Bigelow have turned out to be the Margaret Thatchers of movies, able to out-tough and out-macho any man at his own game.


Lisa Anne Kraus, Producer, to Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Joyce Aronson of New York and Madison, Conn., and Eric Kraus of Newbury, Vt., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Lisa Anne Kraus, and Edward G. Goldfinger, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen E. Goldfinger of Newtonville, Mass.


THE CHURCH IS STILL RESTLESS
LEAD:
LIBERATION THEOLOGY AT THE CROSSROADS
Democracy or Revolution?
By Paul E. Sigmund.
257 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $29.95.


PETER LORRE DOES A HANDSTAND
LEAD:
ROOM TEMPERATURE
By Nicholson Baker.
116 pp. New York:
Grove Weidenfeld. $15.95.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
EASTER STROLLS


Jane Holcombe To Wed in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Browning Holcombe Jr. have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Jane Hilliard Holcombe and Joseph Alexander Tranfo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph C. Tranfo of Greenwich, Conn.


Rio de Janeiro
LEAD: To the Editor: Two things were omitted from the report on Rio de Janeiro (Travel, March 4).
In addition to the warning about crime on the beaches, riders of the funicular to the top of Corcovado Mountain should be careful of cameras, jewelry and handbags while seated near the open windows.
The view is spectacular, but street urchins loiter inconspicuously along the tracks and platforms, make a quick grab for valuables and disappear into the slums where they live.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Mexico City
LEAD: Spring is welcome everywhere when it arrives, but nowhere more so than in Mexico City.
When the temperatures begin to rise, chilangos, as residents of the Mexican capital call themselves, know that the fierce air pollution that dogs their lives from November through March will begin to diminish and that they can resume the outdoor activities they wisely shun during the thermal inversions of winter.


Andrea S. M. Linz to Wed Capt. Scott A. Wyckoff
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew M. Linz of New York have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Andrea S. M. Linz and Capt.
Scott A. Wyckoff, U.S.A.F., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Wyckoff of Clearwater, Fla.


Elizabeth Colston and Leo Titus to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
William Carroll Colston of Morristown, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Maria Colston and Leo Danni Titus, a son of Murray Titus of St.
John, New Brunswick, Canada, and Nancy Titus of Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.


Fighting Just Doesn't Pay
LEAD: This article was excerpted from ''Home Game: Hockey and Life in Canada'' (McClelland &amp; Stewart Inc., 1989) by Ken Dryden, the Hall of Fame goalie, and Roy MacGregor.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Spontaneous Combustion


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Question of the Week;   How Can the N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: 1. Enforce existing rules better.


Miss Ambrose Plans Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Ambrose of Pinehurst, N.C., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Nancy J. Ambrose and Scott G. Armstrong, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald S. Armstrong of Manhasset, L.I.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Mussels, Done the Easy Way, With Rice
LEAD: The first time I ever saw a Greek recipe for mussels with rice, pine nuts and currants, it seemed so complicated that I put it aside in the recipe file where it lay for 20 years before being discarded.
The recipe called for cooking the mussels, cooking the rice, stuffing each cooked mussel shell with the pilaf and tying each shell with thread to hold it closed while the whole was reheated.


About Men;   In Search of Bruce Lee's Grave
LEAD: IT'S SATURDAY MORNING in Seattle, and I am driving to visit Bruce Lee's grave.
I have been in the city for only a couple of weeks and so drive two blocks past the cemetery before realizing that I've passed it.
I double back and turn through the large wrought-iron gate, past a sign that reads: ''Open to 9 p.m.


Two Killed in Hospital Shooting Rampage
LEAD: A gunman shot four people, killing two, in a rampage through a hospital emergency room tonight and was arrested about an hour later, officials said.


Old City Settlers Await Decision on Occupied Building


Protecting the Environment: How Much Can Tax Policy
LEAD: Since the start of the year, American producers of chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, and other chemicals that deplete the atmosphere's ozone have been paying an excise tax expected to raise $4.3 billion over the next five years.
Accounting firms have been warning business clients that the tax, termed a user fee by the Bush Administration, could be the first of a host of new environmentally related levies.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Glen Rock
$220,000
24 Jerome Avenue
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old colonial; large double-tier deck, hardwood floors; taxes $2,998.
Jackson
$118,000
26 South George Drive
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 21-year-old contemporary; 1-car garage, patio, den, w/w carpeting; taxes $2,200.


Adam Smith's Warning to Bankers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wheeling, Dealing and Ominous Friday
LEAD: It seemed like old times on the takeover front.
New deals aborning, old deals decaying - all in a week that ended on Friday the 13th.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: A few weeks ago I was in Oxford, Ohio, which besides being the home of Miami University, is also where one of the world's largest - if not the largest - collections of Leica cameras and equipment resides.


When a Shipment of Plants Arrives
LEAD: NURSERY orders that were mailed a few months back are now being filled.
Cartons packed with live plants are arriving apace.
The thing to do, of course, is open the cartons and plant the plants immediately?
Right?
Wrong.
Opening the cartons as soon as possible is essential.
The plants have been smothered for many days, and upon arrival, they will need to receive some air.


Question of the Week;   How Can the N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: If a deliberate, injury-causing act occurs, the victimized player should be compelled to file an assault complaint with the local police department.
Even though the complaint may later be dropped (at the victim's discretion), it will at minimum put these people on notice that more is at risk than a 20-minute stay in the penalty box.


Greyhound Is Barred From Hiring in Strike
LEAD: Invoking a 28-year-old New York City statute that had never been applied, a judge has signed an order barring Greyhound from employing ''strike breakers'' within the city.


Free the Networks, and Competition
LEAD: Owning a television network isn't what it used to be.
Over 20 years, the three networks' share of the TV audience has declined from more than 90 percent to about 66 percent and is headed downward.
Competition from cable and other sources has got tougher; profitability, once certain, has become problematic.


Clemens Fans 10 And Gains 2d Victory
LEAD: Roger Clemens struck out 10 batters in six and two-thirds innings today and won his second start of the season as the Boston Red Sox rallied to beat the Milwaukee Brewers, 4-3.


Panel Supports a Plan On Striped Bass Fishing
LEAD: A plan to lift a four-year ban on the commercial fishing of striped bass in New York State has been given preliminary approval by an interstate fisheries commission.


Looking Into Accounting's Heart of Darkness
LEAD: Chris Campos finds adventure in a retailer insisting he sells women's coats at full price in February.
He can grow rhapsodic over learning of someone who can shamelessly bilk the boss's son.
Somebody blows up a factory?
Hold on, he'll be right there.


Giving Credit Where It Is Due
LEAD: Your article ''Who Oversees the County's Environment?'' [March 4] , was a reasonably thorough and fair report on the important issue of the effectiveness of Westchester County government as environmental steward, and the need for a Westchester Department of the Environment.


Reporter's Notebook;   Behold Bush, A Diplomat Of the Mists
LEAD: Is George Bush really Joe Btsfplk in disguise?


Linda Cooper Is Engaged
LEAD: May wedding plans for Linda Sue Cooper and Jenkins Cromwell Marshall, a son of Maria C. Marshall of Baltimore and Linton S. Marshall of Ocean City, Md., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Marie M. Naisby of Annapolis, Md., and Earle F. Cooper of Avenel, N.J.
Miss Cooper, 26 years old, is a vice president at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.


Bedrosian Leaves To Be With Son
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants have granted indefinite leave to their top relief pitcher, Steve Bedrosian, whose 2 1/2-year-old son, Cody, has been diagnosed as having leukemia.


Rough-Hewn Melodies From Texas Romantics
LEAD: Texas is so vast that entire musical careers can get lost in it.
But since interest in regional sounds runs high now, small labels are bound to keep uncovering Lone Star favorites like the songwriter Butch Hancock and the accordionist Steve Jordan.
Both are seasoned romantics with a flair for melodies and sentiments at once rough-hewn and delicate.


Melinda Highley to Wed in December
LEAD: The engagement of Melinda de Wees Highley to Thorson Rockwell, a son of Ramona Thorson Rockwell of Denver and Dwight Rockwell Jr. of New York, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Anne Bobst-Highley of New York and Milan, Italy, and Richard Beard Highley of Nassau, the Bahamas.
A


Review/Opera;   Cast Changes In the Met's 'Fledermaus'
LEAD: Johann Strauss's ''Fledermaus'' has returned to the Metropolitan Opera repertory after a 10-week hiatus.
The current run, which closes on Thursday, features singers who have taken on the principal roles since the Otto Schenk production was last reviewed.


A Stillness in North Carolina Politics
LEAD: Six years ago this state endured the roughest, longest, most expensive Senate race around, a $25 million blood feud between Senator Jesse Helms and Gov.
Jim Hunt, a campaign that stirred the deepest passions of Republicans and Democrats, the right and the left.


Miss DeAngelis To Wed in May
LEAD: A May wedding is planned by Kimberly Lynn DeAngelis and Martin Gerard Glavin, the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
John DeAngelis of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., have announced.
Mr.
Glavin is a son of James E. Glavin of Cranberry Lake, N.Y., and the late Helen Hartnett Glavin.


'It's Not the Years, But the Fears'
LEAD: Shame on you, Paul Levine!
Why blame aging for problems that are individually yours?
It's unfortunate that you suffer as you do, and I sympathize with your ''creaks'' and pain and asthma, but it's a bit much at 48 to chalk it all up to old age.
Even 5-year-olds can become asthmatic, so don't attribute that to old age either.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
LEAD: Here are four nice, inoffensive, elderly, retired British spies, the last ones of their generation, affectionately treated by Bob Cook in PAPER CHASE (St. Martin's, $14.95).
They have nothing left to do except to meet once in a while, gossip, talk about the good old days.
Enter a tough agent of the new school.


Benjamin White Weds Grace Gray
LEAD: Grace Elizabeth Gray, a daughter of Mrs.
William B. Gray of New York and the late Rev.
Mr.
Gray, was married yesterday in Grafton, Ill., to Benjamin Hill White, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David White of Eugene, Ore.
Kathleen Foy, an associate leader of the Ethical Culture Society of St.
Louis, performed the ceremony at the lodge at Pere Marquette State


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Freeport, Me.;   House Prices Take a Tumble
LEAD: WHEN a homeowner here decided to sell her waterfront house a year ago, two appraisers encouraged her to ask $269,500.
Last month she accepted an offer based on her most recent asking price, $169,000.


For Thomas Hampson, Singing Is a Single Art
LEAD: ''I am a juicy, lyric baritone, and I am not an opera singer who sings lieder.
I am a singer!'' That vocal self-description comes from a big-boned, 6-foot 4-inch 34-year-old man with a shock of longish brown hair and Paul Newman blue eyes.
He suggests, rather than a self-confident Mozartean in the opera house or Mahlerite on the concert stage, a member of the New York


Revival Houses In the Era Of Videocassettes
LEAD: The film '' 'Beat the Devil' is directed by John Huston, written by Truman Capote and stars Humphrey Bogart, Peter Lorre, Gina Lollobrigida and Jennifer Jones.
It deals with a remarkably odd assortment of Iranian-speaking travelers [sic] .
The formula is that everyone is slightly absurd, according to Huston.


Veteran Film Stars Brighten a Season Of Theater in Paris
LEAD: In France no iron curtain comparable to that between Broadway and Hollywood severs the theater from the cinema.
In fact, there is a tradition of double duty.
Soon after the movies were hatched Sarah Bernhardt went before the cameras in ''The Duel of Hamlet'' (1900), and she progressed to four-reel features before World War I.


Black History Properly Stated
LEAD: In an article about Councilwoman Lois Bronz ['The Politics of Personal Involvement,' April 1] , it was incorrectly stated that she was the first black elected official in Westchester County.
It went on to say that she was first elected in 1975.


Lori Josephson Is Married
LEAD: Lori Josephson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Denny Josephson of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and John C. Dodd 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dodd Jr. of Westlake, Ohio, were married last evening at the Georgian Suite in New York by the Rev.
Orlanda Brugnolo, a Unitarian minister.
Mrs.
Dodd, 28 years old, is a manager of gift wares in Chelsea Passage at Barneys New York.


The Prophet of Montana Once Played Ghana
LEAD: To the Editor:


PAN AM 103: THE GERMAN CONNECTION
LEAD: At the same time that I was reading your article, I was watching ''Sunday Morning,'' with Charles Kuralt reporting on the first free elections in East Germany since that country elected Adolph Hitler.
Forty-five years ago, that independent country's political and military establishments led the German people to slaughter 12 million people in a quest for European domination.


Community Orchestras Offer Family Programs
LEAD: UNLIKE avocational choirs, which often attain professional standards, community orchestras are not likely to be confused with the New York Philharmonic.
Nonetheless, the players' enthusiasm in such ensembles can be quite infectious.
When their concerts have the added benefit of being free, music lovers should take heed - and possibly take the children, too.


Review/Rock;   Charismatic Performance By Murphy
LEAD: Peter Murphy's sold-out show at the Ritz on Wednesday night was a decent-enough vacation.
Mr.
Murphy, once the lead singer for the English group Bauhouse and now a success on the alternative-rock scene, has a voice that ranges, to borrow a phrase, from A to B. The band - guitar, bass, drums, synthesizer and lots of backing tapes - played solemn, simple music unhindered by complicated melodies or rhythms.


Bulgaria Reports Discovery Of Mass Grave From 1940's
LEAD: A mass grave in which 40 people were buried has been found in southwestern Bulgaria, and the authorities believe that it dates from the Soviet invasion in World War II, the official news agency B.T.A. said today.


Pollen Is On the Way
LEAD: THE chilly winds of early April delayed the start of the pollen season, but an allergist in New Haven says that when the season does arrive, it will pack a wallop.


Again, the Right U.S. Stance on Jerusalem
LEAD: The mail has brought welcome news.


DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY
LEAD:
FLASHBACKS
On Returning to Vietnam.
By Morley Safer.
Illustrated. 206 pp. New York:
Random House. $18.95.


The History of 'Everyday People'
LEAD: JEREMY BRECHER is working to fill in some large gaps of Connecticut history.
For 10 years now, the social historian has traveled across the state collecting oral histories from people who rarely appear in history books, including local ethnic pioneers and former labor union organizers.


When a Shipment of Plants Arrives
LEAD: NURSERY orders that were mailed a few months back are now being filled.
Cartons packed with live plants are arriving apace.
The thing to do, of course, is open the cartons and plant the plants immediately?
Right?
Wrong.
Opening the cartons as soon as possible is essential.
The plants have been smothered for many days, and upon arrival, they will need to receive some air.


How to Desert A Friend
LEAD: When you are deserting a friend, the first step is a little difficult.
But pretty soon it gets easy.


Why Jeff Bloemberg Turned the Other Cheek
LEAD: The finest moment in the opening round of the hockey playoffs has been supplied by neither a supple-wristed scorer nor a quick-handed goalie, but rather by a quiet man named Jeff Bloemberg, hunkering down and taking a flurry of punches to his head and body.


Review/Music;   Evening of Works for Brass By Bach and Some Moderns
LEAD: Except for a palate-clearing pair of Contrapuncti from Bach's ''Art of Fugue,'' the Meridian Arts Ensemble devoted its program last Sunday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall to recently composed works.
The ensemble - a brass quintet that comprises Richard Kelley and Jon Nelson, trumpeters; Daniel Grabois, hornist; Benjamin Herrington, trombonist, and Raymond


Meyer to Try Again
LEAD: Since his 1983 victory in the Boston Marathon, Greg Meyer has suffered a stress fracture of the foot, a torn Achilles' tendon, a phantom leg problem that turned out to be a back ailment and a series of injuries that included a separated shoulder and dislocated ribs.


A Feminist Takes Stock
LEAD: LAST YEAR I TAUGHT AT A SMALL liberal-arts college in the West.
The students were intelligent, the teachers conscientious and the town quiet to the point of death.
Among the faculty was a historian with whom I fell into friendship.
This man found my hunger for the larger world interesting and was amused that I possessed it while he did not.


Nancy Reagan Astrologized
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reinstatement Drive
LEAD: Almost 70 years after he was banished from baseball for offering to quit the game if rival players would pay him enough to sabotage his team's chances of winning another pennant, a campaign is under way to win posthumous reinstatement for Phil Douglas, the spitballer who led the Giants to victory over the Yankees in the 1921 World Series.


An Insightful View Of U.S. Education
LEAD: As a foreign citizen who has recently graduated from one Westchester college (Manhattanville) while also taking a few courses at another (the State University of New York at Purchase), I dispute the popular belief that education in America is fast declining in comparison to that in other countries.


The Editorial Notebook;   Is the Peace Dividend at Risk?
LEAD: ''It looks as if we spent the peace dividend,'' lamented Senator Larry Pressler after the General Accounting Office doubled the estimated cost of the savings and loan bailout to as much as $500 billion.


When a Shipment of Plants Arrives
LEAD: NURSERY orders that were mailed a few months back are now being filled.
Cartons packed with live plants are arriving apace.
The thing to do, of course, is open the cartons and plant the plants immediately?
Right?
Wrong.
Opening the cartons as soon as possible is essential.
The plants have been smothered for many days, and upon arrival, they will need to receive some air.


Question of the Week;   How Can the N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: The N.H.L. should follow the example set by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, which ejects and suspends players for fighting.
These tough regulations have virtually eliminated fighting from the college game.
JOSEPH N. LAGOR
Pottstown, Pa.


Another Chapter Due In the Strange Story Of Peru's Election
LEAD: UNTIL a week ago, Mario Vargas Llosa, the Peruvian novelist, was cast as Peru's next president.
Then a political unknown, Alberto Fujimori, emerged as a serious challenger in last week's preliminary elections, surprising the foreign media and diplomats who had looked upon Mr.
Vargas Llosa with favor.


World Markets;   Europe's Hot Place to Bet on Stocks
LEAD: First it was Austria and then West Germany.
Norway got some notice.
Now it's springtime in Paris.


BEST SELLERS: April 15, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House,
$21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to inflitrate the ruthless Medusa
Bridage as part of a plot to trap his archenemy, Carlos the
Jackal.
2
2
8
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO!


Children Scramble for Eggs


Player Leads by 5 at PGA Seniors
LEAD: Gary Player has always found a way to insinuate himself into golf's elite, and he showed today that at 54, he hasn't forgotten how.


U.S. Prepares to Reduce Spying Posts in Germany
LEAD: As a result of the political upheaval in Eastern Europe, American intelligence officials are preparing to close down expensive electronic listening posts and to conduct a major re-evaluation of United States operations in the region.


Wall Street;   Cleaning Up Penny-Stock Fraud
LEAD: A new bill that would strengthen Federal oversight of the nation's ''penny stock'' market could be the acid test of just how serious the securities industry and Federal regulators are about tackling the widespread and chronic fraud that characterizes that marketplace.


Inquiry by H.U.D. Finds No Wrongdoing in Three No-Bid Contracts
LEAD: An internal investigation by the Department of Housing and Urban Development has found the appearance of favoritism but no wrongdoing in three no-bid contracts awarded last year to a former top aide to Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp and to two former Treasury Department officials, officials say.


How John Sayles Shuffled 'Shannon's Deal'
LEAD: When the writer John Sayles and the producer Stan Rogow first collaborated nearly a decade ago, the result was memorable in ways neither man had intended.
A project they deemed commercially lucrative and artistically intriguing - a film adaptation of ''The Clan of the Cave Bear,'' Jean M. Auel's best-selling novel about prehistoric tribes - failed spectacularly on both counts.


Data Bank/April 15, 1990


FILMING A BIG-GAME HUNT
LEAD: ''In the blood,'' an honest, often moving, always restrained and superbly photographed chronicle of a big-game hunting safari in Africa, will elicit wildly disparate reactions from its viewers as it travels to movie theaters across the nation.


Evening Hours;   Faceless Buildings, Faceless No More
LEAD: Guests at the Beaux Arts Ball of the Architectural League of New York let their imaginations take over.
The result?
Inventive headdresses inspired by famous buildings, from ancient Greece to Battery Park City.
Easy to wear?
Not exactly.
But fun?
Yes.


Ms. James to Wed Kevin J. Abrams
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
David Fred James of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Wendy Susan James and Kevin Jay Abrams, a son of Eileen Abrams of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Stuart Abrams of Great Neck, L.I.


The Revolution Is Today; Bureaucracy Is Forever
LEAD: FOR any politician who cannot deliver on a promise, ''the bureaucracy'' is a wonderful scapegoat.


Disa Johnson Engaged to Charles S. Cheston 3d
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Johnson of Carlisle, Mass., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Disa Johnson and Charles S. Cheston 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cheston Jr. of Topsfield, Mass.


Peru's New Frontrunner Vows Shake-Up on Coca and Rebels
LEAD: Alberto Fujimori, the 51-year-old son of Japanese immigrants who displaced Mario Vargas Llosa last week as presidential frontrunner, is vowing to shake up Peru, attacking coca cultivation and guerrilla violence and pushing for the entry of this Andean land into the booming economy of the Pacific.


Alive to the Rhythms of Veracruz
LEAD: IMAGINE New Orleans 40 years ago, before its plethora of skyscrapers and the disfigurement by the Superdome.
That will give you some sense of Veracruz: alive to rhythms day and night; slightly seedy around its elegant Latin edges; redolent of coffee, flowers and fish.
And like New Orleans, this city that was the Old


When The College Says No
LEAD: WITH the mid-April mailing of college admissions decisions, I find myself wondering what sort of parental offensives are about to be launched against selective admissions offices around the country.


Floral Expo Bursts Forth In Osaka
LEAD: EACH spring Japan is consumed by a delirium that accompanies the explosion into bloom of brilliantly colored cherry blossoms.
For a week or so every April, mountain forests and city parks throughout the country are suddenly awash in pink.
Millions of families are drawn from their homes, students abandon their books and workers leave their offices and factories to relax under the cherry trees.


A Tiny but Fashionable Spot for Dinner
LEAD: PRACTICALLY before Paul L'Abbee could say the word restaurant, he had one.
What opened in New Canaan early last year as a deli-pastry shop and showcase for a Pound Ridge, N.Y., catering business, quickly accelerated into a modest dining spot, with a few tables for lunch, tea and sampling.


Some Areas Showing Surges of Growth
LEAD: ALTHOUGH Long Island's population has grown only slightly since 1980 and the economy appears to be flagging, some areas are experiencing surges of growth and expansion.


Ex-Senator's Comeback Confuses Race in Florida
LEAD: Florida Democrats, sensing vulnerability in a first-term Republican Governor, sought to avoid the usual intra-party wrangling this year.
But their plan to unify early behind one candidate to unseat the Governor, Bob Martinez, has gone awry.


Some Missing Facts About Ducky the Swan
LEAD: The story of Ducky the one-winged swan [''A Wing and a Prayer,'' Opinion, March 18]  is very poignant and garners lots of sympathy for the case of saving critically disabled wildlife.
But there are a few facts missing from this romantic story.


Boomerang
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New Cachet for Old East 86th Street
LEAD: IN the two long blocks of East 86th Street between Lexington and Second Avenues, 11 storefronts stand empty.
The windows of Tempo, a small discount jewelry and gift store on the north side of the street at No. 163 near Third Avenue, are papered with notices telling customers the lease has been lost.


Wendy Moyer to Wed T. G. MacLean in May
LEAD: Wendy Ann Moyer and Thomas Gregory MacLean plan to marry in May.
Miss Moyer is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry S. Moyer Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her fiance is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard MacLean of Linthicum, Md.


Don King's House
LEAD: To the Editor:


Youths' Lesson: War Knows No Limits
LEAD: The young men and women came from South Africa, Northern Ireland, El Salvador, Lebanon and the Soviet Union, members of a group called Children of War.
And what surprised them when they spoke to New York City high school students, they said, was that the students seemed unaware that they, too, were living in a ''war zone.


THEIR MONEY WASN'T ENOUGH
LEAD:
ALFRED I. DU PONT
The Man and His Family.
By Joseph Frazier Wall.
Illustrated. 685 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $27.95.
THE CORPORATE STATE AND THE BROKER STATE
The Du Ponts and
American National Politics, 1925-1940.
By Robert F. Burk.
Illustrated. 359 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 15, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
ALMOST HEAVEN, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $4.95.) A
historical romance set in London's salons and Scotland's
Highlands.
2
105
THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berleley,
$4.50.) A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets
to the United States.


Making Himself Useful
LEAD: In his 12 years as governor of West Virginia, Arch A. Moore Jr. proved to be a rather industrious fellow.
In addition to his official duties, he apparently found time to work on behalf of all manner of lobbyists, coal companies and others whose business could benefit from the intercession of the state's chief executive.


Untamed Lake Pepin
LEAD: DENSELY wooded bluffs tower 400 feet over one of the world's great rivers; timber rattlesnakes nest in rocky outcrops while bald eagles soar overhead; hidden behind the bluffs, small farms nestle among green hills, shady pastures and clear trout streams.
To people who think of the Midwest as endless cornfields under a flat horizon, Lake Pepin, on the upper Mississippi River between Minnesota and Wisconsin, is a stunning surprise.


Astros End Their Bid For Record of 0-162
LEAD: After losing their first four games, the Houston Astros knew it would be tough to win against Orel Hershiser.
They didn't beat up on Hershiser, but they did beat the Los Angeles Dodgers, 7-3, today to become the last major league team to win this season.


Question of the Week;   How Can the N.H.L. Clean Up Its Act?
LEAD: The N.H.L. should adopt rules similar to the National Basketball Association's.
For fighting, the players should be ejected and fined.
Subsequent fighting should be cause for suspension, and with intent to injure should be cause for expelling a player for the season.
MICHAEL J. GIAMPAOLI
Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-11
Will China's rulers eventually fall?An eerie quiet pervades China, a year after the student upheaval.
But the calm masks potentially explosive currents.
Page 1


Currency;   Little Help From the Group of Seven
LEAD: After the meeting in Paris a week ago of the finance ministers of the Group of Seven industrialized nations, central banks in Japan, the United States and Europe sold dollars to support the weak Japanese yen.
But the intervention had little impact because the Group of Seven seemed only lukewarm in its concern.


Why is the Boss Wearing a Hula Skirt?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Part of the Problem Is Too Many Solutions
LEAD: THE end of the division of Europe and the waning of Soviet power have made the Western allies feel strangely insecure.
Until a few months ago, the East-West confrontation insured order and stability.
Now, with all the European pieces suddenly out of place, the allies are in a tizzy over how to reassemble them.


Insulting Canada
LEAD: To the Editor:


Betting History Offers a Lesson
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Nunn Retains Title
LEAD: Michael Nunn retained his International Boxing Federation middleweight title when he won a majority decision over Marlon Starling tonight at the Mirage here.


Rangers' Victory Didn't Come Easily
LEAD: The buzzer had sounded, but still the alarm in James Patrick's heart would not quiet.
Patrick, the Ranger defenseman, had not only survived as a target but had also dominated as a force against the Islanders.
And now he was sitting in a locker room choked with smoke, steam and palpable relief on Friday night, unable to calm down, his eyes darting nervously, his conversation loaded with apprehension.


Earthquake in the Northwest Closes One Border Crossing
LEAD: An earthquake capable of considerable damage shook northwest Washington and southeast British Columbia late Friday night, but there were no reports of serious damage or injuries.


Review/Dance;   Ghoulish Wit in Bill by Nina Martin
LEAD: Nina Martin's ''Date With Fate'' turned tough luck into grim fun.
With its ghoulishly witty text and ingeniously macabre choreography, this mixed-media creation presented by Nina Martin/Performance last Sunday night at Performance Space 122 suggested that life is governed by the whims of fate.


Airport's Expansion Plan Imperils Neighbors
LEAD: THE Westchester County Airport could be a valuable asset to residents of New York and Connecticut.
But the proposed expansion of the airport, on the state line in Harrison, N.Y., would reduce this asset to an environmental liability that will inevitably affect its Connecticut neighbors, altering our property values and our community's suburban character.


Single-Lever Faucets
LEAD: SINGLE-LEVER faucets like those found in many kitchens vary greatly in design.
Rotating-ball faucets are one common kind, distinguishable by the dome-shaped base of the handle.


Taxpayers Just Say No to Campaign Fund
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE OFFICER IS A JUNKIE
LEAD:
RUSH
By Kim Wozencraft.
260 pp. New York:
Random House. $18.95.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
Jamaica Fights Harassment Of Visitors


Not Every Dog Has His Dye
LEAD: ''THEY'RE NOT THE AVERAGEJU dogs you see on the street,'' says Oscar Ripamonti, understating the case, perhaps. ''They're like top models.'' He's referring to those of his clients, like the wet terrier above and the rainbow menagerie at right, who receive the ultimate treatment at Serafino, the dog-grooming salon and training school that his father founded in Milan more than 30 years ago.


Deirdre Corcoran to Marry Ray Foote 3d Next Month
LEAD: The engagement of Deirdre Mary-Charlene Corcoran to Ray Palmer Foote 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Foote Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., has been made known by her parents, Irene Corcoran and Dr.
Joseph R. Corcoran of Moorestown, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.


8 Die in Philippine Accident
LEAD: A delivery truck filled with soft drinks and about 35 hitchhikers lost its brakes and overturned today, killing at least 8 people, a survivor and hospital authorities reported.
Most of those killed were crushed to death by the cases of soda.
At least 27 people were injured.
The truck was reportedly delivering cases of Coca-Cola to Marawi city when the accident occurred near the town of Pantar in southern Lanao del Norte province.


In Tight Quarters, One-Dish Meals
LEAD: DO people who live in the country spend more time in their kitchens than city dwellers?
Manhattan apartment kitchens are so often like mine - an afterthought tucked away in a hall closet, the brilliant coup of some architect determined to make two tight little apartments fit where one would have been perfectly comfortable.


NEW HISTORIANS AND THE OLD WEST
LEAD: Joyce Carol Oates is credited with coining the word ''pathography'' to describe the work of biographers who choose to emphasize the personal faults of their subjects at the expense of a more balanced consideration of their contributions to society (''Unsettling the Old West,'' by Richard Bernstein, March 18).


Linda J. Kelly to Wed Frederick H. Bentzel Jr.
LEAD: Linda Joan Kelly and Frederick H. Bentzel Jr. are planning a May wedding, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Frank T. Kelly of Chatham Township, N.J., have announced.
Mr.
Bentzel is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bentzel of Lakeland, Fla.


Gardening as a Career: the Lure of a Dirty Job
LEAD: Weeding and raking and digging and planting have not typically led to high-status careers.
But these days, being a gardener is starting to sound better and better.


Work in Progress
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stephanie R. Maggart To Wed Philip Johnson
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James Richard Maggart of Houston have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Stephanie Ruth Maggart and Philip Davies Johnson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul H. Johnson of Guilford, Conn.


Holly Eastburn To Wed in June
LEAD: June wedding plans for Holly Hutchins Eastburn and Alan Douglas MacEwan, a son of Mrs.
Edwin Harrison MacEwan of Sugar Hill, N.H., and the late Mr.
MacEwan, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Eastburn 3d of Doylestown, Pa.


Rebecca Gaskin to Wed Yorke Lawson
LEAD: The engagement of Rebecca Louise Gaskin to Coleman Yorke Lawson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ferd O. Lawson Jr. of Darien, Conn., has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis J. Gaskin of Raleigh, N.C.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Gaskin, 24 years old, graduated from St.
Mary's College in Raleigh and Wake Forest University, and received a law degree from Emory University.


Evolution in Europe;   Ban on Ukraine Church Falls
LEAD: Priests from the Ukrainian Autocephalous Church were allowed to hold Easter services today for the first time since their church was banned by Stalin in 1930, the independent Rukh press service said.
An all-night service attended by several thousand people was held in Kiev at Pokrovsky Cathedral, which was temporarily handed back to the church for the occasion.


Bomb Near Hindu Temple Kills 5 in Northern India
LEAD: A bomb hidden in a tractor exploded outside a Hindu temple in the Punjab town of Ludhiana today, killing 5 people and wounding 25 who were watching a popular television program at a nearby shop, the police in the northern area of India reported.
The officers said militant Sikh separatists were responsible.


Pitching and Power Win Again for A's
LEAD: Bob Welch allowed only one hit through the first six innings and Mark McGwire hit a two-run homer today as the Oakland Athletics beat the Seattle Mariners, 3-0, to extend the longest losing streak in the major leagues this season to five games.


China Cuts Deposit Rates
LEAD: Interest rates on bank deposits here have been reduced by 1.26 percentage points in a move intended to stimulate China's sluggish economy.


U.S. Bars Chinese Role At Talks on Air Pollution
LEAD: To avoid violating sanctions imposed on China last year because of its crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators, the Administration has excluded Beijing from an international conference on air pollution and climatic change, even though the Chinese burn more industrial coal than any other country, officials said today.


Mandela Visits London To Thank Supporters


Exhibition on Titanic At South St. Seaport
LEAD: On April 15, 1912, the Titanic sank on its maiden voyage from Southampton, England, to New York.
Items retrieved from the ship and other memorabilia relating to the voyage will be on view beginning on Wednesday at the South Street Seaport Museum, 207 Front Street.


Bowing to Protests, King Dissolves Nepal Assembly
LEAD: King Birendra dissolved Nepal's national assembly today and accepted the resignation of his Prime Minister after a weekend of increasingly angry protests here over the pace of democratic change.


Market Place;   UAL Stock's Unhappy Past
LEAD: WHY is the stock of the UAL Corporation trading around $160 a share, when both the company and its unions value it at $201 a share in their latest buyout agreement?
The memory of last October may have much to do with it.


Earth Day's 'Planetism'
LEAD: In celebration of the 20th recycling of Earth Day, the folk musician Glen McClure will perform a concert in Rochester on an instrument made entirely of garbage.


Dr. Harold Fuerst, 80, Ex-Head Of Preventable Diseases Bureau
LEAD: Dr.
Harold T. Fuerst, who retired in 1967 as Assistant Commissioner for Preventable and Chronic Diseases after 27 years in the New York City Health Department, died on Friday at New York Hospital after a brief illness.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Edberg Tops Krickstein: Stefan Edberg, coming back from 2-4 deficits in each set, defeated Aaron Krickstein, 6-4, 7-5, yesterday to capture the men's title at the Japan Open tennis championships in Tokyo.


Falling Revenues and Rising Costs Force Counties to Trim More Services
LEAD: Rockland County was surprised to discover recently that it was the only jurisdiction in the lower Hudson River Valley still operating patrol boats, at an annual cost of $300,000.
Now the service is being ended, County Executive John Grant said, ''because we're looking everywhere to save money.''


Ryan, Ruth and Mr. Schneider
LEAD: A NOTE was superimposed on the television screen while Nolan Ryan was pitching for the Rangers against the Yankees on Saturday.
It said that Ryan, at age 43, is the oldest player in the major leagues, and to emphasize his antiquity, the individual in charge of such items added this fact: Ryan is so old he once faced Eddie Mathews in a major league game (and, it happened, struck him out, in 1966, one of the first of some 5,000 strikeouts over his 24-year major league career).


Outdoors: Wild Turkeys Test Patience and Senses
LEAD: IF your hearing is excellent, your eyes sharp and you can sit motionless for hours at a time, you might be able to become a successful hunter of wild turkeys.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of April 15, 1990:
MONDAY
Genuine Parts Co
Pope &amp; Talbot Inc
B F Goodrich Co
Russ Tog Inc
Eli Lilly &amp; Co
Southern Co
Lubys Cafeterias Inc
TUESDAY
AAR Corp
Mellon Bk Corp
American Cap Mgmt
Reliance Group Hldgs Inc
CSX Corp
Smuckers J M Co
Dana Corp
Southern Ind Gas &amp; Elec Co
Eastern Utils Assoc
Suntrust Bks Inc
Hawaiian Elec Inds Inc
Teco Energy Inc
Honeywell Inc
V F Corp
ICM Ppty Invs Inc
WEDNESDAY
Alberto-Culver Co
IMC Fertilizer Group Inc
American Home Prods
Mexico Fd


Dianne Wallace Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Dianne Wallace and Lowell M. Schulman were married yesterday at the Carlyle in New York by Justice Samuel G. Fredman of State Supreme Court in White Plains.
The bride is a daughter of Stella Paul of Boca Raton, Fla., and the late Jacob Zwillich of New York.
Her husband is the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.


Y.&amp; R. Reorganizes
LEAD: Young &amp; Rubicam said Friday that it was reorganizing its New York office into a single, unified agency, dismantling the tripartite structure it adopted in 1987.
John Glorieux and K. Jane Brite, each of whom was a group general manager, were named New York general manager and associate general manager, respectively.


Publicity Is Enriching Mapplethorpe Estate
LEAD: Attacks by Senator Jesse Helms and, more recently, Cincinnati police officials on the touring show of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe are making money for the artist's estate, the executor, Michael Ward Stout, said last week.
The political pressure has given a strong lift to prices for the photographer's work.


Foreman Fights Jameson
LEAD: George Foreman, the former heavyweight champion, returns to action Tuesday night in a 10-round bout against Mike Jameson at Caesars Tahoe.


Greta Garbo, 84, Screen Icon Who Fled Her Stardom, Dies
LEAD: Greta Garbo, the enigmatic and elusive star of some of Hollywood's most memorable romantic movies of the 1930's and a 50-year focus of curiosity and myth, died yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 84 years old.


Evolution in Europe;   Miners' and Truckers' Strike In Mongolia Protests Layoffs
LEAD: Truck drivers joined coal miners today in a strike supported by one of Mongolia's largest opposition groups, residents said.


FINANCE BRIEFS


Soviet Anti-Semitism Survey Shows Bias
LEAD: To the Editor:


Runner's Shortest Path: Straight Line
LEAD: POOR Pat Petersen.
In the 1987 New York City Marathon he ran 26.2 miles in under two hours, yet lost to the winner, Ibrahim Hussein, by 60.02 seconds.


First Illinois Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Illinois Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,951,000
4,287,000
Per share
.19
.17


Sunwest Fincl Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunwest Fincl Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,262,000
7,048,000
Per share
.50
.75
Shares outst
9,399,327
9,343,832


Poverty Rate Is Up for the Very Young
LEAD: At a time when poverty is on the decline among all other age groups in the United States, the poverty rate for children under 6 years of age is rising, an analysis of Federal population figures shows.


First Commercial Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,769,000
1,727,000
Per share
.47
.46


Progress Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progress Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
201,000
815,000
Per share
.20
.81


N.F.L. Free Agency: How Free Is Free?
LEAD: DON MATTINGLY of the Yankees, instead of waiting a year to become a free agent - but using the leverage of free agency -signs a five-year contract for more than $19 million.
At the same time, 274 restricted free agents in the National Football League are eligible to sign with other teams, but not one receives an offer.


How to End Tax Welfare for the Wealthy;   Minority Workers
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Economics of Popular Discontent
LEAD: There is a subtle, subversive political force at work in China - economic discontent.


Valley National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
8,423,000
8,423,000
Share earns
.66
.66


A Humdrum Style Gives Nunn No. 35
LEAD: Michael Nunn may have won again, but he continues to give action a bad name.


Surely, Webern Is Something to Sneeze At;   Misery Loves Company
LEAD: To the Editor:


Topics of The Times;   Truth in Budgeting
LEAD: The Federal Government is now responsible for more than $5 trillion in various types of loan guarantees, insurance plans and other credit programs.
The loan programs give individuals access to education, housing and start-up capital for new business; the insurance protects farmers, bank depositors and retirees.


Capitals Eliminate Devils, 3-2
LEAD: The Devils were eliminated from the playoffs tonight as the Washington Capitals won, 3-2, to take their Patrick Division semifinal series by four games to two.


First Commerce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commerce Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,732,000
6,628,000
Per share
.62
.53


Talks on Manchester Prison Siege Break Off
LEAD: Talks between inmates and officers have broken down in Britain's longest prison siege, which entered its third week today.


Faulty Power Unit Replaced In Space Shuttle Discovery
LEAD: The space agency installed a new power unit in the shuttle Discovery today and began recharging the batteries of the Hubble Space Telescope.


Yanks' Bullpen Does It All
LEAD: The Yankees beat the Texas Rangers, 3-1, yesterday on a day that would have been the 27th day of spring training had baseball proceeded to have a normal-length spring training after the club owners' lockout ended.


Study Finds Bias in Way Women Are Evaluated for Heart Bypasses
LEAD: Women who have bypass surgery for heart disease are much sicker and slightly older than men who have the surgery, researchers said yesterday, adding that the finding could explain why those women were more likely to die as a result.


Rifts Imperil Europe's No-Border Plan
LEAD: The European Community's plan to remove all internal borders after 1992, long viewed as the most important symbol of new European unity, is being threatened by disagreements over how to deal with migration, asylum, drugs and terrorism.


Bush and the Blacks
LEAD: Commenting on the strange popularity of President Bush among blacks, Prof.
Lawrence Bobo of the University of Wisconsin argued that Mr.
Bush ''hasn't done anything seriously damaging of the sort that seemed to happen repeatedly'' under Ronald Reagan.


Evolution in Europe;   SOVIETS REBUFFED BY CHENEY ON PLAN CURBING SEA ARMS
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has rebuffed a Soviet suggestion that the Bush Administration's new strategic arms proposal be broadened to include constraints on sea-based missiles.


Fraud Charges Rise as Many Aliens Seek to Use '88 Rulings
LEAD: Thousands of aliens who do not have papers to stay in the United States are trying to take advantage of two openings in the legalization program that resulted from Federal court rulings.
The issue has led to allegations of fraud and Government foot-dragging.


'Twin Peaks' May Provide A Ratings Edge for ABC
LEAD: ABC, which already broadcasts the hottest new television show, ''America's Funniest Home Videos,'' has made a serious move toward taking over prime-time leadership next fall based on the unexpected success of ''Twin Peaks.''


Drought in the Southwest Underscores Consequences of Growth


First Peoples Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Peoples Financial Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,760,000
b3,619,000
Per share
.99
1.17
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $913,000, or 30 cents a share.


Collective Farms in Czechoslovakia Score One Success for Communism
LEAD: While all the talk these days is about the failures of Communism, this village's 10,000-acre farm cooperative, with its uninterrupted fields of wheat and alfalfa and dozens of powerful tractors, is testimony to one of Communism's few economic successes.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.


How to End Tax Welfare for the Wealthy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Saatchi Resigns CPC
LEAD: Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising resigned its business with CPC International on Friday.
CPC had taken its Skippy peanut butter and Hellmann's and Best Foods mayonnaise accounts from Saatchi in the past 14 months, leaving the agency with only its Mazola corn oil products and its television-buying assignment.


A New Role for the Anti-Apartheid T-Shirt
LEAD: The war against apartheid is proving to be good business for manufacturers of the politically relevant T-shirt.


Critic's Notebook;   Professional Judgment vs. Visual Imperatives in TV News
LEAD: Anyone who judges the newsworthiness of events by the pictures on the nightly news is likely to come away with a dim comprehension of recent goings-on in places like Lithuania, Nepal, the Natal province of South Africa, the Arab villages of the West Bank and other hot spots.
It is a constant challenge to television journalists.


Hopefuls Closing In on D-Day
LEAD: The two favorites for the Kentucky Derby are through prepping, but more than a dozen potential challengers will have a final tuneup over the next eight days.


Books of The Times;   The Rise and Fall of a Thoroughly Vicious Gang
LEAD:
The Westies
Inside the Hell's Kitchen Irish Mob
By T. J. English
384 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95


Row, Row, Row Your Bike
LEAD: An inventor in Miami has devised a new attachment for bicycles that allows you to work your upper body as well as your legs.


Pirates Shine In Crystal Ball
LEAD: THE Pittsburgh Pirates are hardly shoo-ins to win the National League pennant, but don't rule them out.
By one persuasive pair of leading indicators, the best bet in baseball is that the Pirates will do better this year than their 74-88 record last season.


Evolution in Europe;   Crowd Attacks K.G.B. Site in Armenia
LEAD: About 1,000 protesters attacked the K.G.B. headquarters in the capital of the Armenian republic late Saturday, pelting the building with stones and torches, the official Soviet press agency said today.
One man was killed in the violence.


Separatists Seized in Kashmir
LEAD: Indian security forces clashed repeatedly with Muslim militants today in the capital of the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir, making dozens of arrests.


Chronicle
LEAD: SID CAESAR and IMOGENE COCA will be welcomed with a fan letter from Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS when they open their show tomorrow night at Michael's Pub in New York.
In the show, they will recreate some of the pieces they made famous on ''Your Show of Shows,'' a comedy-variety program that was broadcast from 1950 to 1954.


Securities Loss for Japanese
LEAD: The Yamaichi Securities Company, one of Japan's largest brokers, confirmed today that the bankruptcy of a customer in the recent stock market plunge had cost it about $45 million.


Renovation Program Is Running Out of Abandoned Housing
LEAD: Four years after deciding to spend hundreds of millions of dollars to build affordable housing, New York City finds itself at a surprising pass: it is running out of abandoned buildings to renovate.


Kidney Peril Found in the Pain Reliever Ibuprofen
LEAD: The popular pain reliever ibuprofen can cause kidney failure in people with mild kidney disease, according to a new study.


Pepsico's Spending Plan
LEAD: Pepsico Inc., the giant food and beverage conglomerate, plans to spend $1.1 billion this year to expand its worldwide operations.


Health Insurers Increase Rates For the Elderly
LEAD: The cost of private health insurance for the elderly is rising sharply, straining the budgets of millions of people who live on Social Security checks and fueling demands in Congress and the states for tighter regulation of this insurance.


In Old Jerusalem, Christians and Muslims Protest Settlement
LEAD: Thousands of Christians celebrated Easter today at the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, while around the corner, protesters paraded outside the four buildings that 150 Jewish settlers occupied last week.


Mannes Concert Series
LEAD: A three-concert festival of contemporary music will begin next Monday at the Mannes College of Music, 150 West 85th Street, at 8 P.M.
The Mannes Contemporary Ensemble (Madeleine Shapiro, director) and the Mannes Percussion Ensemble (Howard Van Hyning, director) will be joined by the composers John Bergamo, John Cage, Tan Dun, Lukas Foss and Otto Luening.


First Executive In Bond Swap
LEAD: The First Executive Corporation said Friday that it had sold a small portion of its faltering ''junk bond'' portfolio, agreeing to swap bonds with a face value of $40 million for several large Florida real estate projects owned by the FPA Corporation, a Pennsylvania real estate developer.


Comments by Pathe Chief
LEAD: An attempt by the Pathe Communications Corporation to acquire MGM/ UA Communications has run into new and unfavorable publicity.


Celtics Unravel Knicks, 101-94
LEAD: The Knicks' game plan against the Boston Celtics for much of the past decade has undergone little change.
It has almost always been designed to pay special attention to Larry Bird, Kevin McHale and Robert Parish, the superstar front line.


L.I. Opposition Blocking Weather Radar Station
LEAD: Opposition from residents of Sayville, L.I., to a proposed weather radar station there has forced the National Weather Service to look elsewhere in Suffolk County for a site for its forecast office, now in Rockefeller Center.


Montreal Reaches Adams Final
LEAD: The Montreal Canadiens, with Russ Courtnall scoring two third-period goals and Claude Lemieux another, beat the Buffalo Sabres by 5-2 tonight to wrap up their National Hockey League playoff series in six games.


Teaneck's Clergy Struggles to Mend Its Wounded Town
LEAD: Just a few paces from the neat backyard where a black teen-ager was fatally shot last week by a white police officer, the Rev.
Robert Merritt struggled today to inspire the unusually quiet congregation of the First Baptist Church of Teaneck.


A Champion-Turned-Critic
LEAD: The signposts of his life were strewn all about in the old flat he and his wife moved into just days before.
Along one wall were scores of unopened cartons, filled with books and papers, the necessities of almost two decades of writing.
In a far corner sat a gleaming barbell, the kind he lifted to win an Olympic gold medal in 1960 and set four world records during an eight-year period in which he was known as ''the world's strongest man.


New York's Debt, Unrolled
LEAD: A wondrous idea has just burst from the financial swamp in Albany.
It could, in a stroke, eliminate most of New York's huge accumulated deficit.
It could reduce reliance on ever more fiscal gimmicks.
It could impose future fiscal discipline.
But hold the applause.


Smith Cools Mets As Expos Win, 3-1
LEAD: The Mets continued to wander through the first week of the season without their bats, and tonight, they were tamed by Zane Smith, a pitcher who had lost 10 games in a row since his last victory last May 6.


Killed Book Is Haunting Time Warner
LEAD: An abrupt decision by the publisher Little, Brown &amp; Company, a subsidiary of Time Warner Inc., to cancel the publication of a book that addresses subjects of acute sensitivity to Time has set off a bitter dispute about who killed the book and why.


Killing the Messenger
LEAD: Fifty-three journalists were killed worldwide in 1989, twice the previous year's toll.
This grim news is contained in a survey prepared by the Committee to Protect Journalists, a monitoring group.
It suggests that Iraq's recent execution of Farzad Bazoft, a British-based journalist, as an alleged spy, is only a dramatic instance of a disturbing trend.


Gasoline Explosion Kills One in Tampa


'Epic Debate' Led to Heinz Tuna Plan
LEAD: Until last week, it was easy to describe relations between the H. J. Heinz Company, the world's largest tuna canner, and environmental groups trying to save dolphins tangled in tuna nets. ''We were the bitterest of enemies,'' one defender of the dolphins said.


Reebok Selects Hill, Holliday
LEAD: Reebok International has selected Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos as its new domestic advertising agency, executives at agencies in the review said Friday.
Reebok's former agency, Chiat/ Day/Mojo, initially resigned the $40 million account after it was placed in review in January, but then accepted an invitation to join the competition in March.


Surely, Webern Is Something to Sneeze At
LEAD: To the Editor:


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnett Banks Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
15,500,000
62,400,000
Per share
.25
1.00
The bank-holding company said the decline in earnings was due to a previously announced strenthening of Barnett's reserve for loan losses, increasing by $66 million during the quarter to $316.6 million.


National Penn Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Penn Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,212,000
1,975,000
Share earns
.83
.74
Shares outst
2,666,994
2,660,656


How to End Tax Welfare for the Wealthy;   Return to Old I.R.A.'s
LEAD: To the Editor:


Indiana Journal;   In a Court For Youth, Judgment By Peers
LEAD: As he sat in the jury box pondering the fate of the accused, Jason Woodcock thought about his last visit to Montgomery County Court.
He was in the defendant's chair then.


'Fujimori Phenomenon' in Lima Slum
LEAD: Up a sandy road, five blocks beyond the last street with electricity, behind a shanty's flimsy walls of cardboard and brown paper, Walter Trejo Malqui and two friends sat recently around a wooden table and talked politics.


Pikeville National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pikeville National Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,612,300
1,676,123
Share earns
.64
.66


Century Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
560,000
905,000
Per share
.10
.16


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trustmark Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,007,332
7,182,670
Per share
.71
.73


Fuel Leak at Shelters Is Reported
LEAD: As much as 20,000 gallons of fuel have leaked from the elaborate system of underground shelters that the Church Universal Triumphant built to be safe from nuclear Armageddon, posing a major threat to the trout fishery near the northern border of Yellowstone National Park, state officials say.


Patrick Is Filling Leetch's Skates
LEAD: James Patrick can't remember if the dream happened when he was lost in sleep one night or lost in thought one day, but he can otherwise recall its details perfectly.


Long Road Trip
LEAD: TWO years ago, Dan Gallagher built new dugouts for Coffey Field and coached his Fordham baseball team to its second consecutive National Collegiate Athletic Association Regional appearance.
Losses in the Regional to Clemson and the eventual national champion, Stanford, are just memories now.
So are the dugouts.


Wells, Rich, Greene Deal Shows Strength of French
LEAD: The effort by French advertising companies to establish themselves as international marketers took a striking turn on Friday when Wells, Rich, Greene announced that it had sold a large minority interest to a French advertising conglomerate.


Sabicas, 78, Gypsy Solo Guitarist Who Began Performing as a Boy
LEAD: Sabicas, the Spanish gypsy who took the guitar out of the flamenco troupe and established himself as one of the finest solo guitarists of his time, died early Saturday at St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan after suffering multiple strokes and pneumonia.
He was 78 years old and had lived in Manhattan for more than 30 years.


Harmonia Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harmonia Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,085,000
1,070,000
Per share
.23
-
There are no common share earnings for the year-ago period because the company converted to stock form of ownership from mutual on Nov.


Citizens Banking reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Banking (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,797,000
4,745,000
Per share
.72
.71


U.S. to Study Ways To Combat Frailty Among the Elderly
LEAD: The Government will sponsor a three-year, $2.9 million research project intended to reduce or prevent frailty in the elderly, two Federal agencies announced today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The cost of health insurance for the elderly is rising sharply, straining the budgets of millions of people who live on Social Security checks and fueling demands for tighter regulation of this insurance.
The monthly cost of many types of ''medigap'' insurance, which helps the elderly and disabled to pay medical bills not covered by Medicare, rose at least 20 percent this year.


Beijing Is Quiet on Anniversary of Democracy Protests


How to End Tax Welfare for the Wealthy;   Social Security Juggling
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fifth Cabdriver Is Shot to Death in the Bronx
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was shot and killed late Saturday night on a deserted street in the Fordham section of the Bronx, the police said.


Town Gets Clean Water As Paper Gets a Pulitzer
LEAD: William Coughlin, the editor of a tiny 81-year-old newspaper in North Carolina called The Washington Daily News, is known around town as a man who likes to read the fine print.


Bond Market Ignores Fall In Oil Prices
LEAD: The bond market, usually sensitive to swings in commodity prices, has cast a blind eye to the recent decline in oil prices.


Chronicle
LEAD: RICHARD DE GENNARO, director of the New York Public Library, returns to Harvard University as the Roy E. Larsen Librarian of Harvard College.
On June 1, Mr.
De Gennaro will succeed YEN-TSAI FENG, who is retiring after 10 years.


State Street Boston reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State Street Boston (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
27,610,000
24,020,000
Per share
.75
.66


Pennview Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennview Savings
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
218,000
234,000
Per share
.44
.47
6mo net inc
420,000
425,000
Per share
.85
.86


Marchers in Houston Protest 2 Killings by Police Officers
LEAD: More than 200 people marched through downtown on Saturday to protest the killings of two blacks by Houston police officers.


Team of Scientists Sees Substantial Warming of Earth
LEAD: Assembled by the United Nations in an attempt to arrive at an international consensus on global warming, a team of scientists says it is a ''virtual certainty'' that the temperature of the earth's surface will rise substantially in the next century.


Southern National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern National Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
5,547,000
5,195,000
Share earns
.28
.26


Kobe Journal;   How Much Golf Is Too Much at Clubhouse Japan?
LEAD: More than the love of expensive German cars or baseball, the almost fanatical passion in Japan for golf, with its sense of open spaces and luxury, offers insight into the way wealth and the discovery of leisure are influencing this country.


Dinkins Administration Bargains in Good Faith With City Unions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Agency Uses Brain Power To Lure Prospective Clients
LEAD: THE Deutsch advertising agency has taken on the toughest client it has ever had - itself.


Holiday Trappings


Topics of The Times;   A Bargain for the Schools
LEAD: There is little dispute that New York City's schools are seriously troubled.
The concept of decentralized authority and community control envisioned 20 years ago has been eroded.
Now, education is often stifled by a sclerotic central bureaucracy or by patronage and corruption in community school boards.


Amsouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amsouth Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
20,497,000
20,868,000
Per share
.86
.86
Shares outst
23,834,000
24,244,000


Review/Opera;   The Pagan's Progress in 'Siegfried'
LEAD: There was little acknowledgement of Good Friday at the Metropolitan Opera.
Continuing this spring's re-enactment of last season's new ''Ring'' productions, the Met played the third of Wagner's four operas in the cycle, ''Siegfried.''


A New Era?
LEAD: THE quarterfinal showing of Arthur Carrington 3d, a 16-year-old tennis player from Boston, in last week's Easter Bowl junior championships in Miami provided more evidence that young black players are making enormous strides in a sport that has long been dominated by white players.


Review/Television;   Starting Over in 'Shannon's Deal'
LEAD: Meet Jack Shannon.
In the Reagan 80's, he had what was supposed to be all - a beautiful wife and daughter, upscale perks and a powerhouse job as a lawyer representing corporations.
Then Jack began to fall from grace.
His addiction to poker put him heavily into debt with assorted mobsters.
His wife left him.


Limited and May Promote Officers
LEAD: The Limited Inc., the chain of specialty apparel stores, has named Thomas G. Hopkins vice chairman.


The Endowment That Has Stayed Out of Trouble
LEAD: Lynne V. Cheney, who has been unanimously confirmed by the Senate for a second four-year term as chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, was reflecting not too long ago on the relationship between her agency and the arts endowment.


Review/Theater;   Bearing the Tragedies of Old Age
LEAD: Jo Carson's ''Day Trips'' is personal rather than issue oriented, but it raises troubling questions about family responsibility and about the prolongation of life by artificial means.
Ms.
Carson, a Texan storyteller and author, approaches her sensitive subject without sentimentality or its opposite, cynicism.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-9


U.S.-Canada Trade Border Blurs
LEAD: The 16-month-old free-trade agreement between Canada and the United States, intended to eliminate virtually all tariffs and duties in that enormous trading relationship by 1999, is already having some unexpected grass-roots side effects, promoting a wide array of bilateral business and civic partnerships.


Eldorado Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldorado Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,004,000
933,000
Per share
.36
.34
Per share figures are adjusted for a 10 percent stock dividend paid in February.


Home Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Financial Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,148,000
2,165,000
Per share
.48
.49


Evolution in Europe;   John Paul Says a Prayer For Lithuania's Success
LEAD: Celebrating the revival of democracy across the globe, Pope John Paul II offered an Easter prayer today that Lithuanian hopes for independence would be realized through discussions with Moscow.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
Housing Starts
March
Consumer Price Index
March
Industrial Production
March
Capacity Utilization
March
Wednesday


Player Holds On To Win by 2 Shots
LEAD: Gary Player figured that holding onto a five-shot lead while being stalked at close range by both Jack Nicklaus and Lee Trevino today in the final round of the PGA Seniors Championship would take all the resources his 54-year-old body could muster.


In a Savings Move, the Army Is Proposing Increased Cuts in Troops
LEAD: Responding to increased pressure to reduce the Pentagon budget, the Army has proposed cutting its active forces more than it had announced it would.


Business and the Law;   Biden's Challenge To Federal Courts
LEAD: ''THE real problem here is that Federal judges have lifetime tenure,'' said a senior Judiciary Committee aide last week, lamenting Article III of the Constitution. ''That would make it difficult to make judges accountable and force them to follow the Biden Act.''


Rain Alone Won't Ease Latest Drought in West
LEAD: The plentiful and cheap water that made much of the West rich, powerful and populous has now turned scarce and ever more costly to find.


Cove Hoover, 67, Dies; Newspaper Publisher
LEAD: Cove Hoover, former publisher of newspapers in New York, Illinois and Pennsylvania, died here on Friday at the age of 67.
The cause of death was not given.


Livery Cars Are Like Taxis Where Few Taxis Are Found
LEAD: Livery car companies, now apparently the targets of a killer or killers, grew out of the huge demand for car service across New York City.


Shelton Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelton Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
290,000
353,000
Per share
.26
.31
9mo net inc
861,000
1,300,000
Per share
.76
1.10


Statewide Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Statewide Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
9,721,000
b6,330,000
Per share
-
.59
b-Net income
Latest first quarter results included a provision for loan losses of $13 million, bringing the total reserve to $20 million.


People's Savings Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* People's Savings Fincl
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
707,000
651,000
Per share
.33
.27


Evolution in Europe;   A Mood of Rejoicing Takes Over Warsaw At a Time of Rebirth
LEAD: At the Church of the Carmelite Fathers the tableau depicting the tomb of Jesus is dominated by an Easter-egg-shaped globe suspended from the ceiling.
Painted over the continent of Europe are two giant red chains, links burst apart, which are sinking into the oceans.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Baroid Corp., Houston, a supplier of titanium and petroleum services and equipment, appointed Joseph S. Compofelice chief financial officer.
He will remain president of Baroid's two oilfield equipment operations, Shaffer Inc. and Atlas Bradford.


Chronicle
LEAD: CHARLES DYSON has been appointed chairman of the trustees of the Ballet Theater Foundation, which runs the American Ballet Theater.
Mr.
Dyson succeeds MELVILLE STRAUS, who has been chairman since 1983.
Mr.
Dyson, 80, is the former chairman of Dyson-Kissner-Moran Corporation, a private investment company.


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-America Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,432,312
2,854,000
Share earns
.40
.47


When Looking for Sin, Cincinnati Looks South
LEAD: This small town across the Ohio River from Cincinnati is hardly as seamy as Times Square, but it is the closest thing to it in an area that has nearly gone into convulsions over a photography exhibition that shows images of homosexual acts and nude children.


Tides of Change Lap at Soviet Sports
LEAD: Amid the economic crisis and political reforms in the Soviet Union, sports authorities are straining to preserve a costly system that has made the Soviet Union the leading country in the Olympics for almost 20 years.


Physician From Mexico Arrested In '85 Slaying of U.S. Drug
LEAD: Two news organizations reported today that one of the suspects in the 1985 torture and slaying of a United States undercover drug agent had been captured by bounty hunters in Mexico and turned over to the authorities in this country for a fee.


Olympic Champion Taking On Boston
LEAD: Gelindo Bordin is not your ordinary marathon runner.


Europe's New Home, Next to the Old
LEAD: How can a soon-to-be-united Germany fit in a no-longer-divided Europe?
Two sensible themes emerge from discussions by European and American leaders.
Germany will remain in NATO, at least for several years, but with substantially reduced military forces.
And NATO members will cooperate with their neighbors to the East on new pan-European security structures to stand alongside the old alliances.


Heritage Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Financial Services
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,680,000
1,747,000
Per share
.42
.44


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of Passover, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations will remain in effect.


First of America Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First of America Bank Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
32,845,000
31,936,000
Per share
1.59
1.53
Results have been restated to reflect the Nov. 1, 1989 acquisition of Midwest Financial Group Inc.


Question Box
LEAD: Rangers and Circus
Q.
Years ago, whenever the Rangers made the National Hockey League playoffs, they sometimes had to play games away from Madison Square Garden because the circus was being held there.
How often did this disruption occur and when did the Rangers last play a home playoff game on different ice?


Graf Adds a Title, Trouncing Sanchez
LEAD: Today Steffi Graf reminded herself and her challenger, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, of the way a champion behaves upon reaching a final: like a demolitions expert.


Spark M. Matsunaga Dies at 73; Senator Led Fight for Reparations
LEAD: Senator Spark M. Matsunaga of Hawaii, a longtime proponent of peaceful resolution of disputes and Soviet-American cooperation in space exploration, died of cancer early yesterday in Toronto General Hospital.
He was 73 years old.


Head of Sara Lee Division Joining Maker of Pet Food
LEAD: Thomas D. MacLeod Jr., president and chief executive of the bakery division of the Sara Lee Corporation, has resigned to join the Iams Company, a privately held maker of premium pet foods, as president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
MacLeod, 42, will report to Clay Mathile, chairman and chief executive.


Special Schools Proposed Where Teachers Could Learn by Teaching
LEAD: Administrators of America's leading education schools are proposing a radical redesign of teacher education, in which universities and public schools would join forces to train teachers the way medical schools use hospitals to train doctors.


Lord Bruce-Gardyne, British Monetarist, 60
LEAD: Lord Bruce-Gardyne, a former British Treasury Minister and fierce advocate of monetarism, died on Sunday after a long illness.
He was 60 years old.


Reds Crunch Braves for Fifth in a Row
LEAD: Cincinnati won its fifth straight game under its new manager, Lou Piniella, as Eric Davis and Chris Sabo each hit three-run homers today to pace the unbeaten Reds to a 13-6 victory over the Atlanta Braves.


Burlington Buyback
LEAD: Burlington Resources Inc.'s directors authorized the repurchase of up to 10 million shares of the company's common stock on the open market.
The company has bought about nine million shares at an average price of $41.67 a share under a 10-million-share repurchase program authorized in 1988.
The company has about 146.3 million shares outstanding.


Antitrust Extension Is Weighed
LEAD: The Administration is considering a significant extension of antitrust laws to strike at American subsidiaries of foreign companies that are found to engage in price-fixing, the carving up of markets and other anti-competitive practices in their home markets.


Evergreen Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evergreen Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,453,000
2,583,000
Per share
.53
.56


Veteran of Earth Day 1970 Looks to a New World
LEAD: Twenty years ago Denis Hayes wanted to change the nation.
Now, dissatisfied with progress over the decades, he is trying to change the world.


Life and Death in the Three-Four Precinct
LEAD: Detective Sgt.
Andrew Eanniello had spent the afternoon cruising the double-parked streets of Washington Heights, looking for a man and a woman suspected of robbing and killing two drug sellers.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Soviet Sports Officials Struggle to Save System
Amid economic problems and political change, sports authorities in the Soviet Union are straining to save a costly system that has made their country the leading medal winner in the Olympics for almost 20 years.


Cup Crews Courting Women
LEAD: Female sailors are being recruited for key positions in America's Cup campaigns, opening up the possibility for the first time in yachting history that a woman could sail as skipper of a cup contender.


Metro Matters;   Society's Child Falls Victim To Its Frailties
LEAD: Five weeks from today, the State of New York will hand Dwayne Gosso $40 and a bus ticket to nowhere.
Wherever he goes, you'll pay.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Thomas J. Lipton Inc., to Ogilvy &amp; Mather, for an undisclosed new food product.


A Life in America for a 64-Year-Old Soviet Comedy
LEAD: Arms outstretched, Bronson Pinchot is walking purposefully across the stage at Circle in the Square to greet an unexpected visitor at his cousin Zoya's apartment in 1920's Moscow.
His peach-colored peasant shirt, his black pants and his longish black hair billowing as he walks, the star of the television comedy series ''Perfect Strangers'' looks very


Bridge
LEAD: The player who can bring home a difficult slam will always be a popular partner and teammate.
To find out whether you are entitled to plaudits, plan the play in six spades on the diagramed deal with the East-West cards concealed.


Review/Pop;   The Spirit of Jane Siberry
LEAD: In ''Bound by the Beauty,'' the title song of Jane Siberry's fifth album, the Canadian singer and songwriter imagines returning to life 500 years from now and plunging ecstatically into nature.
The first thing she is going to do, she vows, is to find a forest, lie down in the leaves and listen to the birds sing.


Review/Pop Salsa, Cumbia and Real Conviction
LEAD: Joe Arroyo's packed show at the Palladium on Thursday night brought out the Colombian community to cheer on its home-grown star.
Mr.
Arroyo is becoming an increasingly important presence on both the salsa scene - traditionally dominated by New York and Puerto Rican bands -and in the Caribbean and world music markets as well.


Metropolitan Federal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Federal (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
23,077,000
b1,664,000
Per share
-
.45
Shares outst
3,719,596
3,714,249
9mo net loss
26,496,000
b5,977,000
Per share
-
1.60
Shares outst
3,719,596
3,698,292


Market Grows Competitive for Polish Papers
LEAD: Naked bulbs illuminate the stretch of yellow rooms - a kindergarten just 16 months ago - that houses the Gazeta Wyborcza, the Solidarity newspaper.
Rustic conditions - the photo lab is a converted lavatory and most reporters tap out their articles on manual typewriters - add to the newsroom's excitement.


MOST OF SENATORS GO OUT OF STATE FOR CONTRIBUTIONS
LEAD: More than half the senators seeking re-election this year are financing their campaigns largely from outside their home states, in a profound change from the traditional practice of politicians' relying on their constituents for contributions.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Before on Easter, it was difficult.
Many of my friends were in prison.
Now it is not a time to be sad.
Even though there is an economic crisis, things are not so bad.
We finally have our own Government.''
- Maria Wnuk, at St. Stanislaw's Church in Warsaw.
[A1:1.]


Bensonhurst: A Weakened Murder Case Opens Today
LEAD: In a blue flash from a .32-caliber pistol, Yusuf K. Hawkins was shot to death nearly eight months ago in predominantly white Bensonhurst.
There are some who say that the shooting of the 16-year-old black youth made the Brooklyn neighborhood - like Selma, Ala., and Howard Beach, Queens, in their times - a national symbol of racism.


Housing the Poor - Without Subsidies
LEAD: While social, political and judicial pressures to construct new low-income housing are growing, there is no obvious way to do so.
Tight budgets at all levels of government have made the return of large-scale subsidized housing construction, whatever its merits, extremely unlikely.


Zenith Settles For $15 Million
LEAD: Groupe Bull of France agreed today to pay the Zenith Electronics Corporation an additional $15 million for its computer business.


India's Growing Peril: Kashmir and Punjab Separatism
LEAD: The Indian Government's increasingly shrill accusations that Pakistan is trying to provoke India into another war over Kashmir are diverting attention from the inability of Prime Minister V. P. Singh's Government to stem resurgent tides of secessionism in not one but two strategic border states, Punjab as well as Jammu and


Colorado National Bankhares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colorado National Bankhares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,550,000
2,403,000
Per share
.14
.22


Engraph Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Engraph Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
50,356,000
50,222,000
Net inc
2,567,000
2,089,000
Share earns
.19
.17
Shares outst
13,812,000
12,270,000


Knicks Break Away in the Second Half
LEAD: Kiki Vandeweghe put on a shooting performance for some circus people on their day off yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden, then he did the same thing at the expense of the Miami Heat in the second half last night.


Chronicle
LEAD: Life with Lech can be tough, apparently. ''I don't think any other woman could put up with him,'' said DANUTA WALESA, the wife of LECH WALESA.
She told a Polish national television audience yesterday that her husband of 20 years was secretive and hard to get along with.


Metro Datelines;   2 Deaths and a Flaw Delay IRT Trains
LEAD: Two men, apparently homeless, were killed yesterday in separate incidents in the subway system.


Chronicle
LEAD: SALLY ATWATER, the wife of the Republican Party chairman, gave birth to a 9-pound, 3-ounce girl yesterday at Columbia Women's Hospital in Washington.
The baby, named SALLY THEODOSIA, and mother are doing fine, said Leslie Goodman, a spokeswoman for the Republican National Party.


Grove Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grove Bank for Savings
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
217,000
504,000
Per share
.15
.34


Developer to Acquire Landmark's Holdings
LEAD: A California real estate developer said today that he would acquire most of the Landmark Land Company's holdings in a deal valued at up to $967 million.


Temple-Inland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temple-Inland Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
477,000,000
462,600,000
Net inc
62,200,000
b54,500,000
Share earns
1.12
.98
Shares outst
55,430,000
55,540,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $400,000, or 1 cent a share.


LSB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSB Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,030,000
936,000
Per share
.48
.43


Vilnius: Its Own Worst Enemy
LEAD: Imagine that President Vytautas Landsbergis is arrested and that a cold war chill settles over U.S.-Soviet relations.
Who will lose? Everybody: the


Top-Air Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Top-Air Manufacturing
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
1,911,625
1,651,534
Net inc
170,899
258,754
Share earns
.05
.08
9mo rev
3,895,661
2,267,296
Net inc
188,563
35,788
Share earns
.06
.01


Onetime Enemies of the State Take Up the Gavel in Moscow
LEAD: Insurgency swept into the Moscow City Council today on the wings of Ivan's rules of order.


Chess
LEAD: After 150 years in which France failed to produce a single native-born grandmaster, 17-year-old Joel Lautier has achieved the breakthrough.
By scoring four victories and six draws for the best result by a French player in a match with the Netherlands in February in Cannes, Lautier completed his qualifications, turning his grandmaster rank into a formality to be completed at the next meeting of the International Chess Federation.


Judge Urged to Allow More Tests Without Their Answers Disclosed
LEAD: Seeking to expand a recent Federal court ruling that crippled New York State's truth-in-testing law, a coalition of standardized testing agencies asked a judge today to let them offer more of their examinations without disclosing the answers.


GBC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GBC Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,938,000
2,316,000
Per share
.55
.43
Shares outst
5,375,000
5,350,000


Deadline Passes for Filing 1989 Tax Returns


Effort to Cut OPEC Output
LEAD: The Saudi oil minister announced new efforts today to bring back into line the OPEC partners violating the group's oil production quotas and driving prices down, an official report said.


Dollar Up in Quiet Trading While Gold and Silver Fall
LEAD: The dollar rose against major foreign currencies yesterday in quiet post-holiday trading, and gold and silver prices declined.


Lazy Teaching Habits Invite Plagiarism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Franklin Waldheim; Disney Executive, 93
LEAD: Franklin Waldheim, a former vice president of Walt Disney Productions who was a copyright lawyer for the firm for more than 50 years, died of congenital heart failure on Sunday at a nursing home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 93 years old.


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intergraph Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
230,029,000
185,696,000
Net inc
b14,965,000
c19,508,000
Share earns
.30
.35
Shares outst
50,198,000
56,040,000
b-Included a gain of $1,438,000, or 3 cents a share, on sale of a long-term common stock investment.


First Essex Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Essex Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b665,000
b1,519,000
Per share
.11
.23
b-After loan loss provision of $1,413,000 for latest first quarter and $450,000 for year-ago period.


Ancient Find, But How Ancient?
LEAD: STANDING in the hollow of a 135-foot high rock shelter, Fabio Parenti painted a mental picture of hunters at the same spot thousands of years ago, surveying the valley floor below for game.


Youth Slain by Teaneck Police Officer Is Buried


U S West Plans Stock Offering
LEAD: U S West Inc. has filed plans to make the first additional stock offering in its six-year history in an effort to raise about $525 million for several projects.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday, U S West disclosed plans to offer 14 million new shares of common stock.


Archer-Daniels-Midland reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Archer-Daniels-Midland (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
116,362,000
116,180,000
Share earns
.41
.41
Shares outst
283,732,000
280,596,000
9mo net inc
365,697,000
307,854,000
Share earns
1.29
1.10
Shares outst
282,448,000
279,833,000


Review/Television;   'New Harvest, Old Shame,' About Farm Workers
LEAD: In the 30 years since Edward R. Murrow's powerful report ''Harvest of Shame,'' the safety and welfare of America's migrant workers have been improved by Federal legislation and union bargaining.
Nevertheless, as tonight's strong documentary, ''New Harvest, Old Shame,'' shows, for the 800,000 farm workers who follow the crops north each spring, it's still mighty hard traveling.


K.R.M. Petroleum reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* K.R.M. Petroleum (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,925,000
1,777,000
Net inc
1,012,000
31,000
Share earns
.15
.01
Shares outst
6,862,752
5,654,530


Oratory of Environmentalism Becomes the Sound of Politics
LEAD: The environment, once dismissed as a fringe cause by many politicians, has reached the forefront of American politics, with candidates for one public office after another proclaiming themselves environmentalists.


First Michigan Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Michigan Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,138,000
3,944,000
Per share
.48
.46


Patterns
LEAD: As one watches the schoolchildren streaming in and out of the Polo/Ralph Lauren shop here in the fashionable Harajuku section, it is easy to see why the biggest designer name in Japan is ''Raruf Rohren.''


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aluminum Co. of America (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,636,300,000
2,624,400,000
Net inc
148,600,000
276,000,000
Share earns
1.69
3.12
Earnings for the latest first quarter included unfavorable translation and exchange adjustments of $4.1 million, compared with favorable adjustments of $1.2 million, or 1 cent a share, in the year-ago quarter.


Bondholders Weighing New Plan by Resorts
LEAD: Resorts International Inc., the casino-hotel company that has filed for bankruptcy, filed a new reorganization plan yesterday, and analysts said bondholders were likely to approve the proposal even though it included few changes.


X-Rite Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* X-Rite Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,483,000
5,013,000
Net inc
764,000
818,000
Share earns
.15
.16


Great Bay Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 21
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Bay Bankshares
Qtr to March 21
1990
1989
Net loss
706,000
1,110,000
Shares outst
2,927,373
3,253,567
9mo net inc
1,416,000
3,187,000
Per share
.46
.96
Shares outst
3,051,000
3,334,265


Trans Financial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans Financial Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
672,000
636,000
Per share
.54
.51
Shares outst
1,516,000
1,516,000


Designer of Faulty Heart Valve Seeks Redemption in New Device
LEAD: ON a lonely ranch near this tiny desert town, Dr.
Viking O. Bjork listened to the heartbeat of a Nubian goat called Sunrise.
Through a stethoscope, the surgeon could hear rythmic thumps, as well as the steady metallic clicking of an artificial heart valve.


Corrections
LEAD: A table in Business Day on Friday headed Publicly Traded Funds and provided by the Investment Company Institute misstated the net asset value per share of the Brazil Fund.
It was $7.74, not $17.74.


Citizens Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,500,000
8,200,000
Per share
.52
.57


Worldwide Computer Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worldwide Computer Services
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,390,345
4,456,415
Net inc
83,728
100,103
Share earns
.05
.06


New Bishop Takes Over Brooklyn Diocese
LEAD: The leadership of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn was officially transferred last night from Bishop Francis J. Mugavero to Bishop Thomas V. Daily.


Ex-Koch Official Gets Top Post With Zucker
LEAD: Robert Esnard, a deputy mayor in the Koch administration, has joined the Zucker Organization, a New York-based real estate company, as president and chief executive.


Autodie Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autodie Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
27,215,906
29,493,764
Net loss
5,869,764
b1,007,903
Share earns
-
.20
6mo sales
61,217,088
56,528,913
Net loss
4,809,856
b1,836,435
Share earns
-
.36


Chase Manhattan's Earnings Plummet 67%
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation, the nation's second-largest banking company after Citicorp, announced a 67 percent drop in first-quarter profits yesterday, chiefly because of problems in its commercial real estate lending.


Century Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Communications Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
58,215,000
49,422,000
Net loss
20,749,000
9,421,000
9mo rev
165,564,000
140,382,000
Net loss
50,531,000
18,267,000


Tracking Elusive Chemical Spoor Of a Patient's Rare Odor Disorder
LEAD: IT was a diagnostic puzzle that taxed the wits of two leading experts in taste and smell disorders: a 36-year-old woman sensed the taste of rotten fish on many mornings, even when she had not eaten fish.


Western Co. of North AmerFica reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Co. of North AmerFica (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
72,616,000
46,713,000
Net loss
b1,522,000
3,239,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $814,000.


Bryn Mawr Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bryn Mawr Bank Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,069,000
994,000
Per share
.92
.99


Debt Plan By Circle K
LEAD: The Circle K Corporation, the embattled convenience store company that has been struggling under huge debt, said yesterday that it had missed a debt payment but expected to avoid a liquidity crisis that could force a bankruptcy.


Clayton Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clayton Homes Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
60,758,000
52,231,000
Net inc
4,461,000
3,436,000
Share earns
.28
.22
9mo rev
179,078,000
168,392,000
Net inc
11,919,000
10,244,000
Share earns
.74
.64


A.&amp;P. May Buy Canadian Stores
LEAD: Steinberg Inc. says it is discussing the possible sale of 69 grocery stores in Ontario to the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company.
A.&amp;P. already has a large presence in Ontario, where it owns 93 Dominion food stores that it bought in 1985.


Our Towns;   Beach Is Public, But Access Isn't In the Land of No
LEAD: Every summer, thousands of visitors flock to this tiny Fire Island village, 10 blocks wide and two long blocks long, to play on the beach, gaze at the glittering Great South Bay and leave their troubles behind.
And every summer, the village seems to have a new law or two aimed at keeping things clean and orderly.


Office Club reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Office Club (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
63,987,000
29,333,000
Net inc
709,000
b201,000
Share earns
.12
-
b-Net loss


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dover Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
528,642,000
514,797,000
Net inc
36,368,000
32,120,000
Share earns
.59
.50
Shares outst
61,898,000
64,407,000


National Realty L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Realty L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,000,000
24,900,000
Net loss
18,200,000
16,800,000
Yr rev
96,554,000
98,196,000
Net loss
32,464,000
23,180,000
Latest year results included gains of $6,047,000, compared with $4,732,000 in 1988, on the sale of property.


Mayor Barred From Voting On Cable TV
LEAD: The New York City Conflicts of Interest Board ruled yesterday that Mayor David N. Dinkins could not vote as a member of the Board of Estimate on the renewal of two cable television franchises in Manhattan.


Cycare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cycare Systems (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
20,389,000
22,034,000
Net inc
779,000
800,000
Share earns
.14
.14


Rockwell Net Down by 36%
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation said today that earnings fell 36 percent in its fiscal second quarter because of a big gain on the sale of its meter and valve business in the period a year earlier.


No Snacks, Just Praise
LEAD: Schizophrenia patients can be trained to help each other reach goals of therapy, a new study has found.


John O. Nelson, 80, Cleric Who Founded Ecumenical Retreat
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
John Oliver Nelson, an ordained Presbyterian minister who founded the Kirkridge Retreat and Study Center in Bangor, Pa., died of congestive heart failure on April 9 at a convalescent center in State College, Pa.
He was 80 years old.


Golden Nugget Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Nugget Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
208,094,000
49,857,000
Net inc
17,314,000
10,104,000
Share earns
.92
.55
Shares outst
18,859,188
18,358,145


Sony Is Said To Be in Deal For TV Plant
LEAD: The Sony Corporation is expected to announce today that it will produce television picture tubes in a vacated Volkswagen factory near Pittsburgh.


Her Face Kept Secrets
LEAD: Greta Garbo hadn't made a movie in 49 years when she died Sunday at 84.
She made the headlines anyway.
But Garbo would have made headlines even if her career had ended in 1929 with ''The Kiss,'' her last silent movie.
Garbo didn't have to talk, though she did so thrillingly.
All she had to do was let the camera roam her face, providing film with one of its most enduring icons.


Dataproducts Agrees to Sale
LEAD: After 16 months of negotiations, the Dataproducts Corporation agreed today to be acquired by a joint venture of two Japanese companies for $10 a share, or about $160 million.
The buyers are the Hitachi


Lusaka Journal;   All About What's Going On in Zambia, Slyly Told
LEAD: For more than two decades, Kapelwa Musonda has been charming, amusing and occasionally provoking Zambians about the absurdities and frustrations of surviving amid the beleaguered economy and party politics of their African nation.


Bridge
LEAD: There are undoubtedly times, in bridge as in life, when nature imitates art.
The diagramed deal is a case in point.
It was the last deal in the match played last October between the United States Senate and the House of Representatives.


FLS Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FLS Holdings Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
132,276,871
130,529,693
Net inc
3,412,128
3,202,183
6mo sales
255,917,840
252,725,667
Net inc
4,865,063
4,698,719
FLS Holdings is privately held. Its series A preferred stock is listed on Nasdaq.


Washington Talk;   Rewriting A Budget (And Its Rules?)
LEAD: The senators and representatives who will begin the thankless task of writing a new Federal budget this week have three basic choices.


Upjohn Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Upjohn Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
772,914,000
745,087,000
Net inc
114,276,000
b103,024,000
Share earns
.61
.55
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $1,086,000.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addendum
LEAD: *
Poppe Tyson, a business-to-business advertising and public relations agency that is a subsidiary of Bozell, has opened an office in Los Angeles.


Geographic Society Replaces Its Editor In Unexpected Move
LEAD: National Geographic magazine replaced its editor today following several months of infighting over editorial content.


Rising Clamor by Airport Neighbors Brings Gains in Fight Against Noise
LEAD: Neighbors of airports around the country, whose complaints were once often shunted aside by government officials and the airlines, are enjoying increasing success in their battle against aircraft noise.


An Eye on the Insurance Industry
LEAD: Not long ago, the First Executive Corporation's life insurance subsidiary used a loophole in accounting rules to spruce up its balance sheet.
The change might have gone unchallenged but for the vigilant eye of Joseph M. Belth, a self-appointed gumshoe who has made a career out of investigating questionable insurance accounting and industry flimflams.


RMS International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RMS International (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,781,599
2,834,976
Net loss
667,577
849,583
Yr rev
12,551,979
11,770,265
Net loss
1,275,970
b118,226
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


Edward Winter, 84; Had Sued Hospital For Saving His Life
LEAD: Edward H. Winter, who sued a Cincinnati hospital for acting against his instructions by resuscitating him after he had a heart attack, died Saturday at a nursing home in suburban Cheviot, Ohio.
He was 84 years old.


Grand Valley Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grand Valley Gas
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
28,080,237
29,017,541
Net inc
622,500
392,027
Share earns
.10
.06
9mo sales
75,444,817
70,453,683
Net inc
1,428,000
914,359
Share earns
.23
.15


Leopold Damrosch, 77, An Episcopal Priest
LEAD: The Rev.
Leopold Damrosch, an Episcopal priest and the former rector of the Church of the Resurrection in Manhattan, died of cancer on Sunday at his home in Hulls Cove, Me.
He was 77 years old.


Torchmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Torchmark Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
437,395,000
400,492,000
Net inc
60,365,000
51,551,000
Share earns
1.11
.93
Shares outst
52,534,000
53,095,000


Murder Trial Is Told of Boast In Bensonhurst
LEAD: The leader of a group of white Bensonhurst youths ''boasted that he would 'blow the heads off the nigger bastards' '' hours before Yusuf K. Hawkins was shot to death, a prosecutor asserted yesterday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Back Stage Splits
LEAD: As of July 6, Back Stage, which bills itself as ''the complete service weekly for the communications and entertainment industry,'' will no longer be complete.
It is splitting into two distinct magazines: Back Stage/ SHOOT, a film and video production weekly, and Back Stage, a theater weekly.
Back Stage is published by BPI Communications, a subsidiary of Affiliated Publications Inc.


False Broadcast of Shooting Brings 400 Cabbies to Bronx
LEAD: More than 400 cab drivers, upset by the killings of five cabbies in the Bronx since early March, tied up traffic for two hours yesterday after a false report went over their radios that another driver had been shot, the police said.


America, the Arrogant Trade Cop
LEAD: Washington, full of sanctimony, is about to blow its annual trade whistle again.
It's time for the self-appointed cop to back off.


By Design;   Parkas: The Practical Is Chic
LEAD: It's such a good idea you wonder why it took so long to become chic.
Now though, the parka - or anorak, as it is sometimes called - has become the smartest of coverups.


South Carolina National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b15,748,000
14,751,000
Per share
.73
.68
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $6,052,000, or 28 cents a share, which represented FASB No. 96 change in method of accounting.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Companies


Watkins-Johnson Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Watkins-Johnson Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
74,560,000
80,773,000
Net inc
2,360,000
5,198,000
Share earns
.29
.62
Shares outst
8,163,120
8,399,782


American Cyanamid reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Cyanamid (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,272,700,000
1,232,400,000
Net inc
90,900,000
85,000,000
Share earns
.95
.91
Shares outst
95,550,436
93,308,384
The year-ago results were restated to reflect the acquisition in November of Praxis Biologics Inc., which has been aaccounted for under the pooling of interests method.


Publishing Rape Victim's Name Adds to Trauma;   Delighted, Moved, Upset
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-19
Lithuania is prepared to compromise on some of the independence measures that drove Moscow to threaten severe economic sanctions against the republic, the Lithuanian Prime Minister said.
Page A1


Lack of Ads Kills 7 Days Magazine
LEAD: Just two years after it was started with great fanfare, 7 Days magazine has ceased publishing.


Will 'We' Get Giachetti For Tyson?
LEAD: rrIn his streetwise semantics, Don King professes to be Mike Tyson's ''adviser and friend'' as well as his promoter.
He loudly denies that he's the dethroned heavyweight champion's manager.
But the more Don King talks, the more he sounds like Tyson's manager.
Which according to boxing law, he's not supposed to be while he's a promoter.


Arkansas Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arkansas Freightways (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
31,122,022
21,250,452
Net inc
1,053,727
374,729
Share earns
.19
.09
Shares outst
5,575,539
4,190,643


Review/Music;   Little Outbursts by the Big Trombone
LEAD: Trombone concertos are not anyone's everyday symphonic repertory, but New York has heard two examples of this odd species within a week.
Joseph Alessi was the New York Philharmonic's soloist in Paul Creston's Fantasy for Trombone and Orchestra at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday evening.
Ava Ordman played the Donald Erb Concerto with the American Symphony at Carnegie Hall on


Manufacturers Hanover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers Hanover Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
96,000,000
103,000,000
Per share
1.21
1.84
Shares outst
70,441,066
51,252,082
Latest quarter results included an 18 percent reduction in net charge- offs, aside from those to refinancing countries, to $73 million from $89 million a year ago.


International Business Mahines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Business Mahines Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,185,000,000
12,730,000,000
Net inc
1,037,000,000
950,000,000
Share earns
1.81
1.61
Shares outst
574,200,000
588,400,000


World Refugee Ranks Swell While Aid Shrinks
LEAD: To the Editor:


International Broadcast Sysems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Broadcast Sysems
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,249,000
1,567,000
Net inc
226,000
72,000
Share earns
.07
.04


Secrets of Longer Life Hinted in a Strict Diet
LEAD: What is the secret of surviving to an extraordinary and vigorous old age -to, say, 50 percent or more beyond a normal life expectancy?


VMS Mortgage Invest Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VMS Mortgage Invest Fund (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b140,342,474
c6,243,749
Share earns
-
.30
Yr net loss
b109,242,375
c9,550,292
Share earns
-
.73
b-Included a provision for loan losses of $151,170,807.


Diet Offers Tantalizing Clues to Long Life
LEAD: A FLIMFLAM ad writer could not have invented more outrageous claims.
Here is a diet that extends lifespan by 50 percent or more.
It prevents heart disease, diabetes and kidney failure, and it greatly retards all types of cancer.
It eliminates or forestalls many of the usual banes of aging, including cataracts, gray hair and feebleness.


The News Halts Union Checkoffs
LEAD: Stepping up the pressure on its 10 unions, The Daily News announced yesterday that it was halting its decades-old practice of deducting union dues from employees' paychecks.


Anger Lingers at Slain Youth's Funeral
LEAD: Phillip C. Pannell, the black teen-ager fatally shot by a white policeman in Teaneck last Tuesday, was buried today after a funeral service marked by muted anger amid themes of reconciliation and reform.


Wichita River Oil reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wichita River Oil (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,338,000
3,585,000
Net loss
b1,409,000
c613,000
Share earns
-
.46
b-Included income tax benefit of $106,000.
c-Net income and included income tax benefit of $387,000, and a gain from accounting change of $1,502,000.


Lincoln Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
432,257
364,318
Per share
.48
.40
Shares outst
900,000
912,600





Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the last day of Passover, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City today.
Other rules will remain in effect.


The Last War in Europe
LEAD: Nowhere in Europe does the brute memory of war assault the eyes more than in the tortured fields and acres of plain white crosses near this medieval town.


Dime Fincl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dime Fincl Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,901,000
1,869,000
Per share
.36
.35
Shares outst
5,326,000
5,366,000


Value of a USX Spinoff Is Disputed
LEAD: The USX Corporation's sprawling plant along the shore of Lake Michigan here is the foundation of what many consider to be among the most efficient steel operations in the United States.


Gutierrez Recital Canceled
LEAD: The pianist Horacio Gutierrez has canceled his Carnegie Hall recital tomorrow because of bursitis.
The concert will not be rescheduled.
Refunds for tickets bought at the box office are available there from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on weekdays and Saturday and from noon to 6 P.M. on Sunday.
Customers will be automatically credited for tickets bought from Carnegie Charge or by subscription.


Metro Datelines;   Indictment in Death Of Abducted Woman
LEAD: A grand jury returned a nine-count indictment yesterday against a 25-year-old man from Westbury charged in the death of a 34-year-old woman he reportedly abducted in a car, Nassau County District Attorney Denis E. Dillon said.


Chronicle
LEAD: LOIS M. GIBBS, who founded the Love Canal Homeowners Association in 1978 and emerged as a community leader in a successful fight to close the hazardous waste dump in that section of Niagara Falls, N.Y., was one of six winners of the first Goldman Environmental Prize.
The prize recognizes the environmental efforts of individuals from six continents and awards $60,000 to each winner.


Ziegler Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ziegler Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,791,000
6,064,000
Net inc
276,000
114,000
Share earns
.10
.04


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
256,792,000
287,530,000
Net inc
b35,612,000
b45,789,000
Share earns
6.48
8.49
b-Included tax credits of $6,914,000, or $1.35 a share, and $14,309,000, or $2.80 a share, for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Cumberland Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cumberland Federal Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,634,000
1,483,000
Per share
.66
.60


Cuomo Says Budget Is Close, But Legislators Are Less Sure
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo declared today that there was ''general agreement'' on ''all major aspects of the budget,'' but legislative leaders immediately dismissed his statements as premature.


I.B.M. Net Rises 9.2% In Quarter
LEAD: Showing surprising strength across its product lines and outpacing industry expectations, the International Business Machines Corporation yesterday reported a 9.2 percent rise in first-quarter net income on an 11.4 percent revenue gain.


All's Well As Mets Rise to Occasion
LEAD: All the signs were there for an early sinking spell: Dwight Gooden was 0 and 2 after two starts, and 0 and 4 going back to last summer.
Kevin McReynolds flew back to New York for X-rays on his sprained left thumb.
Howard Johnson struck out six times in a row in two games in two countries.
And the Mets, already last in the National League's East after one week, were forced to play a day game in Chicago after a night game in Montreal.


Struthers Wells Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Struthers Wells Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
5,973,481
7,108,584
Net loss
137,368
b297,975
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income and included a tax benefit of $104,000.


Fibreboard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fibreboard Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
68,018,000
56,222,000
Net inc
2,001,000
b3,530,000
Share earns
.51
.91
b-After income of $1,012,000, or 26 cents a share, from discontinued operations.


Vargas Llosa Remains Candidate In Peru's Runoff Vote for President
LEAD: Mario Vargas Llosa, the Peruvian novelist who has been seeking the presidency, announced today that he would remain in the race for a two-candidate runoff vote.


Peoples Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,113,000
3,049,000
Per share
.45
.44


Golden West Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden West Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
46,974,000
35,026,000
Per share
.75
.56


General Instrument Unit
LEAD: The Dalmo Victor division of the General Instrument Corporation has been awarded a United States Defense Department contract worth $233.2 million for work on updating radar warning receivers in F-111 and FB-111 aircraft, the Air Force said today.


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fifth Third Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
26,471,000
23,935,000
Per share
.68
.62
Shares outst
39,159,000
38,730,000
Per share earnings reflected 3-for-2 stock split paid Jan. 13.
Prior year amounts have been restated for First Ohio Bancshares Inc., of Toledo, Ohio, acquired Nov.


Columbia Savings' 'Junk Bond' Woes
LEAD: Executives at the Columbia Savings and Loan Association are searching far from the shrinking ''junk bond'' market to find a buyer for the $3.5 billion of these high-yield, high-risk securities it holds.
Columbia's junk bond portfolio is the largest in the savings and loan industry.


Northeast Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
6,454,000
b8,660,000
Per share
-
1.09
b-Net income


Drug Suspect Escapes in Texas
LEAD: A man suspected as the leader of a multimillion-dollar drug ring escaped from a privately operated public jail late Sunday after he or a cellmate threatened a guard with a gun.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Beverly Michelle Beach has been named director of business affairs at the Mingo Group.


Results Plus
LEAD:
PRO BASKETBALL
Pacers Earn Berth in Playoffs
Chuck Person scored 33 points, 9 in the fourth quarter, and the Indiana Pacers earned only their third National Basketball Association playoff berth in 14 years by defeating the Chicago Bulls, 111-102, last night in Indianapolis.
The Pacers' other playoff appearances came in 1980-81 and 1986-87.


Coming This Summer: Park Wars
LEAD: The opening of Universal Studios Florida here in a few weeks will be the start of a head-to-head battle by two entertainment giants for the hearts and wallets of millions of families who visit this area annually.


Sculptor to Honor Siberia's Victims
LEAD: All over the vast Siberian triangle of suffering where millions of people died in Stalin's prison camps, a yearning to atone cries out for fulfillment.


First Chattanooga Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Chattanooga Fincl
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
272,000
911,000
Per share
.10
.32
9mo net inc
1,442,000
3,503,000
Per share
.52
1.24


Alcoa's Income Fell 46.2% in First Quarter
LEAD: The Aluminum Company of America, the nation's largest aluminum producer, reported a 46.2 percent decline in first-quarter earnings yesterday.
The company cited an overall slower economy, lower prices and slightly higher costs.


Micro Devices' Revenue Flat
LEAD: Advanced Micro Devices, a maker of semiconductors, reported today that it had only ''marginal profitability'' on operations and flat revenue in the first quarter of 1990.


Fluke (John) Mfg.  (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fluke (John) Mfg.  (A)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
62,144,000
62,397,000
Net inc
3,726,000
3,699,000
Share earns
.53
.42
Shares outst
7,058,302
8,763,812
6mo sales
120,063,000
120,973,000
Net inc
7,209,000
7,165,000
Share earns
1.02
.81
Shares outst
7,078,315
8,842,080


Like Russian Roulette, but With Elevators
LEAD: As if the danger on the streets of New York City's meanest neighborhoods were not enough, an alarming number of teen-agers and even children as young as 6 are seeking thrills in a deadly sport high above.
Boys and occasionally girls are riding outside elevators as they sweep up and down the shafts of high-rise housing projects.


First City Bancorp Texas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First City Bancorp Texas (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
90,100,000
26,200,000
Per share
4.46
1.09
Shares outst
18,900,000
17,800,000
The latest quarter included a pre- tax gain of $139.7 million from the sale of the company's credit card business.


Scripps-Howard Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scripps-Howard Broadcasting (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
71,567,000
67,961,000
Net inc
3,348,000
1,877,000
Share earns
.32
.18


2 Convicted in Case Linked to Gotti Brother
LEAD: Two brothers were convicted of obstruction of justice yesterday in a trial that grew out of a major drug case involving Gene Gotti, a brother of John Gotti, reputed to be the boss of the Gambino crime family.


Supreme Court Lets Stand a Missouri Town's Ban on School Dances
LEAD: A ban on school dances in a small Missouri town survived Supreme Court review today.


Broadway Producer Guilty of Fraud
LEAD: Adela Holzer, a Broadway producer who told investors that she was the secret wife of David Rockefeller, pleaded guilty yesterday to charges that she had stolen $4 million in a fraudulent investment scheme.


Review/Theater;   A Family Confronts Its History In August Wilson's 'Piano Lesson'
The piano is the first thing the audience hears in ''The Piano Lesson,'' the new August Wilson play at the Walter Kerr Theater.
Three hours later, it seems as if the music, by turns bubbling and thunderous, has never stopped.


Douglas-King Case Is Delayed Again
LEAD: The courtroom confrontation between Buster Douglas, the heavyweight champion, and the promoter Don King has been delayed once again and may now be heard first in New York instead of in Las Vegas, Nev.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morton International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
447,113,000
400,030,000
Net inc
39,090,000
b9,628,000
Share earns
.82
.20
9mo sales
1,209,632,000
1,070,678,000
Net inc
98,470,000
b73,741,000
Share earns
2.05
1.54


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delchamps Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
231,413,000
224,025,000
Net inc
3,446,000
3,795,000
Share earns
.48
.53
9mo sales
701,558,000
870,840,000
Net inc
9,214,000
6,486,000
Share earns
1.29
.92
Shares outst
7,132,000
7,077,000


Florios Reveal Taxes Paid on 1989 Income
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio and his wife paid $16,993 in Federal income tax this year, 16 percent of their total income in 1989.


Using Ostrich Eggs to Help Date Fossils
LEAD: NEARLY two million years ago, humans began using ostrich eggs for food, to store water and to make beads.
Now researchers say the shells, unearthed in abundance at archeological sites in Africa and Asia, can help date fossils in the same strata.


Fracas in Bucharest Over Snubbing of King
LEAD: Supporters and opponents of the governing National Salvation Front traded kicks and punches today in a brawl in central Bucharest.


Cincinnati Bell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Bell Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
221,339,000
222,475,000
Net inc
18,336,000
24,604,000
Share earns
.29
.39


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Avon Products Inc., New York, the cosmetics company, promoted Marcia Worthing to senior vice president for human resources.


Petroleum &amp; Resources reports earnings for As of March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petroleum &amp; Resources
As of March 31
1990
1989
Assets
314,946,635
268,920,407
Share earns
30.33
26.90
Latest per share earnings are after capital gain distribution of 3 cents paid in March 1990 and $29,895,000 stated value $1,575 convertible preferred stock outstanding.


Marine Corp. (Ill.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marine Corp. (Ill.) (O)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,642,000
2,291,000
Per share
.41
.38


Sandwich Chef reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandwich Chef
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
9,488,000
8,501,000
Net inc
127,000
11,000
Share earns
.12
.01
9mo sales
27,550,000
25,136,000
Net inc
393,000
39,000
Share earns
.38
.04


Northeast Bancorp Merger Bid Ended
LEAD: After hinting for months that it was willing to forgo a previously announced merger with Northeast Bancorp of Shelton, Conn., the Bank of New York set terms yesterday for the merger that the Connecticut bank found unacceptable.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Huck Finn's Drowning
Q.Was there a scientific basis for searching for drowning victims by floating loaves of bread containing quicksilver on the water, as the townspeople in Mark Twain's novel ''Huckleberry Finn'' did when they thought the hero had drowned?
What about firing cannons over the water to make the body rise?


Burlington Northern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Northern Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,183,000,000
1,125,000,000
Net inc
b63,000,000
33,000,000
Share earns
.82
.44
b-After an extraordinary credit of $8 million, or 10 cents a share, from extinguishment of debt.


First N.Y. Business Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First N.Y. Business Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
733,000
895,000
Per share
.20
.24


Central Bancshares of the South reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Bancshares of the South
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
10,804,000
10,293,000
Per share
.51
.48


Thomas Armitage, 83, Insurance Executive
LEAD: Thomas Watson Armitage, a retired insurance executive, died of pneumonia on Friday at a nursing home in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 83 years old and lived in Fairfield.


Chase Manhattan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chase Manhattan Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
44,000,000
132,000,000
Per share
.20
1.27
The company said that net income was adversely affected by a $75 million increase over the year-ago first quarter in the provision for possible credit losses, principally due to the potential impact of the deterioration that has occurred in certain domestic real estate markets.


Ortega Warns of Snag on Contras
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra left open the possibility today that the inauguration of President-elect Violeta Barrios de Chamorro could be postponed if the contra rebels were not disarmed by that date.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Seeking Deadly Thrills
An alarming number of teen-agers and children, some as young as 6, are riding atop elevators as they sweep up and down the shafts of New York City highrises.
Page B1.
A Look at Tokyo Fashion
Japanese fashions at the Tokyo fall showings were modest but inventive, offering, among other things, big plaid toggle coats.


Autotrol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autotrol Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
9,108,635
8,612,801
Net inc
857,172
749,314
Share earns
.44
.38


The Other Insect
LEAD: A newly discovered beetle in Costa Rica's rain forests destroys the symbiotic relationship between the Piper ant-plant and ants that build colonies within it, new research shows.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.18
9.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.71
7.76
8.65
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.75
7.78
8.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.67
8.64
9.26
30-YR.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I like working, but you can see why a lot of people don't want to get jobs.''
- Pat Perry, a Chicago public housing tenant. [B8:1.]


First Amarillo Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Amarillo Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b574,204
c406,393
Per share
.20
.14
Shares outst
2,869,112
2,866,911
b-After tax loss carryforward of $174,000, or 6 cents a share.
c-Included gains of $261,611 from early extinguishment of debt and $60,000 for tax loss carryforward, both equaled 11 cents a share.


MALAYSIA ACCUSED ON BOAT PEOPLE
LEAD: Despite continued protests from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Malaysia is turning away Vietnamese boat people with increasing frequency, diplomats and international relief workers say.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Y.&amp;R. Goal: Improved Creativity
LEAD: EXECUTIVES at Young &amp; Rubicam suggest that the decision to reorganize the agency's giant New York office from three divisions into one was a case of winning the battle but losing the war.


Transamerica Income reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transamerica Income (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,838,864
2,898,633
Share earns
.54
.55
Yr net inc
11,471,754
11,628,477
Share earns
2.18
2.21


Blocked Funds Put U.S. Role In Seville World Fair in Doubt
LEAD: As work advances on the new auditoriums, pavilions and stadiums for the Seville World's Fair, Expo '92, Spanish and American officials are concerned that construction may never begin on one of the main attractions: the United States pavilion.


LITHUANIANS OFFER NEW COMPROMISES TO AVOID BLOCKADE
LEAD: Lithuania is prepared to compromise on some of the independence measures that drove Moscow to threaten severe economic sanctions against the republic, the Lithuanian Prime Minister said today.


Virginia Names Coach
LEAD: Jeff Jones, an assistant at the University of Virginia, was named yesterday as the Cavaliers' head basketball coach, succeeding Terry Holland.


Striking Bus Driver Arrested After Indictment in Shooting
LEAD: A striking Greyhound bus driver was arrested today on Federal charges of shooting at a bus last month, a prosecutor said.


Vancouver Issuing Needles to Drug Addicts
LEAD: Like many cities, Vancouver is increasingly concerned about the spread of the AIDS virus among drug users and, through them, into the population at large.
But unlike most cities including New York, Vancouver has chosen as a main strategy issuing free clean needles to drug addicts.


Geriatric &amp; Medical Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geriatric &amp; Medical Centers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
32,607,000
28,890,000
Net inc
64,000
c3,029,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
96,239,000
85,115,000
Net inc
b7,426,000
c6,081,000
Share earns
.78
-


Centaur Reports On Proxy Battle
LEAD: Centaur Partners Group said it had obtained consents from holders of 11.8 million shares of National Intergroup Inc., representing more than 54 percent of the company's shares, to amend the company's bylaws and expand its board to 15 members from 12.
Centaur said the amendment, if effective, will result in stockholders electing a majority of National


Raiders' Deal Fading
LEAD: Oakland's mayor, Lionel Wilson, said yesterday that the deal to bring the Raiders back to Oakland may have been killed by a campaign to put the matter before his city's voters.


Wharf Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wharf Resources
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,198,000
1,257,000
Share earns
.06
.06


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Calendar column of The Home Section on Thursday about two lectures on bookbinding at the Place des Antiquaires misstated the time.
The lectures, on Wednesday and on April 25, begin at 2 P.M., not 6.


John G. Murphy, 97, Colonel and Professor
LEAD: John George Murphy, a retired Army colonel and a former professor at Fordham University, died of a stroke Saturday at his home in Washington.
He 97 years old.


Franklin Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Electric Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
42,991,000
43,017,000
Net inc
2,658,000
2,620,000
Share earns
.28
.90
Shares outst
6,189,000
2,903,000


Torchmark Starts Fight For Insurer
LEAD: The Torchmark Corporation has begun calling for proxies for a slate of five independent nominees to the board of the American General Corporation, to be elected at the insurance and financial company's annual meeting on May 2.


Notebook;   Rule Changes Are Giving Game Back to Players
LEAD: The rule changes in college lacrosse this season have done what they were supposed to do: speed up the game and thus make it more fun to play and watch.


Tokyo, Where Fashion Is an Art
LEAD: Japanese culture puts great emphasis on esthetics, from the famously precise gardens and parks to the artfully presented food - even to the hurly-burly of Tokyo traffic in downtown Tokyo, where, miraculously, none of the cars ever have a dent.
In this milieu, it is no surprise that there is a nine-month wait on orders for Grace Kelly bags, the classic Hermes design, or that fashion has an honored place.


National Adding 2 Editions
LEAD: The National, the sports daily that has been publishing in New York, Chicago and Los Angeles for the last two and a half months, plans to begin editions this summer in San Diego and San Francisco.


E-Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Systems Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
457,773,000
394,930,000
Net inc
21,898,000
19,069,000
Share earns
.70
.61
Shares outst
31,247,000
31,145,000


Profits Rise For Lilly And Upjohn
LEAD: Eli Lilly &amp; Company and the Upjohn Company reported gains in first-quarter earnings yesterday.


Times Co. Promotes 5 Executives to Vice President Posts
LEAD: The New York Times Company yesterday named five senior corporate executives to be vice presidents.


Morrison Knudsen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morrison Knudsen Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
399,360,000
461,157,000
Net inc
7,210,000
6,343,000
Share earns
.62
.56
Shares outst
11,645,069
11,333,800


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
208,632,167
195,516,850
Net inc
13,721,442
10,325,961
Share earns
.67
.50
Shares outst
20,575,970
20,480,135


Stotler Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stotler Group Inc. (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
120,680,000
-
Net inc
221,000
-
Share earns
.10
-
Comparable results are unavailable.


The Subtleties of the Chinese In Art of 'Loyalty and Dissent'
LEAD: Anybody who thought China's repression of dissent last year was unprecedented would do well to view ''Orchids and Bamboo,'' an early-18th-century painting by Cheng Hsieh at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in an exhibition called ''Loyalty and Dissent in Traditional Chinese Calligraphy and Painting.


TJX to Revise 1989 Financial Results
LEAD: The TJX Companies said it would restate its 1989 financial results as a loss because of possible fallout from a 1988 deal with Ames Department Stores Inc.
TJX sold the Zayre retail chain to Ames in a deal that included $200 million in stock.
Ames announced last week that it had lost an estimated $228 million in its most recent fiscal year.


CNB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CNB Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,394,000
3,064,000
Per share
.52
.47


Joint Missions to Mars Rejected by U.S. Panel
LEAD: Joint missions to Mars by the United States and the Soviet Union are too risky now, a panel of experts convened by the National Academy of Sciences said today.
It recommended instead that the two nations follow ''a graceful path'' of coordinated but independent explorations.


Pope &amp; Talbot Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pope &amp; Talbot Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
149,054,000
146,315,000
Net inc
b11,022,000
9,437,000
Share earns
.94
.80
b-Included a gain of $1,929,000, or 16 cents a share, on the sale of Timberland.


Chronicle
LEAD: While BARBARA BUSH is not generally considered a controversial First Lady, she has managed to evoke hostility from some students at Wellesley College, where she is is scheduled to be the commencement speaker on June 1.


Premier Choix TVEC Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Choix TVEC Inc.
Year to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
23,754,298
18,604,819
Net inc
b3,511,420
b3,219,031
Share earns
1.06
1.17
b-Included extraordinary credits of $682,200, or 20 cents a share, and $1,088,031, or 44 cents a share, for the latest and prior years, respectively.


St. Paul Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Paul Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b5,290,000
5,121,000
Per share
.43
.42
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $588,000, or 5 cents a share, from the repurchase of notes.


Primerica's Net Gained By 38% in First Quarter
LEAD: Despite Wall Street's depressed environment, the Primerica Corporation, a financial services firm and parent of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, reported a 38 percent increase in its first-quarter earnings yesterday.


Market Place;   Talkative Policy Is Aiding P.&amp;G.
LEAD: THE stock price of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, which has taken a beating in recent months, has made a strong recovery in the last few weeks.


Salick Health Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salick Health Care Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
16,643,000
12,177,000
Net inc
565,000
1,011,000
Share earns
.10
.18
Shares outst
5,607,000
5,612,000
6mo rev
33,075,000
23,316,000
Net inc
1,570,000
2,014,000
Share earns
.28
.36
Shares outst
5,606,000
5,610,000


Reorganized Bonwit Reportedly Picks Chief
LEAD: Frank Doroff will become the head of the new Bonwit Teller fashion chain to be reorganized by Pyramid Companies, retail executives said yesterday.


Service for Rev. West
LEAD: Vespers for the Rev.
Dr.
Edward Nason West, retired Canon Sacrist of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, will be sung at 6:15 P.M. on Friday at St.
Save Serbian Orthodox Cathedral, 15 West 25th Street.
Canon West died on Jan. 3 at the age of 80.


General Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Signal Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
470,394,000
478,411,000
Net inc
20,250,000
19,818,000
Share earns
1.06
1.04
Shares outst
19,099,000
19,048,000


Metro Datelines;   7 Appointed to Panel On Council Districts
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins named seven people yesterday to the Districting Commission that will draw the lines for the City Council's 51 districts for next year's elections.


Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
830,000
811,000
Per share
.39
.47
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted for stock dividends paid on Feb. 16, 1990.


Wheeling's Plan Gains Approval
LEAD: The Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation said Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, which holds a 34 percent stake in the company, had agreed to endorse a reorganization plan proposed in bankruptcy court by Wheeling-Pittsburgh and its creditors.


Talking Business; with Krief of Bernard Krief Associates;   Consultant's Bid For Saatchi Unit
LEAD: For more than a year, Bernard Krief, a French management consultant, has been trying to buy the Hay Group, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi's consulting arm.
The path has not been smooth.
First Saatchi said Hay was not for sale; then it said the group was worth triple the $100 million to $200 million Mr.
Krief was offering; then Mr.


Brazil Inflation Drive
LEAD: The president of Brazil's central bank said Friday that administering the first few weeks of the Government's anti-inflation plan had been ''infernal.'' The new Government of President Fernando Collor de Mello introduced a sweeping economic program on March 16 to arrest inflation.
Mr.
Collor froze most money in bank accounts for the next 18 months.


Review/Dance;   A Benefit Performance by and for Students
LEAD: The Emergency Fund for Student Dancers, which presented its first benefit program on Friday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio, was devised by administrators from five leading New York City dance schools in response to the slaying last year of a dance student in Manhattan.
Four or five benefits a year are to be presented, to build a fund that will lend money to students from other countries and other parts of the United


Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,240,600,000
1,052,000,000
Net inc
340,800,000
284,700,000
Share earns
1.16
.99
Shares outst
293,209,000
289,088,000
Share earnings are on a fully diluted basis.


Clear Bulbs Can Save Energy and Costs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
12,083,000
10,543,000
Per share
.75
.66


CNB Bancshares Is Acquiring Bank
LEAD: Valley Federal Savings Bank agreed to be acquired by CNB Bancshares Inc. of Evansville, Ind., for $10.50 a share, with 60 percent of the transaction to be in common stock.
The company said the conversion value of the CNB stock to be exchanged in the transaction had been set at $21 a share.


Looking at Life From Both Sides
LEAD: At first glance, the Radius Pivot monitor seems to be just another gimmick.
But looking at it another way - take your pick, horizontally or vertically - it is a significant advance in display technology for the Apple Macintosh SE and Mac II computers.


Publishing Rape Victim's Name Adds to Trauma;   Help Is Available
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bond Prices Fall in Slow Trading
LEAD: Treasury bond prices fell in sluggish trading yesterday, as dealers unloaded securities on rumors that Japanese investors were selling bonds.


Oakley's Cast Removed
LEAD: Charles Oakley, the Knick power forward who broke his left hand on March 20, had the cast removed yesterday and was given permission to work out on his own.
It was not immediately known whether he would be ready for any portion of the playoffs.


Fire on Train in India Kills 80 and Injures 65
LEAD: A leaking gas cylinder exploded in a moving commuter train today and set off a fire that left at least 80 people dead and 65 others injured, news reports and officials said.


Coach Gets Yanks Back to Basics
LEAD: The Yankees of Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig would very likely not have done it.
The Joe DiMaggio Yankees did not take time to do it.
Certainly the Yankees of Mickey Mantle and Roger Maris didn't do it.


German Unity Might Cost Berlin Billions in Subsidies
LEAD: Faced with the daunting prospect of spending hundreds of billions of dollars to reunite the two Germanys, the West German Government is casting about for any savings that could ease the burden.


Citizens First Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens First Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,530,000
9,283,000
Per share
.30
.43


Brazil's Troubles May Cut Ford Net
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said its 1990 profits could be substantially reduced because of Brazil's economic problems, which have forced the big auto maker to shut down its Autolatina operations serving Brazil and Argentina.
Ford made the statement in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing.


Operating License Is Granted To Nuclear Plant Near Dallas
LEAD: The Nuclear Regulatory Commission granted an operating license today to the Comanche Peak nuclear power plant in north central Texas.


Flyers Dismiss Clarke
LEAD: Bobby Clarke was dimissed as vice president and general manager by the Philadelphia Flyers yesterday following the team's poorest season in 18 years.


First Western Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Western Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,437,000
1,288,000
Per share
.74
.66


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Sluggish Period For Magazines
LEAD: Magazine advertising revenues rose only 1.54 percent, to $1.48 billion, in the first quarter of 1990 from the comparable period of 1989, according to the Publishers Information Bureau.
Advertising pages fell 3.47 percent, to 39,339.


Mandela Urges Support for Sanctions
LEAD: Speaking to a pop-concert audience of 72,000 and a worldwide broadcast audience of millions, Nelson Mandela pleaded with governments tonight to maintain sanctions against South Africa.


Valcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valcom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
101,612,000
81,201,000
Net inc
1,560,000
1,326,000
Share earns
.37
.30
Shares outst
4,250,000
4,465,300


Advanced Micro Devices reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Micro Devices (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
271,472,000
269,620,000
Net inc
b13,119,000
10,071,000
Share earns
.13
.09
Shares outst
83,042,000
81,669,000
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $10,027,000 realized upon completion of the previously announced transaction with Sony USA.


Gains of Dow Trimmed by 'Sell' Programs
LEAD: The highly favorable earnings reported by I.B.M. helped push stocks sharply higher for much of the day yesterday, but computerized program selling in the final hour brought the market most of the way down again.


Marco Robles, Ex-Panama Chief Who Backed Exports, Dies at 84
LEAD: Marco A. Robles, who as President of Panama in the 1960's tried but failed to negotiate new canal treaties, died Saturday in Miami.
He was 84 years old and lived in Miami after stepping down.


Review/Music;   An Advocate of the Cerebral
LEAD: Last season, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center established a composer-in-residence program, using a $460,000 bequest from Milan Stoeger, a psychoanalyst and frequent concertgoer, whose wish was to endow a composer's chair in memory of his wife, Elise.
The first holder of that chair was Gunther


Public Said to Disregard Dangers Of Manicuring the Greensward
LEAD: THIS spring, as in every spring of recent years, millions of homeowners in search of the picture-perfect lawn are applying millions of pounds of chemical pesticides to their property.
But even as the totals reach new records, officials and environmentalists are issuing new warnings about the dangers and misuses of lawn insecticides, fungicides and weed-killers.


Brewers Get 20 Hits in 18-0 Rout Of Red Sox
LEAD: The Milwaukee Brewers recorded the largest shutout in the club's history today, pounding out 20 hits and beating the Boston Red Sox, 18-0, before a Patriots' Day crowd of 35,478 in Fenway Park.


Primerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Primerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,443,200,000
1,238,400,000
Net inc
83,200,000
51,400,000
Share earns
.73
.53
Shares outst
116,900,000
99,400,000


Board of Examiners, Despite Faults, Does a Job
LEAD: To the Editor:


Healthplex Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthplex Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,232,003
6,365,175
Net inc
121,291
115,074
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
3,127,500
2,977,500


Sherwood Group reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwood Group (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
4,429,599
4,163,811
Net loss
254,278
1,081,950
9mo rev
12,051,857
9,399,193
Net loss
4,144,106
7,899,926
Shares outst
13,162,131
12,037,208


U.S. Sets Wool Subsidy
LEAD: Producers of wool and mohair will receive about $100 million in Government subsidies because 1989 market prices fell below the Federal support level, the Agriculture Department has reported.
The payments, which are to begin immediately, will be split equally between wool and mohair producers.


Strike by Teachers Over Salaries Closes Many Oklahoma Schools
LEAD: More than half of Oklahoma's 36,000 teachers went on strike today, closing nearly a quarter of the state's school districts.


Metro Datelines;   Brooklyn Youth Slain As 4 Men Fire at Car
LEAD: A 19-year-old Brooklyn youth was shot and killed Sunday night and three of his teen-age friends were wounded when four men opened fire on the car they were riding in, the police said.


Technology 80 Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology 80 Inc.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
516,733
271,620
Net loss
25,692
170,681
6mo rev
837,503
505,551
Net loss
417,413
286,213


Birmingham Steel reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Birmingham Steel (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
108,054,000
106,148,000
Net inc
5,531,000
9,427,000
Share earns
.45
.76
Shares outst
12,205,018
12,376,735
9mo rev
327,634,000
323,184,000
Net inc
16,818,000
31,750,000
Share earns
1.37
2.57
Shares outst
12,247,051
12,363,345


Software Services of America reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Software Services of America
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
423,295
374,916
Net loss
455,652
475,625
9mo rev
1,442,808
4,161,143
Net loss
1,293,456
386,667


A Militia Commander Killed
LEAD: Gunmen in a moving car today killed a commander of the Syrian-backed Shiite Muslim militia Amal in West Beirut, the police reported.
An Amal official said that Ali Abu Hassan, the militia's commander in Zokak el-Blat, a district of West Beirut, was killed by the rival Shiite organization, the pro-Iranian Party of God.


Publishing Rape Victim's Name Adds to Trauma
LEAD: To the Editor:


La Jolla Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Jolla Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,087,000
958,000
Per share
.15
.14
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted to reflect 5 percent stock dividend paid in March 1990.


Northern Trust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Trust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
25,900,000
25,400,000
Per share
.38
.31
Share earnings are fully diluted.


Cincinnati Arts Center Denies Obscenity Charges
LEAD: Lawyers for the Contemporary Arts Center and its director pleaded not guilty today to obscenity charges stemming from an exhibition of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe.


Security Fedl Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Fedl Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
266,102
188,342
Per share
.18
.13
9mo net inc
622,250
848,344
Per share
.43
.58


Meditators and Money Find Home in Heartland
LEAD: In the quiet of the early morning, the trek to the golden dome begins.
One by one the business executives and owners arrive, ready to start their day - by sitting in silence.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


RPM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RPM Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
101,252,652
82,110,594
Net inc
2,924,650
2,447,030
Share earns
.13
.11
9mo sales
318,790,532
279,403,848
Net inc
21,354,066
19,013,623
Share earns
.95
.84


Banc One Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banc One Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
101,818,000
87,161,000
Per share
.70
.60
Shares outst
144,358,000
142,525,000


Proxy Victory for Lockheed
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation, whose management has been battling the Dallas investor Harold Simmons to maintain control of the aerospace giant, officially declared victory today in the proxy fight at its reconvened annual meeting.


Firstfed Michigan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstfed Michigan Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,707,000
4,622,000
Per share
.60
.42


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comerica Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
31,547,000
27,393,000
Per share
1.86
1.66
Shares outst
16,474,108
15,725,138


In Boston Marathon, Bordin Catches Ikangaa And Mota Is First Woman to Win a 3d Time
LEAD: For the 94 years of the Boston Marathon, most runners have dreaded Heartbreak Hill.
On that hill, actually a series of three hills, America's most storied running race has often been won and lost.


Laying Down the Law For Business Letters
LEAD: PROGRAMS that check a piece of writing against a standard are fairly common and frequently useful.
The trouble is, their standard is not necessarily your standard.
If you like long sentences, and the program hates them, or if you feel that the passive voice can be effective, and the program doesn't, it will pester you.


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germantown Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,100,000
b2,246,000
Per share
.52
.56
b-After extraordinary utilization of net operating loss carryforwards of $654,000, or 16 cents a share.


China Policy, Twice Tainted
LEAD: The White House insisted four months ago that a high-profile meeting between Brent Scowcroft and Deng Xiaoping did not violate its ban on ''high-level exchanges.'' The same White House now declares that inviting a Chinese minister to an international conference on air pollution and climate change would violate that same rule.


Public Housing: For Workers or the Needy?
LEAD: The growing shortage of affordable shelter for millions of needy people is putting enormous pressure on the nation's already overburdened public housing system and giving a new edge to an old policy debate: who is it that public housing ought to serve?


Flagler Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flagler Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
266,000
534,000
Per share
.12
.24


Golden Nugget Net Up 71.3%
LEAD: Golden Nugget Inc. said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings had increased 71.3 percent, largely because of a strong performance at its new Las Vegas casino and hotel, the Mirage.


Boise Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boise Cascade Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,066,030,000
1,099,100,000
Net inc
33,570,000
78,250,000
Share earns
.79
1.74


United Savings Bank-Montana reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Savings Bank-Montana (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
287,600
253,200
Per share
.24
.21


Notebook;   Early Meeting for Spurs and Suns?
LEAD: If the final week of the National Basketball Association schedule plays to form, San Antonio and Phoenix, each the winner of more than 50 games, will be matched in a rare opening-round playoff series.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cedar Group, Philadelphia, a distributor of fasteners, said it would acquire Gardenbolt International Corp., Sayreville, N.J., an importer of fasteners, for $7 million.


Librarians May Lose Oldest School
LEAD: Columbia University is considering closing its School of Library Service, the oldest and one of the most prestigious library schools in the nation.


Boise Cascade Net Down 57%
LEAD: Weak demand for paper products coupled with higher prices for logs and wood chips sent the Boise Cascade Corporation's first-quarter net income plunging by 57 percent, the company said today.


Gregory Kolovakos; Translator, 38
LEAD: Gregory Kolovakos, a translator of Latin American literature and director of the literature program of the New York State Council on the Arts, died of AIDS yesterday at his home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
He was 38 years old.


Signet Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Signet Banking Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b27,133,000
c31,495,000
Per share
1.02
1.14
b-Included after-tax expenses of $2.7 million for a credit card account acquisition and account management programs and an after-tax gain of $2 million, or 8 cents a share, from a fee related to the termination of an affinity group marketing agreement.


Old Kent Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Kent Financial (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
22,102,000
20,289,000
Per share
.84
.77


Court Session On Eastern
LEAD: Eastern Airlines' creditors were in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan yesterday to press their case for the appointment of a trustee to run the carrier.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Bettina Riedel, a women's clothing designer and manufacturer, to Henszey &amp; Albert, with a budget of $1.5 million.


Czech Movement That Led a Revolution Is Now Bitterly Split in Moravia
LEAD: The harmony of the ''velvet revolution'' that toppled Communist rule in November has turned into discord here in the Moravian capital.


Verdict On Reagan
LEAD: History is closing in fast on Ronald Reagan.
Fifteen months ago he left office in a glow of public affection.
Today he is increasingly identified with greed, corruption and conspiracy.


2 Top Dinkins Advisers Form Unlikely Pairing
LEAD: When Mayor David N. Dinkins discusses the New York City budget with his senior advisers, an unlikely pair of portly men is virtually always among them.
After the Happy Land Social Club fire, they were at his side for hours.
On weekends at Gracie Mansion, at sunset in City Hall, the two are there.


A-Plant Loses Fight to Store Plutonium-Laced Materials
LEAD: A Federal District judge in Denver has ruled that thousands of barrels of plutonium-laced material at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant contain wastes subject to regulation by Colorado, and are being stored illegally.


J.P. Morgan &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* J.P. Morgan &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b399,000,000
180,000,000
Per share
2.09
.96
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $230,000,000, or $1.23 a share, which represented the net cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Ameribanc Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameribanc Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
208,000
722,000
Per share
.09
.33


Hickam (Dow B.) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hickam (Dow B.) Inc.(O)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,148,000
2,754,000
Net inc
122,000
193,000
Share earns
.05
.09


Nintendo Files Copyright Suits
LEAD: Nintendo of America Inc., a superpower in the home video-game business, began a campaign today against what it described as a rising tide of counterfeit Nintendo video-game cartridges.
Nintendo, a subsidiary of the Nintendo Company of Japan, with 85 percent of the home video-game market in the United States, said it had filed four copyright infringement lawsuits in the United States and


Rollins Environmental Servces Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Rollins Environmental Servces Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
48,112,000
41,232,000
Net inc
5,892,000
b4,395,000
Share earns
.10
.07
6mo rev
94,006,000
78,211,000
Net inc
11,955,000
b7,124,000
Share earns
.20
.12


Careers;   Big Growth In Helping The Jobless
LEAD: FEW businesses have grown as fast as outplacement in recent years, with much of that growth related to the rash of corporate mergers and work-force reductions around the country.


Books of The Times;   2 Italian Heroines Torn by Loyalties
LEAD:
The Road to the City
Two Novellas
By Natalia Ginzburg
Translated by Frances Frenaye. 149 pages.
Arcade Publishing/Little, Brown &amp; Company. $16.95.


Meditrust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meditrust (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
20,384,000
15,148,000
Net inc
6,528,000
5,183,000
Share earns
.37
.33
Shares outst
17,454,000
15,720,000


Badger Meter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Badger Meter Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,838,000
18,129,000
Net inc
662,000
584,000
Share earns
.43
.38


Vestron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vestron Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
66,734,000
94,360,000
Net loss
b47,242,000
c1,707,000
Share earns
-
.05
Yr rev
236,192,000
320,955,000
Net loss
135,053,000
c20,590,000
Share earns
-
.55


Review/Music;   2 Nights, 2 Ensembles And Much Mozart
LEAD: Trevor Pinnock's 53-player Classical Band and Frederick Renz's 22-player Grande Bande, two New York-based period-instrument ensembles, had a face-off of sorts over the weekend, when they offered their final concerts of the season.


U.S. WON'T REJOIN UNESCO, DERIDING AGENCY AS INEPT
LEAD: The Bush Administration has decided that the United States should not rejoin the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Administration officials said today.


Banponce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banponce Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,204,000
5,010,000
Per share
.73
.87
Shares outst
5,764,694
5,763,694


Search for Stellar 'Dwarfs' Quickens
LEAD: AFTER years of searching and a few questionable sightings, astronomers believe they will soon find out if the heavens are heavily populated with brown dwarfs, dim stellar objects that could account for much of the ''missing mass'' of the universe.


MGM-UA reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MGM-UA (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
176,800,000
241,900,000
Net loss
9,800,000
14,700,000
6mo rev
388,300,000
412,200,000
Net loss
b11,900,000
54,200,000
b-Included gain of $1.6 million, or 3 cents a share, from early retirement of debt.


Collective Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collective Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,007,000
2,308,000
Per share
.35
.27
9mo net inc
7,554,000
8,438,000
Per share
.87
.97


Plasma-Therm reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plasma-Therm
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
8,086,648
5,679,858
Net inc
384,165
183,371
Share earns
.05
.02
Shares outst
8,038,179
7,853,234


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Fries Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fries Entertainment (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
6,183,000
6,135,000
Net loss
3,053,000
2,961,000
9mo rev
36,834,000
24,420,000
Net loss
2,972,000
3,769,000


Blackhawks and Oilers Move Ahead
LEAD: The Chicago Blackhawks turned a negative into a positive, then turned the Minnesota North Stars into playoff spectators.


On Horse Racing;   Kentucky Glad to Be Backing a Favorite Son
LEAD: rrMost Kentuckians have probably never ridden the New York City subways at rush hour.
If they did, it would probably remind them of Blue Grass Day at Keeneland.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the projected Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art, in North Adams, misattributed a feasibility study.
It was made by outside professional organizations, not by the executive planning group of the Mass Moca Cultural Development Commission.


Universal Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Foods Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
219,729,000
201,617,000
Net inc
10,015,000
8,392,000
Share earns
.40
.34
6mo rev
444,055,000
389,307,000
Net inc
23,369,000
19,240,000
Share earns
.93
.78


Tech Data reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tech Data
Qtr to Jan 31
1989
1988
Revenue
100,884,000
71,479,000
Net loss
1,975,000
b2,253,000
Share earns
-
.36
Yr rev
348,037,000
246,729,000
Net inc
3,061,000
7,861,000
Share earns
.49
1.39
Shares outst
6,232,000
5,670,000


Prices for Crude Oil Rally In Advance of OPEC Talks
LEAD: Crude oil futures prices rallied yesterday on the eve of an OPEC meeting called to address the market's recent steep declines.


National City Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1988
Net inc
64,465,000
62,443,000
Per share
1.06
1.03
Shares outst
60,592,182
60,479,334


Woman Enters No-Contest Plea In a Bomb Plot
LEAD: An animal-rights advocate accused of planting a bomb outside a surgical-supplies company in Norwalk, Conn., 17 months ago, entered a plea of no contest yesterday to charges of attempted murder in exchange for a one-year jail term, her lawyer said.


Worthen Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worthen Banking Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,097,000
2,032,000
Per share
.37
.19


Merry Land &amp; Investment Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merry Land &amp; Investment Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,593,000
9,628,000
Net inc
1,623,000
2,713,000
Share earns
.17
.28


Raymond Parker, an Artist, 67; Helped Reshape Abstract Painting
LEAD: Raymond Parker, an abstract painter, died of prostate cancer on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Mort Werner, 73, Television Producer And NBC Executive
LEAD: Robert Morton Werner, a television producer and the head of programming at NBC from 1962 to 1972, died of kidney failure on Saturday at Kula Hospital on Maui, Hawaii, after a long illness.
He was 73 years old and lived in Pukalani, on Maui.


Accounting Firm's Cutbacks
LEAD: The accounting firm of Laventhol &amp; Horwath, hit by costly litigation payments, said today that it would cut profit payouts and personnel, but the firm's top executive said business was generally strong.


The Men at the Mayor's Side


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR SPECIAL SESSION ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council
UNICEF EXECUTIVE BOARD - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Rockwell International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rockwell International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,151,000,000
3,162,000,000
Net inc
173,400,000
270,700,000
Share earns
.70
1.05
6mo sales
6,036,000,000
6,031,000,000
Net inc
319,200,000
430,700,000
Share earns
1.29
1.67


Pulitzer Play Reaches Broadway


Cyberoptics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyberoptics Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,100,000
946,500
Net inc
136,400
120,400
Share earns
.06
.05


An Author Travels to Nurture Ideas About Home
LEAD: In her stories, Alice Munro certainly can go home again, often.
It is other places she may not be able to get to.
At least that is her suspicion after spending three months in a small town in Scotland where, as usual, she has been thinking about more stories.


Financial Center Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Financial Center Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
604,000
539,000
Per share
.46
.43


Lost Lesson of Mental Health
LEAD: ''Deinstitutionalization'' - removing mental patients from big state hospitals for more humane treatment in communities - has become a textbook example of failed social policy.
Yet Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York and the State Legislature now behave as if it never happened.
If allowed to prevail, their denial of a disastrous history will inflict new suffering on thousands of mental patients and the communities they inhabit.


Opposition to Form Nepal's Government
LEAD: King Birendra of Nepal today invited the national opposition, including the country's Communist leaders, to form the first multiparty government in 30 years as this Hindu kingdom continued its passionate rush toward democracy.


Farm Policies Called Wasteful
LEAD: Farm subsidies and import barriers cost the world's richest nations $72 billion a year in lost income, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development reports.


Devils' High Hopes Unravel
LEAD: With more nationalities and temperaments than any of the National Hockey League's 21 franchises, the Devils united their cultures well in the last month of the regular season for the best finish in their history.


Society Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
40,340,000
34,541,000
Per share
1.16
.95
Shares outst
33,500,181
34,365,925


Ethiopian Government Seen as Fighting to Survive
LEAD: The Ethiopian military Government, unable to dislodge rebel troops from a crucial Red Sea port and losing ground to another group of insurgents who have moved to within 100 miles of the country's capital, is now fighting for its life, Western diplomats in Addis Ababa said today.


Supreme Court Lifts the Final Stay Of Death for a Retarded '77 Killer
LEAD: Lifting a stay of execution it granted four months ago, the Supreme Court today turned down the final appeal of a retarded Louisiana man who as a teen-ager murdered a state trooper.


Rangers' Next Strategy: Stop Ciccarelli
LEAD: Roger Neilson, having traveled to the Capital Centre on Sunday night, figured the Capitals would beat the Devils, and so calculated that he would spend his evening and his energy scouting just one team.


Howard S. Tierney Jr., A Former Executive, 71
LEAD: Howard Sherwood Tierney Jr., a retired Manhattan business executive, died of liver cancer on Monday at his home in Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 71 years old.


Summcorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summcorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
5,238,000
5,235,000
Share earns
.59
.60
Shares outst
8,937,006
8,787,006


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article and a picture caption on Monday about Easter celebrations in Poland referred incorrectly to four place names inscribed on a cross at a Warsaw church.
Katyn is the name of the forest in which a mass grave of Polish officers was found; Kozielsk, Ostaszkow and Starobielsk are the Polish names for Soviet camps in which those officers and others were interned just before they disappeared.


Fulton Fedl Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fulton Fedl Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
18,010,000
b106,000
Per share
-
.03
Yr net loss
38,623,000
b3,022,000
Per share
-
.72
b-Net income
The bank said the provision for possible losses on real estate owned and repossessed assets was $938,000 for latest quarter, compared with $150,000 for year-ago period, and $7,893,000 for latest year and $668,000 for 1988.


Senator Dole's Duty
LEAD: The system is broke and Congress, which comes back to work today, can finally fix it.
But it won't if Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, has his way.
To him, reforming the odious way of financing Congressional campaigns is not an ethical question at all, just partisanship.
He helped torpedo reform legislation in the last


Bruins Eliminate Whalers as Bourque Returns
LEAD: Inspired by the return of their injured captain, Ray Bourque, the Boston Bruins triumphed, 3-1, tonight and eliminated the Hartford Whalers in the seventh game of their Adams Division semifinal series.


First Northern Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Northern Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
586,000
503,000
Per share
.48
.41


Topics of The Times;   Shrinking Secrets
LEAD: The U.S.
Government is no slouch at manufacturing secrets.
But discovering the exact number of them has been a statistician's nightmare, despite the best efforts of the Information Security Oversight Office, established in 1978 to oversee classified information.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-12


John W. Hundley, 90, Former Censor for CBS
LEAD: John W. Hundley, a musical comedy singer and actor and a CBS television executive who was in charge of the network's office of censorship for nearly 20 years, died yesterday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 90 years old.


General Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Electric Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,600,000,000
11,900,000,000
Net inc
950,000,000
849,000,000
Share earns
1.06
.94


Believe It, the Deficit Affects Interest Rates
LEAD: To the Editor:


VF Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VF Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
567,188,000
562,789,000
Net inc
23,216,000
38,267,000
Share earns
.39
.56


DE KLERK ENDORSES SHARING OF POWER
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk said today that his Government would not agree to majority rule but was prepared to work out a formula for whites to share power with blacks in South Africa.


Nova Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nova Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,195,000,000
1,297,000,000
Net inc
36,000,000
129,000,000
Share earns
.11
.51
Shares outst
299,000,000
245,000,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Rates Up Again At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates rose slightly yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper, the second consecutive week that rates have risen.


McGraw-Hill reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McGraw-Hill (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
420,022,000
390,322,000
Net inc
16,489,000
31,171,000
Share earns
.34
.64
Year-ago first quarter results included a gain of $8 million, or 16 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


First Fincl Management Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fincl Management Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
191,666,000
121,216,000
Net inc
12,579,000
9,560,000
Share earns
.47
.43
Shares outst
26,682,000
22,265,000


San Francisco Sees Bonus in Quake If Reviled Freeway Becomes a Victim
LEAD: When the devastating earthquake struck six months ago today, its 15 seconds of destructive power may have inadvertently rectified what many here believe to be one of this city's worst planning mistakes: the Embarcadero Freeway.


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubbell Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
173,736,000
161,755,000
Net inc
21,144,000
19,163,000
Share earns
.74
.67
Share earnings for both periods have been adjusted for the 5 percent stock dividend distributed to shareholders on Feb.


Videotape Tells Of Youths' Role In Bensonhurst
LEAD: In a videotaped interview played at the Bensonhurst murder trial yesterday, a defendant admitted that he and a group of white friends had gathered with baseball bats on the night Yusuf K. Hawkins was shot to death.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
HOCKEY
2d Loss for Americans
Shawn Burr and Greg Adams scored two goals each as Canada rallied from a 3-1 deficit to beat the United States, 6-3, yesterday in the world championships in Bern, Switzerland.
The loss was the second in two games for the Americans.
They were crushed by Czechoslovakia, 7-1, on Monday.


Unicorp American reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unicorp American (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
64,941,000
62,994,000
Net loss
b52,562,000
c1,697,000
Yr rev
263,125,000
240,453,000
Net loss
b96,130,000
c8,650,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $34,756,000 for the quarter which represented an estimated loss on disposal of discontinued operations; the year included a loss from discontinued operations of $67,347,000 which consisted of income from discontinued operations of $653,000 and an estimated loss on the disposal of


First National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,338,000
1,031,000
Per share
.40
.33
Per share earnings are fully diluted.


Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
159,800,000
141,500,000
Share earns
3.04
2.56
Shares outst
50,400,000
52,600,000


Conner Peripherals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conner Peripherals Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
235,110,000
130,870,000
Net inc
15,422,000
5,656,000
Share earns
.37
.16
Shares outst
42,097,000
35,860,000


Market Place;   Europe's Buyouts Draw More Firms
LEAD: THE flurry of corporate buyouts that has swept across Europe in recent years appears to be on the verge of new growth.
At least, that is the hope of some on Wall Street and in the international financial community.


Beloved but Old-Fashioned, Buckwheat Acquires a New Image
LEAD: IN springtime the fields around the upstate New York town of Penn Yan become a gorgeous blanket of lacy white flowers.
It's buckwheat in bloom.


Bancorp of Mississippi Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp of Mississippi Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,060,000
3,263,000
Per share
.64
.68


Plaza Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plaza Commerce Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,110,000
1,905,000
Share earns
.30
.27


Bankers First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers First Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,290,000
1,246,000
Per share
.30
.29


Reviews/Music;   Flutists Who Shun Fluty Cliches
LEAD: Ransom Wilson is a flutist, but he is also artistic director of the Solisti New York Chamber Orchestra.
In that guise, he took it upon himself to encourage the expansion of the contemporary flute repertory by presenting a concert on Monday night at Town Hall devoted to four flute-concerto premieres, with four well-known soloists, counting himself.


Bonds Tumble on Inflation Data
LEAD: The bond market was rocked yesterday by the Government's report that consumer prices climbed five-tenths of 1 percent in March, making the annual inflation rate for the first three months of the year 8.5 percent.
Prices of Treasury securities tumbled in heavy trading.


Chambers Development Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chambers Development Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
59,030,000
36,757,000
Net inc
7,930,000
5,498,000
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
54,641,000
46,071,000
Share earnings reflected 2-for-1 stock split to be paid May 14.


National Mercantile reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Mercantile
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
668,000
806,000
Share earns
.23
.32
Shares outst
2,952,319
2,532,744


Accounts Seized in Inquiry On Colombian Drug Profits
LEAD: The Justice Department announced today that based on a review of bank records seized in Panama after the American invasion, as well as in other foreign countries, it had obtained a court order freezing hundreds of bank accounts in the United States suspected of having been used to hide nearly $400 million in


Nothing New About Adjusting Census Count;   Homeless Numbers
LEAD: To the Editor:


San Diego Gas Yield at 9.785%
LEAD: The San Diego Gas and Electric Company priced through competitive bids yesterday an offering of $100 million in first-mortgage bonds, due in 2020.


Modest University in Florida Is Blazing a Trail For Blacks to Careers in the World of Business
LEAD: A bespectacled young man, beaming in a double-breasted suit, thrust out his hand at a reception here. ''Matthew Bowman,'' he said. ''I'm a business administration major at FAM U., and I'm from Fayetteville, N.C.'' Without pause, he produced a business card with his school address, his home address and his telephone numbers.


National Banc of Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Banc of Commerce
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,596,000
1,224,000
Share earns
.26
.28
Shares outst
6,196,000
4,409,000


Walbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walbro Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
38,077,000
38,006,000
Net inc
1,183,000
b1,649,000
Share earns
.28
.40
b-Included a gain from an accounting adjustment of $336,000, or 8 cents a share.


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GTE Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,500,000,000
4,100,000,000
Net inc
355,000,000
329,000,000
Share earns
1.05
.97


F.D.A. CONTRADICTS A REPORT ON MILK
LEAD: Contradicting an earlier news release, the Food and Drug Administration has issued a final report saying that five-sixths of the milk samples it tested were contaminated with a tiny amount of antibiotics.


Paine Webber in 17.4% Gain
LEAD: Paine Webber Group Inc. reported a 17.4 percent increase in first-quarter earnings yesterday, but the gains came against a particularly weak quarter last year on Wall Street.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:
Dear Diary:


$263.4 Million Fuel Issue by Louisiana
LEAD: A $263.4 million issue of tax-exempt Louisiana gasoline and tax revenue bonds was tentatively priced yesterday with a maximum yield of about 7.478 percent for a bond maturing in 2004.


Bank Yields Mixed in Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were mixed for the week ended yesterday.
Except for a few banks that change yields on certain deposits, to fall in line with competitive offers, there has not been a sustained movement in months, analysts said.


Reynolds Metals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reynolds Metals (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,386,300,000
1,445,200,000
Net inc
77,700,000
124,500,000
Share earns
1.31
2.28
Shares outst
59,100,000
54,600,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ELIZABETH TAYLOR, hospitalized for a week with a persistent fever and sinus infection, has been transferred by ambulance to a larger hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.


Veto of Abortion Rights Bill Is Upheld in New Hampshire
LEAD: The New Hampshire House failed today to override Gov.
Judd Gregg's veto of an abortion rights bill that the Governor said would have given this state the nations' most liberal abortion law.


CONSUMER PRICES CLIMBED IN MARCH BY A SHARP 0.5%
LEAD: Consumer prices climbed five-tenths of 1 percent in March to make the annual inflation rate 8.5 percent for the first three months of 1990, the most rapid increase in a quarter in nearly eight years, the Labor Department reported today.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: THE listing in the 1989 Gault Millau ''Best of New England'' guide was not the first time Pasta Nostra has been called the ''best Italian restaurant in Connecticut,'' and it may not be the last.


Miami Officer Is Hospitalized In Reported Suicide Attempt
LEAD: A white officer convicted of manslaughter in the deaths of two black men in an incident that touched off rioting last year was hospitalized tonight after what was reported as a suicide attempt, the police said.


Two Views On a Trustee For Eastern
LEAD: The unsecured creditors and management of Eastern Airlines yesterday presented sharply different views on what would happen to the airline if the Bankruptcy Court appointed a trustee to run it.


A.T.&amp;T. in Accord On Retirements
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and two unions representing 60 percent of its work force announced a tentative agreement yesterday on an early retirement plan for nonmanagement workers.


Keycorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keycorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
36,281,000
31,006,000
Per share
.85
.72


Webster Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Webster Financial Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
608,000
1,208,000
Share earns
.17
.34
The company said the lower earnings in 1990 are primarily due to an $800,000 increase in the allowance for loan losses and $450,000 charged to non-interest expense relating to costs associated with the proposed merger with Eagle Financial Corp., which was terminated by mutual agreement on April 6.


Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
9,820,000
b5,962,000
Share earns
-
.70
b-Net income


Eastland Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastland Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
634,000
1,994,000
Per share
.11
.35


Lake Shore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lake Shore Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,800,000
3,014,000
Per share
.34
.37


Belo (A.H.) Corp.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Belo (A.H.) Corp.(N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
97,946,000
91,050,000
Net inc
2,782,000
2,385,000
Share earns
.14
.12
Shares outst
19,414,000
19,945,000


Ethics, Votes And Cable
LEAD: Rulings by a New York City ethics panel that Mayor David N. Dinkins and City Council President Andrew J. Stein should not vote on Manhattan cable television franchises has forced the two officials to choose between the prospect of governmental paralysis and a convoluted solution that risks seeming like a sham.


U.S. SEES QUICK END TO CONTRAS' CAMPS
LEAD: Expressing Washington's continued optimism that the contra war is ending, a senior Administration official said today that the Nicaraguan guerrilla camps in Honduras should be totally dismantled by the middle of next week.


Badger Paper Mills Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Badger Paper Mills Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,992,000
19,466,000
Net inc
589,000
1,326,000
Share earns
.30
.67


Washington Mutual Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Mutual Savings (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
8,493,000
4,758,000
Share earns
.48
.32


Review/Dance;   Exotic Motions With a Jolt of Presence
LEAD: It is a paradox of dance that as performers grow more experienced and gain in dramatic artistry, their physical strength wanes.
Much ethnic dancing allows performers to continue their development as performers, as was illustrated by a program of Near Eastern and Spanish dance on Saturday afternoon at the Nikolais-Louis Choreospace.


Idex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Idex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
66,208,000
56,749,000
Net inc
b3,796,000
b4,654,000
Share earns
.35
.45
Shares outst
10,807,000
6,995,000
b-After extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $590,000, or 5 cents a share, for the latest quarter and $649,000, or 9 cents a share, for year- ago period.


AST Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AST Research Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
137,248,000
113,842,000
Net inc
9,621,000
b1,312,000
Share earns
.78
-
Shares outst
12,368,000
11,590,000
9mo sales
381,988,000
333,066,000
Net inc
19,859,000
b9,951,000
Share earns
1.65
-
Shares outst
12,023,000
11,567,000


Hartford Steam Boiler Inspecion &amp; Ins Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartford Steam Boiler Inspecion &amp; Ins Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
133,800,000
118,067,000
Net inc
20,365,000
19,762,000
Share earns
.99
.97
Shares outst
20,627,586
20,450,988


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huffy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
128,828,000
115,766,000
Net inc
6,053,000
4,335,000
Share earns
.69
.52


First City Bancorp-Tenn.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First City Bancorp-Tenn.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
102,899
102,285
Per share
.08
.15
Shares outst
1,339,898
677,960


Bulgaria Party Officials Blamed for Camps
LEAD: Senior Communist Party officials were to blame for the beating deaths and atrocities in at least two labor camps from 1959 to 1962 and should be punished, a Government commission said today.


Warner-Lambert Gains
LEAD: The Warner-Lambert Company said today that its first-quarter earnings rose 19 percent, to $120 million, or $1.79 a share, from $101 million, or $1.49 a share, in the period in 1989.
The health-care and consumer products company said sales rose 8 percent, to $1.1 billion, from $1.02 billion in the same period last year.


Justin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Justin Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
63,600,000
59,781,000
Net inc
529,000
209,000
Share earns
.06
.03
Year-ago share earnings restated for 3-for-2 stock split effective Dec. 28, 1989.


Test Results in India Canceled Over Fraud
LEAD: Because of fraud in the administration of internationally standardized tests in India, the Princeton-based Educational Testing Service has canceled all the results of the last three Graduate Record Examinations held in this country.


Cities Seek Bush's Backing to Avert Census 'Crisis'
LEAD: Saying the census was facing a ''crisis situation,'' officials of several cities called on President Bush today to join a public relations campaign and ''stress that it's O.K. for people to open their doors'' when census takers start making the rounds of uncounted households next week.


About New York;   Within the Play, The Realities Of Life and Death
LEAD: The 6-year-old boy lingered tentatively outside the door. ''Come in,'' a man said. ''We don't bite.'' Finally, the child plodded into the room, smiling shyly and carrying his cherished Ninja Turtles.


Industrial Output Up by 0.7% in March
LEAD: The nation's industrial production rose by seven-tenths of 1 percent in March, the Federal Reserve reported today, in a second consecutive strong showing that led analysts to suggest that the manufacturing recession may have ended.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a front-page headline was omitted from some copies of Science Times yesterday on an article about the effects of a low-calorie diet on longevity.
The headline should have said, ''Diet Offers Tantalizing Clues to Long Life.''


Large Pension Fund Criticizes A.T.&amp;T. Over Family Agency
LEAD: The trustees of the New York City Employees' Retirement System, which owns 3 million shares of A.T.&amp;T. stock, said yesterday that they were ''deeply disturbed'' by the corporation's recent decision to stop contributing to the Planned Parenthood Federation of America.


Paine Webber Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paine Webber Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
426,060,000
396,974,000
Net inc
10,781,000
9,177,000
Share earns
.20
.11
Share earnings are after preferred dividend requirements of $5,804,000 in the latest quarter and $6,015,000 a year ago.


Mac Brier Dies at 73; Owned Clothing Firms
LEAD: Mac Brier, a men's clothing manufacturer, died of a rare blood disease on Sunday at Bates Hospital in Oakland, Calif.
He was 73 years old and lived in Oakland.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Apr. 13
Apr. 6
Apr. 14
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.5
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.7
2.6
2.8
Gasoline stocks
222.5
225.5
225.4
Distillate stocks
98.7
100.2
96.9
Crude imports, daily
5.8
6.0
5.6
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.8
2.3
Crude stocks
371.7
370.9
320.5
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.4
7.7
Refinery utilization (%)
85.4
82.1
82.7


2 OPEC Nations Reported To Agree to Cut Oil Output
LEAD: Two influential ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries agreed today to reduce production to try to restore oil prices to their benchmark level of $18 a barrel, oil industry executives said.


Hibernia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hibernia Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
b24,911,000
c15,223,000
Per share
-
.57
Shares outst
27,222,000
26,511,000
b-The loss was the result of a special provision of $50 million added to reserves in view of a more conservative approach by Federal regulators toward banking industry credit procedures and uncertain economic trends which became apparent during the first quarter of 1990.


NCNB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCNB Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
140,062,000
75,790,000
Share earns
1.33
.82
Shares outst
101,268,000
86,384,000


Beating the Sphinx
LEAD: I have been to the top of the Empire State Building at night and watched a thunderstorm rage.


Great Western Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Western Fincl (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
74,152,000
57,205,000
Share earns
.58
.45
Per share earnings are fully diluted.


Reynolds Net Declines 38%
LEAD: The Reynolds Metals Company today reported a 38 percent drop in its first-quarter net income, reflecting a steep decline in prices for aluminum ingot and other aluminum products.


Corrections
LEAD: The Talking Business column in Business Day yesterday about an interview with Bernard Krief, a French management consultant, misidentified the consulting group that Bernard Krief Consultants originally wished to buy from the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi advertising agency.
A year ago, Krief sought Saatchi's entire consulting group, which included several firms as well as the Hay


Scott Paper Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott Paper Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,296,000,000
1,268,900,000
Net inc
60,100,000
86,500,000
Share earns
.82
1.12


Bout Outside Ring: King Against Wynn
LEAD: Even though Donald Trump offered $4 million - $1 million more than Caesars Palace - for the live rights to Mike Tyson's next bout, Caesars Palace has managed to get the inside track to the fight.


Westchester to Sue On Rent Allowances
LEAD: The County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, said yesterday that Westchester would sue New York State for ''grossly inadequate'' rent allowances for welfare clients.


Ameritech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritech Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,619,100,000
2,500,700,000
Net inc
303,500,000
300,800,000
Share earns
1.13
1.12


Yield at 9.5% for Offering Backed by Chrysler Loans
LEAD: The Asset Backed Securities Corporation, a unit formed by the First Boston Corporation for issuing asset-backed securities, yesterday priced $609.28 million of securities backed by automobile loans, which were purchased from the Chrysler Financial Corporation.


'Twin Peaks' Journal;   It's Weird, but Town Relishes TV Notoriety
LEAD: Most days, when the mist peels away from the shaggy edge of this old mill town in the foothills of the Cascades, what the light of day reveals is as ordinary as an old shoe.
There are frame houses washed dull by the rain, and barking dogs and gear-grinding trucks.


American Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Electric Power (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,299,000,000
1,263,000,000
Net inc
144,867,000
159,782,000
Share earns
.75
.83
Shares outst
193,151,000
193,535,000


Shops Try Alternative To Mergers
LEAD: IF the 1980's were the age of acquisitions in the advertising industry, the 1990's may turn out to be the age of ''melding,'' one influential analyst says.


Polaroid Net Up 22.8%
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation said today that its first-quarter profit climbed by 22.8 percent but sales declined slightly in a lackluster business environment.
The photography giant reported a net income of $31.8 million, or 43 cents a share, in the three months ended April 1, up from $25.9 million, or 29 cents, in the 1989 quarter.


Southwestern Bell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Bell Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,129,200,000
2,057,600,000
Net inc
247,800,000
238,800,000
Share earns
.82
.79


Sunrise Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunrise Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
793,000
417,000
Share earns
.23
.12


Bank of San Francisco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of San Francisco (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
796,000
460,000
Per share
.38
.21
Shares outst
2,273,833
2,266,033


Books of The Times;   Distilling and Augmenting Virginia Woolf's Letters
LEAD:
Congenial Spirits
The Selected Letters of Virginia Woolf
Edited by Joanne Trautmann Banks
472 pages. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
$24.95.


Surgery for Modell
LEAD: The Cleveland Browns' majority owner and president, Art Modell, underwent successful double bypass coronary surgery yesterday at Cleveland Clinic Hospital.
Modell, 64 years old, underwent a quadruple bypass operation in 1983 after a heart attack. (AP)


Coca-Cola Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
906,378,000
859,563,000
Net inc
8,033,000
13,452,000
Share earns
.03
.07
Shares outst
121,924,000
132,289,000
In the latest first quarter, the completion of the sale of Coca-Cola Enterprises' food-service vending operations in Memphis, Tenn., resulted in a gain of $3.7 million, before taxes, equaled to 1 cent a share.


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Springs Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
459,201,000
471,862,000
Net inc
7,563,000
15,289,000
Share earns
.42
.86


NBC Wins Ratings for Season But Shows Signs of Weakness
LEAD: NBC finished on top in the 1989-90 prime-time television ratings season, which ended Sunday, its fifth straight victory, but the results revealed an unexpected weakness in the front-running network and a shift in momentum toward its rival, ABC.


Communications Transmision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Transmision Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1980
Revenue
94,503,000
102,662,000
Net loss
12,153,000
b4,388,000
Shares outst
10,402,000
10,532,000
9mo rev
291,003,000
332,974,000
Net loss
38,562,000
b12,953,000
Shares outst
10,403,000
10,534,000


Lawson P. Ramage Is Dead at 81; Submarine Hero in World War II
LEAD: Lawson P. Ramage, a retired vice admiral who served in the Pacific in World War II and was one of the Navy's most decorated submariners, died of cancer on Monday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 81 years old.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: HOME cooks, when pressed for time, seem to have an insatiable appetite for quick, tasty pasta recipes.
There is probably no better way to get a nourishing family meal on the table in half an hour or less than by making a seafood pasta.
Shrimp is ideal, since the cooking time is only a few minutes.


Affiliated Bankshares of Colo.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Bankshares of Colo.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,023,000
1,109,000
Per share
.17
.09


TRW Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TRW Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,991,000,000
1,785,000,000
Net inc
57,000,000
69,000,000
Share earns
.93
1.13


Diasonics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diasonics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
59,312,000
46,250,000
Net inc
3,863,000
b2,753,000
Share earns
.05
.04
Shares outst
76,193,000
71,866,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $676,000, or 1 cent a share.


Del Monte Buyout
LEAD: The European processed foods division of the Merrill Lynch Company's Del Monte Corporation is being bought out by management for $375 million.
The new company will be called Del Monte Foods International and will include the European Processed Food division's associated overseas companies.
Merrill has owned the division only since Jan.


A &amp; W Brands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A &amp; W Brands (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
27,010,000
23,570,000
Net inc
3,386,000
2,758,000
Share earns
.37
.30


SDNB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SDNB Financial Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
261,000
216,000
Share earns
.18
.16


Nichols Institute reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols Institute (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
40,900,000
30,176,000
Net inc
1,698,000
960,000
Share earns
.13
.09
Shares outst
13,333,000
10,175,000


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


First Commercial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,763,000
4,198,000
Per share
.62
.43
Shares outst
7,734,297
7,716,403
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted for 5-for-3 split in May 1989.


Flightsafety Intl reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flightsafety Intl (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
64,657,000
52,582,000
Net inc
b24,479,000
14,217,000
Share earns
.72
.42
b-Included a gain of $9,011,000, or 26 cents a share, from an accounting change.


Donaldson Censured by The S.E.C.
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission disclosed yesterday that it had censured the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation and suspended one of its managing directors for 45 days for the purported systematic misuse of securities belonging to inattentive customers for the firm's own profit.


The Cloud Over Cable in New York
LEAD: New York City's new Conflicts of Interest Board has now done the easy part.
It rules that, to avoid the appearance of conflict, Mayor David Dinkins and City Council President Andrew Stein cannot vote on renewing cable television franchises for Manhattan.
The board then said each could delegate someone to act in his place.


A Tyson Sparring Partner Falls in 4 Against Foreman
LEAD: George Foreman, the 42-year-old former heavyweight champion, took another step in his comeback drive to another world title shot when he stopped Mike Jameson of San Jose, Calif., at 2:16 of the fourth round of a scheduled 10-round bout at Caesars Tahoe tonight.


Eddie Lee Hears Some Good Echoes
LEAD: One of the bizarre dynamics of team sports is that every team has one player who drives the coach nuts.
Somebody the coach can unload on.
Somebody who can take it.
With the Knicks, that player is a soft-spoken reserve center named Eddie Lee Wilkins.


Gannett Co. reports earnings for 13wk to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gannett Co. (NYSE)
13wk to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
813,400,000
817,559,000
Net inc
75,001,000
74,901,000
Share earns
.47
.47
The year-ago quarter's earnings included a pre-tax gain on the sale of certain newspaper operations equaled to $9 million, or about 3 cents a share.


A Benefit With Dance
LEAD: The Trisha Brown Dance Company is to join Lucinda Childs, Sara Rudner and eight other leading dance and performance artists in a benefit at 8 P.M. on Monday for Movement Research at Ethnic Folk Arts, 179 Varick Street, in lower Manhattan.
The event is to be the first in a series of benefits for the organization, which was founded to present and teach dance and performance-art skills.


Baruch Chief Acknowledges Problem With Reaccreditation
LEAD: The president of Bernard M. Baruch College has acknowledged that the school's reaccreditation had been deferred last month because of concerns over the low retention rate of minority students and the lack of minority representation on the faculty.


Ivy Budgeting Is a Tough Test
LEAD: When Bill Cleary, Harvard's longtime hockey coach, was named director of athletics at the university recently, he made a promise: he would endure longer than did another hockey coach who was given a similar appointment.


First Tennessee National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Tennessee National (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,470,000
12,898,000
Per share
.22
.82


Hugh W. Colton, Rancher, 89
LEAD: Hugh Wilkens Colton, a rancher and lawyer who was a co-founder of the company that became the Marriott Corporation, died Saturday at his home in Vernal.
He was 89 years old.


Addenda
LEAD: *
Meredith Corp. has agreed to sell MMT Sales Inc. to the unit's management.
The unit, which is based in New York, represents 30 television stations to national advertisers.


Benjamin Adler, 86, An Early Advocate Of UHF Television
LEAD: Benjamin Adler, an electronic engineer and inventor best known for his early work in ultrahigh-frequency television, died of pneumonia Monday at his home in Larchmont, N.Y.
He was 86 years old.


Ohio Edison Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Edison Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
559,662,000
546,708,000
Net inc
96,656,000
98,825,000
Share earns
.59
.60
Yr rev
2,167,923,000
2,162,528,000
Net inc
358,857,000
b225,412,000
Share earns
2.17
1.28


Black Militancy
LEAD: In Milwaukee, a black alderman has called for a black militia to wage ''urban guerrilla warfare'' - actual violence - unless ''racial parity'' is achieved in the city by 1995.
In Teaneck, N.J., black youths angered by the killing of a black teen-ager by police erupted in violence after a prayer vigil.


Hallmark Accepts Univision Offer
LEAD: Hallmark Cards Inc. said that it had dropped a key condition of a tender offer for $270 million in ''junk bonds'' issued by the company's Univision Holdings Inc. unit and had accepted $251.9 million of the bonds for payment.
Hallmark, the privately held greetings card company based in Kansas City, Mo., had offered to pay $131 million for two series of junk bonds on which its 63.5 percent owned Univision unit had missed interest payments.


Nicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nicor Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
631,100,000
681,900,000
Net inc
43,800,000
54,600,000
Share earns
1.49
1.82
Shares outst
29,200,000
29,600,000


4 Major Phone Companies Report Increased Profits
LEAD: Four of the nation's 10 largest providers of local telephone service reported modest increases in first-quarter sales and profits yesterday.


Polaroid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polaroid Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
436,200,000
442,300,000
Net inc
31,800,000
b25,900,000
Share earns
.43
.29
Shares outst
52,075,000
69,808,000
b-Included pretax restructuring charge of $38.5 million.


Sundstrand Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sundstrand Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
401,244,000
377,092,000
Net inc
26,593,000
26,271,000
Share earns
1.43
1.24


Skaneateles Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skaneateles Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
155,000
352,000
Share earns
,15
.34


Macmillan Bloedel reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Macmillan Bloedel (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
781,300,000
807,000,000
Net inc
30,000,000
73,400,000
Share earns
.26
.68
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Warner Joins Walt Disney In Banning Ads at Its Films
LEAD: Warner Brothers has followed the lead of the Walt Disney Company in banning commercials from movie screens where its pictures are shown.


Corrections
LEAD: An article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about a rally in crude oil futures prices misidentified the ministerial group of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries that scheduled a meeting yesterday in Saudi Arabia.
According to the official Saudi Press Agency, those meeting were the oil ministers of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, not the OPEC monitoring committee, which has eight members.


Cleaning Up Electronics
LEAD: In an effort to prevent further depletion of the earth's ozone, the Digital Equipment Corporation has developed a system for cleaning sophisticated electrical equipment that eliminates the use of chlorofluorocarbons, a chemical blamed for damaging the protective layer of the atmosphere.
The company said it would make the technology available without charge.


Southwest Media Sale
LEAD: The American Express Publishing Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Southwest Media Corporation, the publisher of D Magazine.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Consumer's World page on March 24 about computer purchases with credit cards misstated the protection offered by the American Express extended-warranty program.
That plan is not more restrictive than those offered by Visa and Mastercard.
All require that the consumer have a written warranty on a product before they will extend the warranty, and that the warranty be separate from the sales receipt.


Evolution in Europe;   Rightist Russians' Visit Angers Jewish Groups
LEAD: A visit to the United States by seven Soviet writers touched off a debate today between the Bush Administration and Jewish groups, which said the Government was financing the spread of anti-Semitic views.


Great Amer Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Amer Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1990
1989
Net loss
b198,874,000
c19,790,000
Per share
-
.82
Yr net loss
b263,402,000
c49,278,000
Per share
-
2.04
b-Included provisions for loan and foreclosed real estate losses of $271.2 million for the quarter and $405 million for the year.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Ralph Abernathy Dies at 64
The Rev.
Ralph David Abernathy, civil rights pioneer and close adviser to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., died in Atlanta, where he had been hospitalized a month because of declining health.
Page B7.
Handshake Across a Border
West Germany's largest bank, Deutsche Bank, and a newly created private bank in East Germany are forming the first banking joint venture in the two Germanys.


Valmont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valmont Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
214,482,000
189,424,000
Net inc
4,450,000
4,175,000
Share earns
.38
.36


First Alabama Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Alabama Bancshares Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
15,946,000
15,939,000
Per share
.48
.48


Please Stay Home, Suffolk Staff Told
LEAD: Suffolk County hopes to balance its budget in part by encouraging its employees to stay home from work occasionally.


Talk of a Puerto Rico Town: Buried Treasure, No Kidding
LEAD: Most of the millions are still missing, sending F.B.I. agents scrambling for leads from villagers who won't admit to knowing very much about the buried treasure of Vega Baja.


Scientists See a Link Between Alcoholism And a Specific Gene
LEAD: A gene that puts people at risk of becoming alcoholics has been identified for the first time, scientists report in a study being published today.


Geodynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geodynamics Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 2
1990
1989
Revenue
13,326,000
11,927,000
Net inc
957,000
914,000
Share earns
.32
.31
Shares outst
2,989,000
2,906,000
9mo rev
39,035,000
36,258,000
Net inc
2,680,000
2,573,000
Share earns
.89
.89
Shares outst
3,002,000
2,906,000


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lukens Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
170,619,000
159,569,000
Net inc
10,920,000
7,130,000
Share earns
1.26
.83


NBC's 'Hogan Family' Goes to CBS Television
LEAD: CBS announced yesterday that it had purchased the rights to show ''The Hogan Family,'' a family-oriented weekly series that has been shown by NBC since the spring of 1986.
The show consistently ranked first in the ratings in its time slot, Mondays at 8:30 to 9 P.M.
An established show rarely changes networks.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corp., Denver, which is operating under Federal bankruptcy law protection, said it would solicit bids for its main hardware distribution business, thus putting all of its operating businesses up for sale.


ALLIES STILL LAG ON ARMS, U.S. SAYS
LEAD: The United States, which spent a larger share of its national income for the military budget in 1988 than virtually all its NATO allies and Japan together, criticized its friends today for not doing enough to close the military spending gap in recent years.


BHA Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BHA Group Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,091,000
13,666,000
Net inc
1,418,000
899,000
Share earns
.22
.17
Shares outst
6,516,085
5,259,372
6mo sales
33,024,000
26,384,000
Net inc
2,278,000
1,662,000
Share earns
.35
.32
Shares outst
6,508,186
5,114,768


Zulus' Buthelezi: Statesman or Scoundrel, He'll Count in Pretoria's Future
LEAD: Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, the most powerful political leader of the Zulus, South Africa's largest ethnic group, is a man with regal bearing - charismatic, proud, intolerant of criticism, and widely admired or detested.


John Wick, 82, Dies; A Judge in New Jersey
LEAD: John B. Wick, a retired Superior Court judge in New Jersey, died of complications of a stroke on Saturday at Underwood Memorial Hospital in Woodbury, N.J.
He was 82 years old and had lived in Woodbury.


DFSoutheastern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DFSoutheastern Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,938,000
3,311,000
Per share
.63
.72


Atlantic American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic American Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,844,000
22,511,000
Net loss
428,000
3,161,000


Timken Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Timken Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
408,543,000
434,724,000
Net inc
19,059,000
27,729,000
Share earns
.63
.98
Shares outst
30,324,820
28,401,641


Inamed Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inamed Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
26,081,844
18,555,579
Net inc
720,832
435,291
Share earns
.09
.06
Shares outst
7,585,732
6,966,012


Simpson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Simpson Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
46,682,000
51,067,000
Net inc
1,502,000
3,748,000
Share earns
.16
.39


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JEANNE GALWAY flew into the role that her husband was to have played at the Opera Company of Philadelphia when JAMES GALWAY missed his opera debut Monday night because he was in the hospital with an intestinal tract inflammation.


After Years of Becoming Cleaner, New York City Air Grows Dirtier
LEAD: After years of improvement, the quality of New York City's air is again on the decline, as growing numbers of automobiles spew rising amounts of carbon monoxide and smog-producing pollutants into the atmosphere.


Food Notes
LEAD:
Queens Farmers' Market


Arthur Sorin, 89, Dies; Led Air-Cooling Firm
LEAD: Arthur Sorin, founder and chief executive of one of the first concerns to install air-conditioning equipment in the city, died of cancer on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 89 years old.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
ANR Freight System Inc., Denver, a subsidiary of the Coastal Corp., Houston, announced the resignation of Joseph F. DeBella, its president.
The company named Larry R. Jouett executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Baby Orphaned but Enriched By Quake Is Going to Cousins
LEAD: A 10-month-old baby orphaned in the earthquake last Oct. 17 will be raised by second cousins who own a hog farm in the Central Valley town of Chowchilla, a judge announced today, six months to the day since the parents were crushed to death beneath the Nimitz Freeway.


E.W. Scripps Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E.W. Scripps Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
297,476,000
294,911,000
Net inc
9,725,000
15,084,000
Share earns
.13
.19
Shares outst
76,490,000
78,743,000


Ralph David Abernathy, Rights Pioneer, Is Dead at 64
LEAD: The Rev.
Ralph David Abernathy, a pioneer leader in the civil rights struggle who was one of the most trusted confidants of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. in the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, died yesterday at the Crawford W. Long Hospital of Emory University in Atlanta.
He was 64 years old.


Dollar, Up Modestly Abroad, Ends Trading Day Lower
LEAD: The dollar ended lower yesterday against major foreign currencies after rising modestly overseas.
Currency dealers attributed the dollar's slide to Government reports that consumer prices surged an unexpectedly sharp five-tenths of 1 percent last month and that industrial production rose seven-tenths of 1 percent.


Independent Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
436,000
627,000
Per share
.19
.30


Fashion Students Win Parsons's Gold Thimbles
LEAD: LAST night at the Parsons School of Design's 24th Fashion Critics Awards show, students showed big jackets, quilted in satin or velvet over miniskirted dresses or thigh-high denim rompers, a beaded dress depicting the Statue of Liberty, as well as a butter-soft goatskin coat whose shiny brass toggles came from the hardware store.


Jewish Settlers, Ordered Out Of Building, Plan to Appeal
LEAD: A panel of judges from a Jerusalem district court today upheld an order to evict 150 Jewish settlers whose move into the Christian quarter of the Old City has led to anti-Israel protests.


Man Guilty of Attack on Brooklyn Principal
LEAD: A man from Brooklyn was convicted yesterday for punching and kicking a school principal in an argument over a dance class, the Brooklyn District Attorney's office said.


Citicorp Earnings Drop 56.3%
LEAD: Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, said yesterday that problems with real estate loans and loans for corporate takeovers caused its earnings to fall 56.3 percent in the first quarter, to $231 million, from $529 million a year ago.


Altera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altera Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
17,331,000
12,468,000
Net inc
3,068,000
2,285,000
Share earns
.15
.12


Green Tree Acceptance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Green Tree Acceptance (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
33,280,000
23,515,000
Net inc
4,816,000
1,338,000
Share earns
.22
-
Preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income in the year-ago quarter.


Nuclear Training Plan Upheld
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled today that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission must set up training requirements for workers at nuclear power plants instead of relying on utilties to conform voluntarily with the commission's training guidelines.


Let's Shine Some Light on Kosher Food Industry
LEAD: To the Editor:


Standard Pacific L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Pacific L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
99,175,000
102,457,000
Net inc
18,712,000
23,591,000
Share earns
.68
.86
The 1989 partnership income was positively affected by a gain of about $1.5 million, or 6 cents a unit, from the sale of an industrial building located in Orange County, Calif.


Home &amp; City Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home &amp; City Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,756,000
1,924,000
Per share
.61
.67


United Banks of Colorado Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Banks of Colorado Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,600,000
4,500,000
Share earns
.27
.26
Shares outst
15,305,000
15,163,000


Photo: Mikhail Ulyanov as Lenin in ''The Peace of Brest-Litovsk.''Review/Theater;   An Unsaintly but Heroic Lenin at a Turning Point
LEAD: With an impartiality that has been rare in contemporary Soviet theater, ''The Peace of Brest-Litovsk'' personalizes history and illuminates a turning point in its nation's past: the 1918 treaty that fixed its signers (post-Czarist Russia and imperialist Germany) on a course that was to have disastrous repercussions.


How Youths Rallied To Dolphins' Cause
LEAD: AS many as 10 million dolphins have died in the nets of tuna fishermen in the last 30 years.
But it seems that only in the last six months has the magnitude of the slaughter sunk into the national psyche and prompted support for a boycott of tuna.
The all-American food, popular in sandwiches and casseroles, was becoming associated with needless killing.


Bush and Europeans Disagree on Warming
LEAD: President Bush today called for more research on the issue of global warming induced by pollution, but officials from several European nations responded that research was not enough and that prompt, concrete action was needed as well.


Dual-Trading Ban Proposed
LEAD: Members of the Chicago Merchantile Exchange approved a ban tonight on so-called dual trading, a practice involving certain futures contracts.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Generally speaking, New York's air is cleaner than Los Angeles's, but that's not saying a whole heck of a lot.''
- Ronald H. White of the American Lung Association.
[A1:1.]


Imperial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,007,000
5,085,000
Per share
.56
.48
Shares outst
10,722,281
10,571,781


Fernando Lay, U.N. Official, 51
LEAD: Fernando Lay, First Counselor of the Italian Mission to the United Nations, died Sunday at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, after a long illness.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Shortage of Additive Limits Clean Gasoline
LEAD: In recent months, four oil companies have followed ARCO's lead in introducing cleaner-burning gasolines in a limited number of markets, and more are likely to follow.
But for all the marketing fanfare accompanying the new products, most Americans should not expect to see such lower-pollution gasolines at local pumps for at least three years.


First Charter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Charter Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
773,000
b730,000
Per share
.26
.25
b-After a loss of $14,000 from discontinued operations.


Security Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,005,000
6,340,000
Share earns
.59
.54


Kroger Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kroger Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Sales
4,558,759,120
4,490,776,099
Net loss
10,265,313
18,970,837
Shares outst
84,096,391
80,956,862


Victoria Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Victoria Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
536,000
b807,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


For Insider, Fine and 4-Month Term
LEAD: Closing one of the most difficult criminal cases the Government has brought in its pursuit of corruption on Wall Street, a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday sentenced a former stock speculator to four months in prison and fined him $1 million for a single incident of insider trading.


Falls Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falls Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
657,000
529,000
Per share
.41
-
The year-ago per share earnings not available as the company converted to stock company in December 1989.


Jefferson Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,601,000
4,058,000
Per share
.52
.59


American General Denied Injunction
LEAD: The State Corporation Commission of Virginia denied a request by the American General Corporation for a temporary injunction against the Torchmark Corporation's proxy solicitation for a slate of candidates for the American General board.
The commission said Torchmark was not in violation of Virginia law even though it had begun its proxy campaign without seeking the commission's approval to take control of American


Massachusetts Helps Norton
LEAD: A bill drawn expressly to thwart a hostile takeover of the Norton Company was passed today by the Legislature.


John Henry and Velasquez Voted to Hall
LEAD: John Henry, the ageless gelding who earned more than $6 million, and Jorge Velasquez, a leading New York jockey for more than 20 years, are among four horses and three people whose election to thoroughbred racing's Hall of Fame was announced yesterday.


Great Oaks Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Oaks Financial
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
211,000
b2,881,000
Per share
.13
-
Shares outst
1,630,000
1,200,000
b-Net loss


General Electric's Profits Increase by 12% in Quarter
LEAD: The General Electric Company reported a 12 percent rise in first-quarter earnings yesterday, to $950 million, or $1.06 a share, from $849 million, or 94 cents a share, a year earlier.


Noland Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noland Co
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
105,570,088
104,853,453
Net inc
828,638
548,858
Share earns
.22
.15


Warner-Lambert Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warner-Lambert Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,100,021,000
1,019,675,000
Net inc
120,274,000
101,071,000
Share earns
1.79
1.49
Shares outst
67,253,000
67,782,000


11 Killed in Strife Between Beirut Shiite Factions
LEAD: Widespread clashes broke out between rival Shiite Muslim factions in mainly Muslim West Beirut and its southern suburbs today, and the police said 11 people were killed and 35 wounded.


Bank of New England Gets Chief of New Unit
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation said yesterday that it planned to set up a ''collecting bank'' to hold a large part of its nonperforming real estate assets and named Steven E. Wheeler to head it.


Xoma Awarded Drug Patent
LEAD: The Xoma Corporation, a biotechnology company, received a patent covering a drug for bacterial infections.
Xoma immediately filed a lawsuit against Centocor Inc., which is developing a similar drug.


Gilmore Is Drafted
LEAD: He helped Jacksonville University reach the national collegiate final in 1970, then scored, rebounded and blocked shots for four teams over 18 seasons in the American and National Basketball Associations.
Yesterday, Artis Gilmore, still 7 feet 2 inches in height but now at least 15 pounds over his playing weight of 265, was drafted again - by the United States Basketball


In Mideast, Egypt Acts as a Peacemaker
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gish Biomedical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gish Biomedical (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,940,000
3,927,000
Net inc
405,000
237,000
Share earns
.21
.13
Shares outst
1,970,522
1,847,400
9mo sales
13,126,000
10,888,000
Net inc
948,000
654,000
Share earns
.50
.35
Shares outst
1,915,620
1,845,395


Louisiana-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana-Pacific (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
474,080,000
467,000,000
Net inc
35,800,000
39,900,000
Share earns
.95
1.05
Shares outst
37,720,000
38,200,000


United Telecom to Buy All of U S Sprint
LEAD: United Telecommunications Inc. announced yesterday that it would buy out its minority partner in the U S Sprint long-distance telephone company and rename itself the Sprint Corporation.


Sales of Vehicles Down By 11.3% in Early April
LEAD: Sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks fell by 11.3 percent in early April, compared with relatively strong sales a year ago, despite aggressive cash rebates and other discounts.


New Direction Expected In Geographic Shake-Up
LEAD: The abrupt replacement of the editor of National Geographic magazine, brought on by editorial and managerial disputes within the scientific society, appears likely to alter the magazine's course as it explores its own identity.


Citicorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citicorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
231,000,000
529,000,000
Per share
.60
1.52
Shares outst
327,290,000
320,152,000
Year-ago first quarter included a $77 million gain on the sale of Tokyo real estate and $66 million of Brazilian interest payments that have since been suspended.


Robert Forster Meffert, Stock Exchange Partner, 78
LEAD: Robert Forster Meffert, a retired member of the New York Stock Exchange, died Saturday at the Memorial Medical Center in Savannah, Ga., after a long illness.
He was 78 years old and lived in Beaufort, S.C.


Review/Theater;   The Pursuits of Poets, Literary and Otherwise
LEAD: One shudders at the thought that the future of American letters might in any way be influenced by the band of would-be poets that gathers at the writers' workshop that is the setting for ''Related Retreats,'' a new play by Eduardo Machado at the Theater for the New City.


Safeway Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeway Inc.
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Sales
3,336,000,000
3,226,600,000
Net inc
15,000,000
8,800,000
Share earns
.17
.12
Shares outst
88,200,000
79,700,000


Hawks Defeat Nets to Stay in Race
LEAD: Dominique Wilkins scored 10 of his 36 points in the final quarter to help break open a close game tonight, and the Atlanta Hawks went on to rout the New Jersey Nets, 118-95, keeping their playoff hopes alive.


Merchants National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants National (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b4,603,000
12,439,000
Share earns
.31
.85
b-Included an after-tax charge of $3 million related to Drexel Burnham Lambert commercial paper.


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dexter Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
229,204,000
217,768,000
Net inc
9,991,000
11,430,000
Share earns
.41
.46
Shares outst
24,555,000
24,867,000


How Cincinnati Sees the Arts And Art Figures See the City
LEAD: At the very center of downtown Cincinnati is a 109-year-old fountain, an ornate mid-Victorian fantasy that graces the area appropriately named Fountain Square.
When it was restored in 1971, a bronze plaque was put next to it, Joseph Marioni, a painter who was born and brought up in Cincinnati, said the other day.


Nothing New About Adjusting Census Count
LEAD: To the Editor:


Microsoft Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microsoft Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1989
1988
Revenue
310,882,000
197,024,000
Net inc
75,169,000
41,119,000
Share earns
.62
.36
Shares outst
121,069,000
112,868,000
9mo rev
846,474,000
583,299,000
Net inc
199,233,000
125,186,000
Share earns
1.69
1.12
Shares outst
118,047,000
112,270,000


Ex-Oklahoma Banker Joins New Jersey Bank
LEAD: Fred M. Moses, a former Oklahoma banker, has been named president and chief executive of the United Jersey Bank, based in Hackensack, the bank said yesterday.


Eating Well
LEAD: ''I'VE often been referred to as ''that idiot woman from New Hampshire,'' said Mary Roy, who has waged a one-woman campaign to provide consumers with more information about the fruits and vegetables they buy.
Because of Ms.
Roy, a bill to require labeling of produce that has been coated with wax has been passed by the New Hampshire Legislature.


Burr-Brown Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burr-Brown Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
41,857,000
43,951,000
Net inc
1,578,000
3,037,000
Share earns
.16
.30
Shares outst
9,616,000
9,696,000


International Multifoods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Multifoods Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
528,300,000
495,700,000
Net inc
4,100,000
c7,000,000
Share earns
.32
.56
Yr sales
2,074,900,000
1,940,700,000
Net inc
b25,300,000
d35,100,000
Share earns
1.96
2.49


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MELBA MOORE went to Washington yesterday seeking wider recognition for a favorite song, ''Lift Every Voice and Sing.'' It was the song's 90th anniversary.
WALTER FAUNTROY, the delegate to Congress from the District of Columbia, read the words into the Congressional Record and Miss Moore was honored at a reception where she played her new recording of it, sung with STEVIE WONDER, DIONNE WARWI


McDonald's Contribution To Recycling
LEAD: Facing widespread opposition to its plastic food packaging and a rising tide of environmental concern, the McDonald's Corporation today is announcing a plan to buy up to $100 million in recycled construction materials for use in building and remodeling its fast-food restaurants.


For Nepalese, Talk Now Centers on Politics
LEAD: In homes and offices, at public meetings and dinner parties, in villages and towns across Nepal, conversations center on one Nepali word: bahu-dal.


Mets Throw One Away In 13th
LEAD: Would you walk Howard Johnson to load the bases and pitch to Darryl Strawberry with two down and the game on the line in the 10th inning?


Sunrise Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunrise Technologies
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,174,062
350,044
Net inc
118,900
20,846
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
7,172,625
3,920,816


American Capital Manageent reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital Manageent (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
24,450,000
25,520,000
Net inc
5,070,000
5,160,000
Share earns
.21
.21


Rev. Charles E. Sheedy, Notre Dame Dean, 77
LEAD: The Rev.
Charles E. Sheedy, former dean of the College of Arts and Letters at the University of Notre Dame, died of chronic lung disease on Saturday.
He was 77 years old and lived in South Bend.


North American Union
LEAD: To the Editor:


Equifax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equifax Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
218,041,000
195,490,000
Net inc
9,769,000
8,465,000
Share earns
.20
.17
The year-ago share earnings restated to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split on Dec. 18, 1989.


Mallette Gives Rangers More Than A Rough Edge
LEAD: It was behind St.
Bartholomew's Church in Lavack, Ontario, that matters of childhood pride and prejudice came to punches.


Avon Files Suit
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. filed a lawsuit against Chartwell Associates L.P., charging the partnership with ''a relentless effort'' to influence Avon to pursue corporate policies that benefit Chartwell.
In a suit filed late Monday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Avon asked the court to stop Chartwell from buying more Avon stock and to order Chartwell to dispose of the Avon stock it had purchased.


Lessons
LEAD: Plenty of public school systems have recently begun delegating financial and educational decisions to principals and teachers.
Now the Dade County school system has extended this notion of site-based management to its logical conclusion: Let them design and run their own schools.


Executive Is Hired By Weider Publishing
LEAD: Weider Publishing Group has hired Michael T. Carr as executive vice president.
The company's magazines include Muscle &amp; Fitness, Flex, Men's Fitness, Shape and Moxie.
For the last six months Mr.
Carr, formerly a senior vice president and advertising director at Playboy, was publisher of the National Lampoon, which last month agreed to be acquired by J2


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: IN the Napa Valley wine country no one flinches at reports of the ''flying zucchini'' hovering overhead.
This particular zucchini is actually a passenger-carrying hot-air ballon painted in various shades of green, one of 15 balloons launched every morning from the rolling vineyards of the Domaine Chandon winery in


Use of Drugs in Religious Rituals Can Be Prosecuted, Justices Rule
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that governments may prosecute those who use illegal drugs as part of religious rituals.
It said such prosecutions were not a violation of the constitutional guarantee of religious freedom.


$169.5 Million Deal For Honda and Rover
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company has agreed to buy 20 percent of the Rover Group, the British car maker, in a cash-and-stock deal possibly worth $169.5 million, the two companies announced today.


European Officials Dispute Bush Over Global Warming
LEAD: President Bush called today for more research into the scientific and economic ramifications of global warming linked to pollution, but several European officials attending a conference here argued for more concrete and prompt action as well.


Community Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bank System
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
890,000
1,104,000
Per share
.33
.39
Shares outst
2,711,547
2,868,635


Grainger (W.W.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grainger (W.W.) Inc.(N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
447,421,000
393,603,000
Net inc
28,851,000
b27,561,000
Share earns
1.05
1.01
b-Included a gain of $13.8 million from the sale of fan and blower manufacturing assets that is offset by a charge of $11.8 million for change in method of accounting.


Harland (John H.) Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harland (John H.) Co.(N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
90,465,899
83,768,178
Net inc
14,895,422
14,166,877
Share earns
.40
.37
Shares outst
37,658,999
37,943,028


No Run for the Statehouse
LEAD: Mayor Raymond L. Flynn sent community leaders a letter on Monday saying he would not run for governor and would instead focus on curbing this city's wave of violence, drug dealing and resulting ''despair that affects too many of our citizens.'' The Mayor's decision left four candidates in the Democratic gubernatorial race: John Silber, persident of Boston University; Lieut.


Raytheon Contract
LEAD: Raytheon Services Nevada, a subsidiary of the Raytheon Company, said it had been awarded an Energy Department contract valued at up to $625 million over five years.
The contract, which begins on Oct. 1, calls for Raytheon to provide management, operating and technical services at various test sites.


The Sweetness of Bananas and Apples Cools a Spicy Curry
LEAD: WE love spicy food at our house, and curry - combined occasionally with veal, sometimes with lamb, but most often with chicken - is always welcome.
My family prefers chicken legs to breasts, and that enables us to be generous with the white meat when we have guests.


Strike in Oklahoma Gains Backing
LEAD: The Oklahoma City School Board voted today to use a leftover snow day on Thursday to allow teachers to join a walkout in protest of the Legislature's rejection of a school financing bill that would have included money to raise teachers' salaries.


United Telecommunications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Telecommunications Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,023,800,000
1,766,100,000
Net inc
107,600,000
76,400,000
Share earns
.51
.36


Witness Calls Commissions Routine in Marcos Dealings
LEAD: A Philippine shipping executive, testifying at the racketeering trial of Imelda Marcos, said yesterday that he paid more than $25 million in commissions as a routine part of doing business with the Philippine Government.


Westamerica Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westamerica Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,355,000
1,519,000
Share earns
.45
.30


N.J. School May Shut Down Research Unit Hit by Storm
LEAD: Fairleigh Dickinson University's 21-year-old West Indies Laboratory for Underwater Research, which was badly damaged by Hurricane Hugo last fall, may be closed and sold, depending on the recommendation of a committee of university trustees.


Bronx Cabbie Killings: Night Holds New Fears
LEAD: Piloting his battered Oldsmobile through a dark corridor of tenements, Jose Gonzalez clutched the wheel in his left hand, a steak knife in his right.


'Batman' Among 4 Convicted of Fraud
LEAD: A former New York City police officer, known as Batman for his anti-crime exploits, was convicted with three other men yesterday in a $1.5 million insurance-fraud scheme.


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
748,000,000
665,000,000
Net inc
b32,000,000
34,000,000
Share earns
.76
.82
Shares outst
42,090,000
42,121,000
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $1,000,000 from the purchase of senior subordinated debentures and junior subordinated debentures.


Sony Announces New Factory Plan
LEAD: In an announcement that had been expected, the Sony Corporation said it would spend $300 million on a television picture-tube factory in a plant that was abandoned by the West German auto maker Volkswagen A.G.


Constar International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constar International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
123,654,000
135,719,000
Net inc
4,335,000
3,562,000
Share earns
.58
.58
Shares outst
7,488,000
6,081,000


Playboy Seeks New Agency
LEAD: With its New York ad agency on the verge of closing, Playboy magazine has quietly begun talking to other agencies about its advertising account, which it previously valued at $2 million in print and broadcast billings.
Michael Perlis, the magazine's publisher, confirmed yesterday that he had ''informally started a review, not a structured search,'' for an agency.


The News Is Accused Of Unfair Practices
LEAD: The largest union at The Daily News struck back at the paper's management yesterday, accusing it of 10 separate instances of unfair labor practices in violation of Federal law.


Garbo Funeral Service Is Conducted in Private
LEAD: Funeral services for Greta Garbo, who died on Sunday at New York Hospital at the age of 84, were conducted in private yesterday at the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Home in Manhattan.


Equimark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equimark Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
15,447,000
b5,681,000
Per share
-
.50
Shares outst
11,799,000
9,508,000
b-Net income


CHRONICLE
LEAD: It has been a sore point with the Japanese that they win so few Nobel Prizes, even in the sciences.
So KONOSUKE MATSUSHITA, the founder of one of the world's biggest consumer electronics companies, created the Japan Prize, an annual award in science and technology.
Mr.
Matsushita died last year.


Corestates Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corestates Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
61,903,000
76,486,000
Per share
1.10
1.37
Shares outst
54,696,000
54,668,000
The year-ago results restated to include consolidated accounts of First Pennsylvania Corp., acquired in March 1990 and accounted for as pooling of interests.


Canadian Pacific Forest Prodcts reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Pacific Forest Prodcts
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
642,100,000
711,000,000
Net inc
4,800,000
65,100,000
Share earns
.11
1.48
Results are in Canadian funds.
The company is listed on the Toronto and Montreal stock exchanges.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.37
8.25
9.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.71
8.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.79
7.75
8.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.75
8.67
9.09
30-YR.


People
LEAD: *
Dick Grossman and Sylvio deRouin have been appointed vice chairmen of Nelson Communications Inc.
Cynthia Armstrong has joined the Nelson Communications agency RWR Advertising as executive vice president and creative director.


Nothing New About Adjusting Census Count;   Nine for One
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fab Indus reports earnings for Qtr to March 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fab Indus (AMEX)
Qtr to March 3
1990
1989
Sales
35,609,000
34,958,000
Net inc
2,005,000
1,983,000
Share earns
.61
.60
Shares outst
3,283,406
3,301,637


Nathaniel Frison, Chef, 79
LEAD: Nathaniel Frison, head chef at the Old Original Bookbinders restaurant in Philadelphia for four decades and creator of many of its soups, died Friday at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
He was 79 years old.


First Florida Banks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Florida Banks (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,457,000
12,926,000
Per share
.41
.81


Goldome reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldome (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b25,400,000
c38,800,000
Per share
.88
-
Shares outst
28,105,167
28,061,300
b-Included a gain of about $20 million from the sale of securitized loans.
c-Net loss


Reds Top Padres, 2-1, To Capture 7th Straight
LEAD: For now, the Cincinnati Reds have an unbeatable combination: good play and good luck.


McGraw-Hill Profit Drops
LEAD: McGraw-Hill Inc. said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings had tumbled 47.1 percent, in part because it has become more vulnerable to seasonal swings in its sales since it entered a school publishing venture.


Indiana Federal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Indiana Federal Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,080,000
870,000
Per share
.39
.32
Shares outst
2,743,000
2,742,000


Rock Concerts in Memory Of Crackdown in Beijing
LEAD: Rock concerts are planned in Paris, New York and at least four other cities on June 3 to commemorate the anniversary of the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing, organizers announced today.


Companies' Anti-Union Tack In Strikes Is Blocked by Court
LEAD: The Supreme Court today strengthened labor unions' hand in strikes marked by the hiring of replacement workers.


Louis J. Tullio, 73, Mayor of Erie, Pa.; Had a Rare Disease
LEAD: Louis J. Tullio, the six-term Mayor of Erie, died at his home early today from amyloidosis, a rare disease that also took the life of Pittsburgh's Mayor in 1988.
Mayor Tullio was 73 years old.
Mr.
Tullio, a Democrat, was credited with helping to slow Erie's decline as a manufacturing town and preserving it as a port city and commercial center.


Puritan-Bennett Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puritan-Bennett Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
61,871,000
53,898,000
Net inc
4,174,000
4,142,000
Share earns
.37
.37


Rev. John A. Bell, 80, Episcopal Priest, Dies
LEAD: The Rev.
John Atherton Bell, an Episcopal priest and the rector of the Church of the Incarnation in Manhattan for more than 30 years, died on Thursday at Forest Farm Inn, a convalescent center in Middletown, R.I.
He was 80 years old and lived in Newport, R.I.


Accounts
LEAD: *
MGM Grand Air, a luxury airline that flies between New York and Los Angeles, to Lintas Campbell-Ewald.


Honeywell Gains 43.2%
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. said today that net income in the first quarter rose 43.2 percent, and that earnings from continuing operations were even stronger, showing a gain of 63.5 percent in part because of strong performances by the company's industrial and commercial flight systems divisions.


Harvey Named Best In Metropolitan Area
LEAD: Greg (Boo) Harvey, a senior guard, last night became the 16th player from St.
John's to win the Haggerty Award as the finest college basketball player in the New York metropolitan area.


Grenada Sunburst System Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grenada Sunburst System Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,800,000
2,900,000
Per share
.31
.32


NBSC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBSC Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,066,000
1,031,000
Share earns
.34
.33


Gannett Posts A Slight Gain
LEAD: The Gannett Company, the diversified media company, yesterday reported a small gain in first-quarter earnings.
Gannett, based in Arlington, Va., said earnings totaled $75 million, or 47 cents a share, up from $74.9 million, or 47 cents a share, in the 1989 quarter.
Revenue slipped less than 1 percent, to $813.4 million, from $817.6 million a year earlier.


Review/Rock;   Audience Is Part of Motley Crue Act
LEAD: The audience is the thing at a Motley Crue concert.
At the Meadowlands tonight the audience yelled loudly, then even louder.
They waved their arms.
They sang along with the songs.
They pumped their fists in the air, and congratulated themselves on what a good performance the band was putting on.
And the band, taking regular breathers from its calisthenics on stage, milked the audience for every scream.


Rep. Frank Announces Plans to Seek 6th Term
LEAD: Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts announced today that he would seek re-election even though the House ethics committee has yet to release a report on questions surrounding his relationship with a male prostitute.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: BREAKFAST at Tiffany's might be a fantasy for New Yorkers, but in Wisconsin it can be had seven days a week in the tiny village of Tiffany, right across the road from Laders' Tiffany Feed and Supply.


Smith Corona reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith Corona (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
110,600,000
121,800,000
Net inc
6,100,000
b12,400,000
Share earns
.20
.41
9mo sales
391,600,000
380,700,000
Net inc
34,400,000
b38,400,000
Share earns
1.14
1.27


Oakland Is Expected to Rescind A Deal for the Raiders to Return
LEAD: The thousands of silver and black T-shirts proclaiming that the Raiders were back may soon become collector's items and the thousands who reserved seats for the 1992 season may be getting refunds.


Wine Talk
LEAD: ARE you into ''fighting varietals''?
This may sound like the name of a high-wire act or the nickname of a basketball team, but it actually describes a group of wines.
Needless to say, they are American wines: where else in the world would wines be described so pugnaciously?


Stock Prices Weaken, Then Rebound a Bit
LEAD: Stock prices recovered from a strong setback yesterday but barely advanced by the end of the day.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
566,575,000
431,838,000
Net inc
21,361,000
19,210,000
Share earns
.74
.72
Shares outst
28,806,340
26,616,200


Transactions
LEAD:
BASEBALL
HOUSTON (NL) - Placed Steve Lombardozzi, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to April 15.
Purchased the contract of Casey Candaele, infielder, from Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
BASKETBALL
DALLAS (NBA) - Activated Brad Davis, guard, from the injured list.


C-Cor Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C-Cor Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
18,310,000
14,337,000
Net inc
1,666,000
1,155,000
Share earns
.38
.27
9mo sales
44,604,000
39,371,000
Net inc
3,581,000
3,575,000
Share earns
.82
.84


Burmese Army's Successes Produce a New Flood of Refugees for Thailand
LEAD: Advances by Burmese troops against rebellious ethnic minorities along the Thai border are creating a new refugee problem here, with thousands of Burmese seeking shelter and assistance in Thailand.


Diceon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diceon Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
32,671,000
29,539,000
Net loss
1,421,000
1,262,000
Shares outst
5,650,000
5,811,000
6mo sales
59,439,000
60,206,000
Net loss
2,619,000
1,025,000
Shares outst
5,731,000
5,811,000


As Field Narrows to 8, Possibilities Seem to Multiply
LEAD: With eight teams remaining in the playoffs and the defending champion Calgary Flames already eliminated, this spring's Stanley Cup tournament is running over with legitimate contenders as the second of four rounds begins tonight.


Union Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
34,565,000
33,459,000
Share earns
1.00
1.00
Shares outst
31,965,000
30,706,000
Year-ago quarter results included a gain of $11.4 million related to a real estate profit participation loan.


Bush Warns Moscow of U.S. Move Over Cut in Fuel for Lithuanians
LEAD: President Bush warned Moscow today that he would retaliate for a cut in fuel shipments to Lithuania, and officials said possible responses ranged from canceling official meetings and educational exchanges to stalling talks on a variety of trade issues.


Deutsche Bank Sets Tie in East
LEAD: Deutsche Bank A.G., West Germany's largest bank, announced today that it had agreed to form a pioneering joint venture in East Germany that would give it control over roughly one-third of the existing banking network in East Germany.


Greece Threatens to Expel Syrian Envoy Over Terrorism
LEAD: Greece's new conservative Government warned a Syrian diplomat today that it would expel him unless he gave a satisfactory explanation for a statement interpreted as supportive of terrorism.


Rigged Shotgun Kills Youth
LEAD: A teen-ager was killed when he broke into a warehouse last Saturday night and tripped a booby-trapped shotgun, the authorities said today.
The youth, Michael McComb, was shot in the chest while leading three juveniles in a burglary attempt, the police said.
They said the downtown warehouse, leased to Philip Connaghan of suburban Arvada, had been burglarized eight times since 1987.


Profits Up 83% At Microsoft
LEAD: Amid a personal computer industry slump, the Microsoft Corporation today reported strong growth in earnings and revenues for its third quarter.


Topics of The Times;   Railroad Bridge
LEAD: Long Island Rail Road commuters have a history of adapting to delays, fare hikes and a monotonous daily trip.
Now one group of riders, bridge players, is forced to adapt again.
A change in advertising signage requires them to find a new source of card tables.


Spread of AIDS In Rural Areas Testing Georgia
LEAD: Since October, the number of AIDS cases in the area surrounding Macon has tripled to 76, catching health officials by surprise, confronting them with difficult choices on how to provide care and sorely testing community values.


Pacific Western Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Western Bancshares (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,003,000
2,438,000
Share earns
.31
.21
Shares outst
12,760,000
11,811,000


The Pop Life
LEAD:
By Charles Mingus


Vanfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vanfed Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
398,000
284,000
Share earns
.35
.25


New Delhi Journal;   A Call to the Downtrodden: Break Down the Door
LEAD: A brown washcloth in hand to mop his brow under the fiery Indian sun, Kanshi Ram stepped up to the microphones to start a revolution.


Economic Scene;   Trade Wars Postponed
LEAD: HAUNTED by visions of Toshibas and Toyotas being shoved off the pier in Seattle, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu is making a big push to appease America's Japan-bashers.
The Bush Administration, which has been playing good cop to Congress's bad cop in the unfolding trade drama, emerged from the latest round of negotiations with a sheaf of commitments that should make it far easier for American consumer goods to break into the


Mellon Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mellon Bank Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
65,000,000
b77,000,000
Per share
1.25
1.67
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $24,000,000, or 65 cents a share, from early retirement of debt.


Constitution Bancorp of New England Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constitution Bancorp of New England Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,343,000
b585,000
Per share
.40
-
b-Net loss


More on Valvano
LEAD: North Carolina State players weren't motivated to study under former coach, Jim Valvano, unless their playing time was threatened, Larry Monteith, the school's interim chancellor, said yesterday.


Dinkins Hopes to Bring Home a Souvenir of the South: New Business


Rich Japanese Beef Barred From U.S.
LEAD: AMERICANS will have to wait to sample $100 Kobe steaks, which come from hand-massaged, soybean-fed, beer-quenched cattle raised in Japan.
The United States Department of Agriculture has rejected a New York restaurant's request to import Kobe beef, saying that Japanese slaughterhouses fail to meet the


Winfield Drives In 2 Runs to Support Leary
LEAD: An entire season had passed, but the moment that Dave Winfield swung the bat and drove the pitch to left tonight, it seemed as if time had not really moved at all.
He has been doing this so often - and for so long - that he might have done it yesterday.


Teaneck Shooting Investigation Is Shifted to State Grand Jury
LEAD: The New Jersey Attorney General today ordered the grand jury investigation of the fatal shooting of a black youth by a white policeman moved to the state level because of tensions here over the sharp differences between the police report of the incident and witnesses' accounts.


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
61,751,000
39,200,000
Share earns
.62
.40


Tolland Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tolland Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
184,000
262,000
Share earns
.16
.23


American Home Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Home Products Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,813,435,000
1,746,751,000
Net inc
314,488,000
280,092,000
Share earns
2.01
1.81
Shares outst
156,806,000
155,168,000
The 1989 results were restated to reflect the merger with A.H.


Cheshire Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cheshire Financial Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b584,000
1,255,000
Per share
.16
.34
b-Included a pre-tax $525,000 writedown of marketable securities.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Consumer prices climbed by 0.5 percent in March to make the annual inflation rate 8.5 percent for the first three months of 1990, the most rapid quarterly increase in nearly eight years, the Labor Department reported. [Page A1.]
Sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks fell by 11.3 percent in early April.


Johnson Controls Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Controls Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,084,400,000
863,700,000
Net inc
8,100,000
19,400,000
Share earns
.15
.53
6mo sales
2,155,200,000
1,724,100,000
Net inc
36,400,000
50,200,000
Share earns
.82
1.37


Salem Carpet Mills Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salem Carpet Mills Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
112,272,000
89,241,000
Net inc
482,000
672,000
Share earns
.06
.08
The company attributed the sale increase to the inclusion of Howard Carpet Mills Inc., which was acquired July 21, 1989.


Honeywell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Honeywell Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
1,526,800,000
1,432,500,000
Net inc
b90,100,000
c62,900,000
Share earns
2.29
1.46
Shares outst
39,330,866
43,132,150
b-Included a gain of $18.1 million from the sale of Yamatake-Honeywell shares and after income of $6.7 million, or 17 cents a share, from discontinued operations.


Evolution in Europe;   MOSCOW SAYS CUTS IN ENERGY SUPPLIES TO LITHUANIA BEGIN
LEAD: The Soviet authorities told Lithuanian officials today that they would halt crude oil supplies to Lithuania's only refinery and curb the flow of natural gas.
This set off calls in Lithuania's Parliament for scaling back independence measures that had provoked the Kremlin's economic move.


Cullen-Frost Bankers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cullen-Frost Bankers (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
511,000
729,000
Per share
.06
.08


Firstbank of Illinois Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstbank of Illinois Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,906,000
2,478,000
Per share
.54
.46


A New Service Begins at Stewart Airport
LEAD: American Airlines Flight 793, seven minutes late but its 118 seats filled, roared out of Stewart International Airport for Chicago today, the first regularly scheduled passenger service in the history of this former Air Force base 60 miles north of New York City.


Evolution in Europe;   Furor Grows Among Soviets Over a Corruption Scandal
LEAD: The Soviet Parliament plunged into one of the nation's most impassioned controversies today, trying to judge the behavior of two former criminal prosecutors who have stirred crowds across the country with charges that a mass corruption scandal reaches all the way to the Kremlin.


First Security Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Security Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
12,568,000
10,082,000
Per share
.92
.75
The year-ago quarter was restated to give effect to the acquisition of United Savings Bank on March 2, 1990, which was accounted for as a pooling of interests.


Orient-Express Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orient-Express Hotels (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,816,000
9,766,000
Net loss
2,982,000
b23,160,000
Share earns
-
2.37
Yr rev
55,915,000
59,869,000
Net loss
3,253,000
b21,604,000
Share earns
-
2.21


NCR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCR Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,265,000,000
1,250,000,000
Net inc
52,000,000
61,000,000
Share earns
.73
.77
Shares outst
70,900,000
79,700,000


Ad Council Award
LEAD: The Advertising Council has chosen Richard L. Gelb, chairman and chief executive of Bristol-Myers Squibb, as the recipient of the council's 37th annual public service award.
Mr.
Gelb will receive his award at the council's annual dinner on Nov. 14 in New York.


Instead of Special Prosecutor, A Middle Choice in Teaneck
LEAD: In moving the grand-jury investigation into the fatal shooting of Phillip C. Pannell out of Bergen County, state officials chose not to appoint a special prosecutor for the case.
Lawyers for both the Pannell family and Gary Spath, the Teaneck police officer who shot the youth, had requested such a prosecutor.


West Newton Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Newton Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b154,000
320,000
Share earns
.09
.19
b-Included one-time gains totaling $85,000.


Loan Losses Up at Great American
LEAD: The Great American Bank, the nation's seventh-largest savings and loan company, sharply increased its estimate of losses from soured real estate loans and investments today, making it another likely candidate for eventual seizure by Federal regulators.


Bristol Research Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bristol Research Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,000,000
7,400,000
Net loss
3,700,000
500,000
Shares outst
3,231,507
1,822,000


Star Chefs Find Themselves On the Outside Looking In
LEAD: BY the early 1980's, as restaurant mania began to build, chefs became celebrities.
And like star baseball players, if a kitchen home-run king left one restaurant team, there was always a more lucrative contract waiting.


A New Way of Talking From Smith/Greenland
LEAD: Transmitting business messages, leaking important documents and sending love letters across town are not the only uses for facsimile machines.
Thanks to the Smith/Greenland advertising agency, they can now be employed for interactive advertising.
The agency behind the ''. . .
And he drinks Johnnie Walker'' Scotch whisky campaign has developed a novel extension of its billboard ads that featured the telephone numbers of swimsuit-clad young people that, when called, elicited a taped message for the


Hawaiian Electric Indus reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawaiian Electric Indus (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
237,592,000
200,091,000
Net inc
11,321,000
17,313,000
Share earns
.53
.83
Shares outst
21,311,000
20,737,000


Sherwood Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwood Group Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
4,492,599
4,163,811
Net loss
254,278
1,018,950
9mo rev
12,051,857
9,399,193
Net loss
4,144,106
7,899,926
Shares outst
13,162,131
12,037,208
Corrected from yesterday's editions.


Dip Continues For Starts In Housing
LEAD: Housing starts continued to fall in March from their January peak, the Commerce Department reported today, but many analysts said the decline had bottomed out.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE FOR SPECIAL SESSION ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION - 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council
UNICEF EXECUTIVE BOARD - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Bridge
LEAD: If you look at two partnership hands in order to assess the most desirable contract, the decision often hinges on the presence of a specific ten, nine or even eight.
Even sophisticated modern systems, which on occasion pinpoint jacks, cannot solve such problems.
Bidding is not an exact science and there is always some guessing to be done.


Real Estate;   More Buildings Unite Art and Commerce
LEAD: MANHATTAN office buildings are increasingly reflecting New York's emergence as the contemporary art capital of the world by using their lobbies and other public spaces as galleries for exhibits ranging from modern masters to movie posters.


The Matinee Bus Crowd: As Broadway-Bound as Ever
LEAD: On a Wednesday morning in Lake Ronkonkoma, L.I., commuters were driving to work, the bagel shop in the Portion Road mall was dispensing bagels, and across the parking lot, 40 or so people were boarding a bus bound for Broadway.


Teco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teco Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
236,500,000
248,700,000
Net inc
27,400,000
27,900,000
Share earns
.48
.49


Rangers Sign Rice
LEAD: Steven Rice, 18 years old, the Rangers' first-round selection in the National Hockey League entry draft last year, has been signed to a pro contract, Neil Smith, the Rangers' vice president and general manager, said yesterday.
No terms were reported.


When Albany Proposes, Counties Pay the Bills
LEAD: To the Editor:


Income Fell 14.8% at NCR
LEAD: The NCR Corporation said today that its net income fell 14.8 percent in the first quarter as a result of lower profit margins and the cost of a share repurchase program.


Norwest Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norwest Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
62,800,000
57,000,000
Share earns
.66
.60


Member of Met's Orchestra Gives Recital at Weill Hall
LEAD: Trudy Kane, the principal flutist of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, took a night off from her regular duties on Monday evening to give a concert of her own at Weill Recital Hall.


Public Service Enterprise Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Enterprise Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,325,210,000
1,296,140,000
Net inc
144,660,000
154,423,000
Share earns
.69
.75


Whitman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whitman Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
927,400,000
859,400,000
Net inc
25,700,000
b37,800,000
Share earns
.16
.30
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $1,900,000.
Year-ago figures are restated.


Diebold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diebold Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
113,218,000
114,379,000
Net inc
7,923,000
7,577,000
Share earns
.60
.58
Shares outst
13,207,000
13,175,000


First Community Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Community Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,728,000
1,713,000
Per share
.44
.44
Shares outst
3,956,225
3,924,476


Washington at Work;   Not Many White House Invitations, But Republican Rebel Doesn't Mind
LEAD: Representative Constance A. Morella of Maryland voted with the Democrats 76 percent of the time in 1989, making her the House Republican displaying the least party loyalty.
Americans for Democratic Action ranked her the highest of any House Republican; the American Conservative Union ranked her the lowest.


Abortion Divides Firm Hired to Help Fight It
LEAD: Hill &amp; Knowlton, the nation's largest public relations firm, has created a public relations problem on its own turf by taking on an anti-abortion campaign for the nation's Roman Catholic bishops.


Ceradyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ceradyne Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,012,000
5,970,000
Net inc
66,000
b860,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
6,524,000
6,057,000
b-Net loss


CSC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSC Industries
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
49,810,000
50,591,000
Net loss
5,311,000
3,152,000


Engraving a Single Letter or 10,000
LEAD: ''NINETY-FIVE percent of what we do is by hand,'' said Richard Naimoli, who still engraves jewelry and silverware the old-fashioned way: with one of his 60 wooden-handled tools, a lot of patience and a steady hand. ''There are only a few of us left,'' he said.


Ipalco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ipalco Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
151,408,000
151,808,000
Net inc
25,689,000
25,640,000
Share earns
.68
.68


Square D Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square D Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
396,490,000
401,740,000
Net inc
27,114,000
b27,604,000
Share earns
1.09
1.09
Shares outst
23,385,000
25,392,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $97,000.


Talking Deals;   No End in Sight In Norton Battle
LEAD: THE bruising weeks-old fight for the Norton Company by BTR, a British conglomerate, is far from over.
And the fight could grow nastier as Norton, a maker of abrasives based in Worcester, Mass., continues to throw obstacles in its opponent's path, and BTR sinks its teeth in and hangs on.


Congress Returns to a Divisive Agenda
LEAD: After a 10-day Easter recess, lawmakers returned to Capitol Hill today to face a legislative agenda that includes most of the divisive issues Congress managed to sidestep in its first three months.


American General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American General Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,040,464,000
1,005,971,000
Net inc
107,141,000
97,172,000
Share earns
.90
.77
Shares outst
119,224,000
133,011,000


Lincoln Deal Is Questioned
LEAD: Government lawyers charged today that Charles H. Keating Jr., chairman of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, had used $13 million in federally insured deposits to buy loans from the Saudi European Bank in exchange for a $3.75 million loan for Lincoln's parent, the American Continental Corporation.


Chronicle
LEAD: JENNIFER FITZGERALD, a longtime aide to PRESIDENT BUSH who is the deputy chief of protocol, has been fined $648 for customs violations for improperly bringing two fur coats into the United States, officials said yesterday.
She bought $2,400 in furs last July, when she was in Argentina as a member of the United States delegation to the inauguration of President CARLOS MENEM.


Care Plus Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Care Plus Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
10,574,000
8,431,000
Net inc
824,000
376,000
Share earns
.13
.07
Shares outst
6,241,000
5,040,000


2 OPEC Nations Are Likely To Seek Increase in Quotas
LEAD: Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates are still likely to seek larger oil production quotas, despite their reported promise on Tuesday to decrease output, senior OPEC officials said today.


Kaman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaman Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
203,859,000
203,648,000
Net inc
4,343,000
6,826,000
Share earns
.24
.38


Metro Datelines;   Accord on Removing High School Principal
LEAD: The Board of Education has agreed to settle disciplinary proceedings against a former principal of Eastern District High School, Sonia Rivera, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said yesterday.


Ciccarelli Stealing Post-Season Spotlight With Strong Work at Both Ends of the Ice
LEAD: It is the diminutive, pesky and feisty Dino Ciccarelli - not Wayne Gretzky, Brett Hull, Mark Messier or Bernie Nicholls - who has been the most electrifying performer in the Stanley Cup playoffs thus far.


Huntington Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huntington Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
27,407,000
26,062,000
Per share
.53
.51
Shares outst
51,244,000
50,838,000
The year-ago first quarter restated for acquisitions of First Macomb Bancorp Inc.


Royal Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Trustco
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,214,000,000
839,000,000
Net inc
72,000,000
60,000,000
Share earns
.40
.41
Preferred-share dividends were $21 million for latest period, compared with $16 million for year-ago period.


Officer's Link To Social Club Under Inquiry
LEAD: The lawyer who filed the papers incorporating the Bronx social club at which 87 people died in an arson fire last month is a New York City police lieutenant who was moonlighting from his job in the Police Department's prosecutor's office, the department said yesterday.


A Mansion Retrieves Its Wings
LEAD: TWO pairs of decorative giltwood eagle wings measuring four feet across and a third that spans a little more than seven feet will be on display at the Morris-Jumel Mansion for the first time since 1916.
That was when the heirs of Eliza Jumel sold the laurel and arrow-bedecked wings to Adm.
Richard Evelyn


Growing Pressure
LEAD: After a confusing day of threats and denials, Lithuania reported tonight that the Soviet authorities had cut off the principal supply of oil to the republic as part of the Kremlin's campaign to force Lithuania to retreat from its declaration of independence.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Vice President Named by Fox
LEAD: The Fox Broadcasting Company has appointed Helen Boehm, a psychologist who recently directed the Children's Advertising Review Unit of the Council of Better Business Bureaus, as vice president of the Fox Children's Network.
Fox said that Ms.
Boehm would work on the development of programming and would work with advertisers to develop campaigns that


U.S. and Japan Will Discuss Allied-Signal's Trade Issue
LEAD: In a compromise to avoid new confrontation with Japan, the United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, announced today that she would begin special talks with Tokyo to try to resolve a complaint about barriers in Japan's $100 million-a-year market for amorphous metals.


G.M. to Begin Production Of a Battery-Powered Car
LEAD: Responding to concerns about poor air quality, the General Motors Corporation announced today that it would proceed with commercial production of a battery-powered electric car for personal use.


American Telephone &amp; TeleFgraph reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Telephone &amp; TeleFgraph (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,892,000,000
8,659,000,000
Net inc
668,000,000
594,000,000
Share earns
.62
.55
Shares outst
1,082,000,000
1,075,000,000
Consolidated results for 1990 reflected the acquisitions of Istel Group Ltd.


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BellSouth Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,524,800,000
3,367,600,000
Net inc
423,200,000
b449,600,000
Share earns
.88
.97
Shares outst
482,300,000
464,600,000
b-After income of $68.4 million, or 15 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of change in method of accounting.


Arthur Zaidenberg; Artist, 88
LEAD: Arthur Zaidenberg, a painter, sculptor and teacher who wrote the classic art-instruction book ''Anyone Can Draw,'' died Monday at his home in San Miguel de Allende, Mexico.
He was 88 years old.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: I DON'T think much about college.
I went to one reunion, my 11th, and felt as if I were sleeping in a bed that was too short in a room that was too small in a place that was now too narrow to encompass me.
I'd grown up, and could no longer find a space for myself in academe.


Stock Prices Slide as Dow Tumbles 32.89
LEAD: Stock prices tumbled yesterday in the wake of weak corporate earnings, rumors of rising interest rates in Japan and signs that the American economy is much stronger than many people believed.
The latest indication of that strength was the improvement in the nation's trade deficit announced yesterday.


Taiwan May Face Sanctions
LEAD: Washington will place Taiwan on a list of unfair trading partners next week, leading to possible United States trade sanctions against the export-driven nation, Taiwan newspapers reported this week.


Vermont Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vermont Financial Services Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,608,000
2,090,000
Share earns
.48
.65
Shares outst
3,361,000
3,339,000


The American Eight
LEAD:
Terry A. Anderson: Chief Middle East correspondent of The Associated Press; missing since March 16, 1985.
Thomas M. Sutherland: Dean of agriculutre at the American University of Beirut; missing since June 9, 1985.
Frank Herbert Reed: Director of the Lebanon International School in Beirut; missing since Sept.


Despite Stock Holdings, Golden Says He Will Vote on Cable TV
LEAD: In another twist involving the renewal of cable-television franchises, Borough President Howard Golden of Brooklyn disclosed yesterday that he owns stock in a corporation that is a partner in an unrelated venture with Time Warner, the parent of the two companies seeking renewals.


Review/Film;   Civilization Grinds Down in 'Twister,' a Comedy
LEAD: The yellowy-gray clouds are ominous, but the weather is still trying to make up its mind.
The winds are warm, gusty.
A little girl, Violet, hauls a vacuum cleaner across the lawn toward the swimming pool.
On a small knoll behind her stands an all-American mansion, part Mount Vernon, part suburban split-level.


Republic New York reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic New York (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
44,400,000
41,800,000
Share earns
1.30
1.20


Chief's Son Moves Up At Eastman &amp; Beaudine
LEAD: Eastman &amp; Beaudine, an executive search firm based in Dallas, has named Robert E. Beaudine, representing the second generation of Beaudines, as president and chief operating officer.


Consolidated Rail Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Rail Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
823,000,000
872,000,000
Net inc
25,000,000
60,000,000
Share earns
.43
.88
Con Rail said that earnings for the year-ago quarter included $7 million in other income, but latest first quarter's earnings included $20 million in other expenses.


Continental Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Bank Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b56,700,000
b75,600,000
Per share
.89
1.23
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $5 million for the latest first quarter and $17.1 million for year-ago period.


James O'Donnell, 72, Reporter and Author
LEAD: James P. O'Donnell, a former foreign correspondent whose 1978 book on the final days of Adolf Hitler, ''The Bunker,'' became a best-seller, died of lung and stomach cancer on Monday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
He was 72 years old and lived in Boston.


Nikkei Tops 30,000 Level
LEAD: Japanese stock prices surged across the board in brisk trading today, moving above the 30,000-point level during the session.


2 Are Saved and 20 Missing In Plane Crash Off Panama
LEAD: A twin-engine plane carrying 22 people crashed today shortly after takeoff from the Panamanian island of Contadora when birds were sucked into an engine, according to the airline, Aeroperlas.
Twenty people were missing and two rescued, it said.


2 Stores Closed By Jordan Marsh
LEAD: The Jordan Marsh division of the Allied Stores Corporation has announced the closing of its stores in Lowell, Mass., and Danbury, Conn.
Allied Stores and its sister company, Federated Department Stores Inc., are operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
Both companies are owned by the troubled Campeau Corporation of Canada.


Spending Falls in Britain
LEAD: Britain's consumer spending fell last month, indicating that Government efforts to reduce inflation through high interest rates were beginning to take hold.
The Central Statistical Office said today that provisional March retail sales fell by 1.4 percent.
February's retail sales figures had shown a marked rise of 2.4 percent, which market analysts had described as a one-time abnormality.


John Reurs, 66, Head Of Cruise Ship Group
LEAD: John H. Reurs, chairman of the International Committee of Passenger Liners, a trade organization for cruise ships, died of prostate cancer on April 12 at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 66 years old and lived in Rowayton, Conn.


Dart Group Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dart Group Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
280,193,000
229,480,000
Net inc
4,708,000
c5,168,000
Share earns
2.48
2.77
Yr rev
943,050,000
660,091,000
Net inc
b11,677,000
c28,659,000
Share earns
6.15
15.52


Philip Morris Companies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philip Morris Companies (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,388,000,000
10,610,000,000
Net inc
775,000,000
590,000,000
Share earns
.84
.64
Shares outst
926,000,000
925,000,000
Certain prior years amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year's presentation.


Fund Yields Are Mixed
LEAD: The yields of money-market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday.
The yields of tax-exempt funds rose while those of taxable funds remained unchanged.


UJB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UJB Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
24,734,000
31,870,000
Share earns
.55
.71


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about rehearsals for the play ''Zoya's Apartment'' by Mikhail Bulgakov at Circle in the Square included a misstatement from the producer about the play's American premiere.
It occurred in 1978 at the Gene Frankel Theater in Manhattan; the current production is not a premiere.


Conagra Names Head Of Prepared Food Unit
LEAD: Conagra Inc., the big food company, yesterday named a president and chief operating officer, James R. Tindall, for its prepared food companies.


Eldon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldon Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Sales
26,282,000
25,078,000
Net inc
2,137,000
1,941,000
Share earns
.23
.21


Northrop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northrop Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,277,200,000
1,280,700,000
Net inc
b96,000,000
9,700,000
Share earns
2.04
.21
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $67,100,000, or $1.42 a share, from the sale of the company's headquarters complex.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the obituary of the Rev.
Ralph David Abernathy yesterday referred incorrectly in some copies to a church headed in the 1950's by the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
The Dexter Avenue Baptist Church is in Montgomery, Ala., not Atlanta.


House Bill Aids Price-Fix Suits
LEAD: The House challenged a threatened veto by President Bush and voted today to make it easier for discount stores and local prosecutors to sue manufacturers and full-price retailers for price fixing.


Tudor Baffles Pirates
LEAD: John Tudor continued his comeback from elbow and shoulder trouble by extending his two-season scoreless streak to 19 innings as the St.
Louis Cardinals beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 3-0, tonight.


Personal Health
LEAD: Remember those childhood days when you tried to walk without stepping on any cracks in the sidewalk?
Or the times you lined up your toys in a particular order and became furious if anyone disturbed them?


Bonds Fall Sharply; Rates Soar
LEAD: Long-term interest rates rose yesterday to their highest levels since last May, as prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell for the fourth straight day.


Blunders Cost Mets 2d Loss To Cubs
LEAD: Except for the fact that Darryl Strawberry hit his first home run of the year in his ninth game in his 32d time at bat, the evening in Shea Stadium qualified as a total loss for the Mets.


Norris Likes Comeback
LEAD: Not bad, Mike Norris, for your second major league game in almost seven years: a perfectly pitched inning and a victory over California. ''I couldn't have come up with a better scenario,'' Norris said after Oakland beat the Angels, 7-5, at Anaheim Tuesday night in 12 innings.
The victory was Norris's first in the major leagues since May 16, 1983, and the appearance was only his second in the majors since Aug.


DST Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DST Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
35,806,000
32,450,000
Net inc
3,816,000
2,906,000
Share earns
.20
.15


McClatchy Newspapers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McClatchy Newspapers (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
95,102,000
86,928,000
Net inc
2,358,000
4,854,000
Share earns
.08
.17


Decades-Long Battle Between Paper And Ex-Official Is Refought in Trial
LEAD: For 17 days over the last few weeks, the executive editor of Philadelphia's largest newspaper was on the witness stand here, testifying in a libel case that arose from articles published in his paper almost two decades ago and a killing that took place 27 years ago.


Cognitive Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cognitive Systems
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
843,000
559,000
Net inc
48,000
b176,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Citytrust Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citytrust Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
b7,395,000
c6,475,000
Per share
-
1.54
b-Included a $12.4 million provision for loan loss reserves and one-time gains totaling $7.4 million.
c-Net income


Tandy Brands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandy Brands (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
30,872,000
24,189,000
Net inc
990,000
c935,000
Share earns
.16
.20
Shares outst
5,557,000
4,529,000
9mo sales
108,125,000
84,365,000
Net inc
b9,087,000
c6,658,000
Share earns
1.69
1.60


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ethyl Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
609,732,000
570,497,000
Net inc
52,447,000
b56,388,000
Share earns
.44
.47
Shares outst
119,380,000
120,635,000
b-After income of $5,253,000, or 4 cents a share, from discontinued operations, reflecting income from aluminum, plastics and energy businesses spun off in 1989 third quarter.


Pfizer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pfizer Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
1,482,000,000
1,436,300,000
Net inc
b251,900,000
240,800,000
Share earns
1.50
1.43
b-Included a pretax gain of about $39 million on the sale of Pfizer's 30- percent interest in the Dekalb-Pfizer genetics seed partnership.


Additional Area Code Is Planned In New York
LEAD: New York Telephone Company officials said yesterday that they plan to introduce an additional area code to New York City within two to three years.


Mission-Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mission-Valley Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,115,000
942,000
Share earns
.31
.31
Shares outst
3,591,401
2,992,323
Results for 1989 are restated to include the results of Concord Commercial Bank, acquired on March 30, 1990 on a pooling-of-interests basis.


Jafta Masemola, 58; Began Armed Wing Of Pan-Africanists
LEAD: Jafta Masemola, founder of the military wing of the black nationalist Pan-Africanist Congress, died of injuries suffered in a car accident on Tuesday, his sister said today.
He was 58 years old.


Conrail's Net Tumbles 58%
LEAD: The Consolidated Rail Corporation, the large Northeast railroad, said today that its earnings plummeted 58 percent in the first quarter.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
Bush on Global Warming


U.S. Assailed Over Trade
LEAD: The European Community today accused the United States of undermining world trading rules through what it said was an array of unfair trade practices.


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanley Works (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
484,100,000
480,600,000
Net inc
22,500,000
24,600,000
Share earns
.53
.57
Shares outst
42,753,000
42,909,000


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Taller Chimney?
Q.We have a very old two-story house.
Our next-door neighbor's house, 11 feet away, has a one-story kitchen with a wood stove that is the main source of heat for the house.
The smoke is vented through a four-foot chimney, and the wind often blows it into our house with a sickening odor.


Thornburgh Aide Tied to News Report
LEAD: A criminal investigation ordered by Attorney General Dick Thornburgh has concluded that one of his closest aides played a role in confirming a politically damaging news report about a House Democratic leader, William H. Gray 3d, Bush Administration officials said.


Catholic Bishops' Big P.R. Blunder
LEAD: America's Roman Catholic bishops have committed a blunder as big as the Ritz in hiring public relations and polling organizations to design campaigns against abortion.


Check Express reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Check Express
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,389,699
2,965,009
Net inc
9,247
62,149
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
5,320,006
4,873,800


Barnes Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnes Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
141,236,000
128,746,000
Net inc
3,672,000
3,476,000
Share earns
.61
.53
Shares outst
6,067,307
5,514,843
Results in the latest first quarter reflected a $1.6 million foreign currency translation loss, almost entirely from Brazil, compared with only $25,000 last year.


Panama and the Press
LEAD: The more one looks into President Bush's invasion of Panama, the more one should - and the more one wonders why those of us in the press have been so uncritical about both the ''justification'' and the consequences of this egregious misuse of U.S. military power.


Massbank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Massbank Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
671,000
1,115,000
Share earns
.28
.40
Shares outst
2,376,179
2,799,384


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.37
8.37
10.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.80
7.76
8.42
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.66
7.79
8.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.86
7.79
8.37
30-YR.


Seamen's Bank Seized; Chase Buys Its Deposits
LEAD: The Seamen's Bank for Savings, which was formed in 1839 to encourage thrift among seamen, was put under the control of Federal regulators at the close of business yesterday.
All of its deposits were bought by the Chase Manhattan Bank, which will begin operating Seamen's 13 branches today.


Meridian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
21,232,000
23,926,000
Share earns
.53
.62


Abortion Foe Seeks to Void Loss
LEAD: A state lawmaker and outspoken opponent of abortion who narrowly lost her bid for re-election last month now says she won after all, and on Friday she will ask a Cook County Circuit Court to reverse the results.


Dauphin Deposit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dauphin Deposit Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
10,883,000
10,530,000
Per share
.84
.81
Shares outst
12,994,546
12,967,656


Hurdle for Preventive Medicine: Insurance
LEAD: At a time when physicians are increasingly likely to recommend preventive health measures from mammograms to cholesterol checks, patients are often faced with the discovery that insurers will not pay the bills.


Goulds Pumps reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goulds Pumps (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
125,187,000
113,963,000
Net inc
6,362,000
b6,519,000
Share earns
.31
.32
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $826,000.


'Your Bunny' and Wall Street Justice
LEAD: On the afternoon of Jan. 8, 1987, Robert Freeman, chief of risk arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, was feeling anxious about a takeover of Beatrice Foods Company that hadn't yet gone through.
He called Martin Siegel, one of the deal's promoters, and said his friend Bunny Lasker had told him the deal was in trouble.


MILITANTS PROMISE TO FREE AMERICAN
LEAD: A pro-Iranian group believed to be holding three American hostages in Beirut said today that it would release one of them within 48 hours.


Metro Matters;   How Much Pity For a Dentist Turned Burglar?
LEAD: Brace yourself.
This is a story about crime, drugs, child abuse and wife beating that may yet have a happy ending.


Georgia-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia-Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,659,000,000
2,447,000,000
Net inc
101,000,000
154,000,000
Share earns
1.18
1.65
Shares outst
85,300,000
93,200,000


Court Overturns 16th Death Sentence
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court yesterday reversed a death penalty ruling because the prosecution did not prove the defendant intended to kill his victim, though he stabbed her 53 times.


Portland's Artists Record Its History
LEAD: Starting with little money but grand designs, the local arts commission in 1984 bought a few pieces of art that captured a slice of city life, then tucked them away in storage.
Since then, as Portland's landscape has undergone rapid change, artists have recorded the evolution through an expanding art collection known as the Visual Chronicle of


Inmate Escapes From Prison Barge
LEAD: An inmate broke the metal seals on the window of a prison barge moored at a Hudson River pier early yesterday, climbed out, swam ashore and escaped into lower Manhattan, the police said.


Atlantic Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Group Inc.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
8,442,361
9,566,246
Net inc
63,507
217,406
Share earns
.02
.08
Shares outst
2,592,500
2,620,240
9mo sales
25,818,432
27,369,343
Net inc
128,602
171,750
Share earns
.03
.05
Shares outst
2,652,477
2,637,293


Public Service Co. of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Co. of Colorado (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
448,296,000
544,669,000
Net inc
42,289,000
43,672,000
Share earns
.74
.77
Shares outst
53,072,000
52,458,000


Dinkins Names Executive Panel On Volunteers
LEAD: To encourage businesses and foundations to adopt programs that need money and manpower, Mayor David N. Dinkins named a committee of business executives yesterday to coordinate volunteer efforts in New York City.


Dreco Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dreco Energy Services
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
11,118,000
9,526,000
Net inc
470,000
351,000
Share earns
.10
.07
6mo rev
21,183,000
18,559,000
Net inc
858,000
674,000
Share earns
.18
.13


Corrections
LEAD: A headline in Science Times on Tuesday about a heart surgeon, Dr.
Viking O. Bjork, misstated his role in developing a heart valve.
As the article said, he contributed concepts, tested the device and helped market it, but he did not design it.


Bradstreet Earnings Decline
LEAD: The Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation reported today that its first-quarter earnings fell 23 percent partly because of declines in two units.


Universal Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Health Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
166,538,000
153,469,000
Net inc
5,565,000
4,472,000
Share earns
.38
.30


Philip Morris's Profits Rose By 31.4% in First Quarter
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies, the world's largest consumer-products company, said its earnings in the first quarter rose 31.4 percent, to $775 million, or 84 cents a share, from $590 million, or 64 cents a share, in the quarter a year ago.


Amgen Backed In Patent Case
LEAD: A Federal appeals court has blocked a court order that would have required Amgen Inc., a drug maker in Thousand Oaks, Calif., to share patent rights for a lucrative new anti-anemia drug with a rival.


Phelps Dodge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phelps Dodge Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
642,600,000
743,300,000
Net inc
111,300,000
165,900,000
Share earns
3.20
4.89
Shares outst
34,800,000
33,800,000


McCants Facing Some Competition
LEAD: Only a few months ago, Keith McCants's name intruded into the same sentence as Lawrence Taylor's.
McCants, the University of Alabama linebacker, was the top pro prospect even though he was only a junior.


Sovereign Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sovereign Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,417,000
1,265,000
Share earns
.51
.47
Year-ago per share earnings are restated to reflect the effect of the stock split which occured in December 1989.


A Venture Into the Heart Of Capitalism
LEAD: On the hectic floor of the New York Stock Exchange the other day, a young man with a mild Russian accent, microphone in hand, addressed a bemused trader.


Raritan Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raritan Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
375,000
483,000
Share earns
.33
.42


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Grey Los Angeles Unit Gets Coldwell Account
LEAD: Grey Advertising yesterday announced a big account victory for its Los Angeles office, and a series of executive appointments overseas.
The new client is Coldwell Banker Residential Real Estate, whose advertising account BBDO Los Angeles resigned in January.
Grey said that the account, which billed about $10 million last year, would bill $15 million this year.


Student Accuses 5 at St. John's Of a Sex Assault
LEAD: Law-enforcement authorities said yesterday that they were investigating an accusation by a student at St.
John's University in Queens that she was sexually assaulted by up to five students at an off-campus residence on March 1.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   NBC Shifts Executives For Sales Operations
LEAD: NBC realigned its sales organization yesterday.
It named Bob Blackmore executive vice president, television network, with oversight of sales and marketing at the NBC Television Network, CNBC and SportsChannel America, as well as for the 1992 Summer Olympics and international programming.


New Jersey's Rules Voided On Milk From Out of State
LEAD: A Federal judge today struck down New Jersey milk regulations that effectively barred supplies from other states.
The decision, which ends a two-year dispute between New York and New Jersey, is expected to mean lower prices for consumers.


Puget Sound P&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puget Sound P&amp;L (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
264,628,000
274,339,000
Net inc
50,770,000
50,514,000
Share earns
.86
.85


Drew Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Drew Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
23,990,000
28,295,000
Net loss
286,000
266,000
6mo rev
52,870,000
54,776,000
Net loss
326,000
58,000


Corrections
LEAD: The Eating Well column in The Living Section on April 11 about fast-food hamburgers made an invalid comparison between the fat in the hamburgers and the amount of fat in the diet recommended by most health professionals.
The figure for fat, which ranged from 21.2 percent to 23.7 percent, was the percentage of the hamburgers' weight, not the percentage of their calories from fat.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Analog Devices Inc., Norwood, Mass., a maker of integrated linear circuits, completed a repurchase of 2 million shares of its common stock and said it might repurchase up to 2 million additional shares from time to time on the open market.


Montana to Seek Halt To Leaky Sect Shelter
LEAD: State officials say they will ask a court to halt construction of a fallout shelter complex near Yellowstone National Park where more than 30,000 gallons of fuel has leaked from the builders' buried tanks.


Conversion Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conversion Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
1,407,512
287,508
Net inc
87,059
113,682
Share earns
.04
.05
Shares outst
2,549,207
2,311,314


Commerce Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
16,031,000
14,680,000
Per share
.83
.76


Antiques Worth Smiles (Hint: the Prices Help)
LEAD: SHE'S back in town, and no one seems more pleased than she.
Just a few weeks ago, Maya Schaper, the peripatetic antiques dealer with a taste for the esoteric, opened her newest shop on the second floor at 862 Lexington Avenue (65th Street).


Safe Passage for Students
LEAD: Violence that begins inside New York City's schools often continues after the bell rings, making the subways increasingly unsafe during after-school hours.
Now relief may be in sight for law-abiding students who simply want safe passage.


Oil Falls Below $17 a Barrel; Sugar Prices Up on Rumors
LEAD: Prices of crude oil futures yesterday settled below $17 a barrel for the first time in nearly 16 months on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
The decline reflected traders' dissatisfaction with OPEC's response to a worldwide oil glut.


American Maize-Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Maize-Products (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
115,181,000
119,118,000
Net inc
3,267,000
b2,138,000
Share earns
.49
.32
Shares outst
6,672,727
6,538,974
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $1,890,000.


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b127,220,000
c132,200,000
Per share
2.23
2.81
b-After a gain of $30.1 million, or 57 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.
c-Included an extraordinary credit of $21.8 million, or 48 cents a share, from utilization of tax benefit and a gain of $16,105,000, or 35 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


A Star of 'The Piano Lesson' Who Found a New Life Onstage
LEAD: Onstage in ''The Piano Lesson,'' the August Wilson play that won the Pulitzer Prize for drama last week, Charles S. Dutton is a study in perpetual motion.
As Boy Willie, he has come to Pittsburgh from the South in 1936 to do battle with his sister over the right to sell a piano that has been part of their family history since slavery.


Capital Cities-ABC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Cities-ABC Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
1,262,321,000
1,120,441,000
Net inc
106,303,000
82,773,000
Share earns
6.08
4.59
Shares outst
17,475,000
18,050,000


Papp, Seeking Aid, Resists Signing Pledge on Obscenity
LEAD: Joseph Papp, head of the New York Shakespeare Festival, has written to John E. Frohnmayer, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, saying he is reluctant to sign an acceptance form agreeing to observe obscenity restrictions so the festival can receive a $50,000 grant for its annual Festival


A.T.&amp;T. Chief Defends Decision on Abortion
LEAD: The chairman of A.T.&amp;T. today defended his company's decision to withdraw support from Planned Parenthood's teen-age pregnancy prevention programs, saying it did so because of the organization's advocacy of abortion rights.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: SANDY S. remembers feeling embarrassed by her daughter's behavior. ''When she was a few months old, if she saw anyone else's face, including my mother or father, she would scream,'' Sandy recalled. ''My parents would say, 'Our granddaughter doesn't like us.' I felt terrible.
I'd cry.'' Even though the child has not had such strong reactions to unfamiliar adults for more than a year, Sandy's family is still so embarrassed that she asked that her full name not be used.


Water Main Break Disrupts Subway Service on West Side
LEAD: Photo: A 109-year-old water main broke yesterday, sending thousands of gallons of water rushing down Central Park West.
The break halted service on four subway lines for six hours and closed five blocks of Central Park West to vehicles.
Workers watched as a section of the main was removed at 85th Street.


Chronicle
LEAD: With a list of artists that reads like a musical Who's Who, Music for Life, a concert for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, is scheduled for Oct. 28 at Carnegie Hall.
LEONARD BERNSTEIN, JAMES LEVINE, PLACIDO DOMINGO, ITZHAK PERLMAN and many others plan to perform.


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b5,116,000
5,013,000
Per share
.40
.39
b-After an extraordinary gain on extinguishment of debt of $756,000.


Stone &amp; Webster reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone &amp; Webster (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b5,235,000
6,565,000
Share earns
.35
.43
b-Included income of $2,853,000, or 19 cents a share, resulting from the sale of investment securities.
Share earnings for 1989 have been restated to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split declared in June 1989.


Jacobs Engineering Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jacobs Engineering Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
218,807,000
190,697,000
Net inc
3,430,000
2,393,000
Share earns
.31
.22
6mo rev
430,342,000
356,041,000
Net inc
b6,725,000
4,448,000
Share earns
.61
.42


Estimates Are Cut On Neutrogena
LEAD: Several analysts trimmed their earnings estimates for 1990 and 1991 for the Neutrogena Corporation after the company projected lower second-quarter earnings.
The stock dropped $2.625 yesterday, to $19.50, in over-the-counter trading.
The Los Angeles cosmetics and personal-care products company said late


Racing's Brash New Yorker
LEAD: When Howie Tesher got the word two years ago that the Track Barron-Champagne Babe colt he would be training had been named Champagneforashley, he cringed.


Combining Metalwork And Glass
LEAD: ANDRE DUBREUIL, a French designer who lives in London, is one of the stars of the European furniture world.
Now working with Daum, the venerable French glass company, under the baton of its art director, Clotilde Bacri, Mr.
Dubreuil has created a new collection that reinterprets traditional glass techniques using his fanciful metalwork.


Boulevard Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boulevard Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,998,000
3,516,000
Per share
.28
.47


New Drug Treatment Is Approved For Late Stages of Colon Cancer
LEAD: A chemotherapy treatment that includes a drug used to remove worms from the intestines of farm animals was endorsed today by a panel of experts as a standard for patients who have undergone surgery for a late stage of colon cancer.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE FOR SPECIAL SESSION ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE OF 24 - SUBCOMMITTEE ON SMALL TERRITORIES - 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council


Big Net Gain For Northrop
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation reported a sharp increase in earnings for the first quarter, largely because of a one-time gain of $67.1 million from the sale of its headquarters.


American Capital &amp; Research reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital &amp; Research (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
133,922,000
94,600,000
Net inc
2,914,000
2,051,000
Share earns
.16
.14
Shares outst
18,160,000
14,521,000
Yr rev
503,904,000
297,866,000
Net inc
8,794,000
6,524,000
Share earns
.57
.45
Shares outst
15,527,000
14,389,000


Some Smog in Pledges To Help Environment
LEAD: On the bottom of the paperboard container that McDonald's uses for its hash-brown potatoes is the three-arrow symbol that generally denotes a product made of recycled material, and the words ''Recyclable Paper.'' But McDonald's officials concede that the package is not made of recycled paper, is not being recycled and may not even be capable of being recycled because of a promotional label glued to the back.


Boatmen's Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boatmen's Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
32,498,000
30,930,000
Per share
.94
.90


Perrier to Bow to F.D.A. and Change Label
LEAD: The ''eau,'' as Perrier promotions state, is expected to be back on American store shelves next week.
But the mineral water's label claims are about to change.


Calendar: Exhibitions Of Ornament and Craft
LEAD:
Sewing at School, Museum of American Folk Art, Feld Gallery at Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street; 212-977-7298.


United Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Technologies (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,801,500,000
4,457,800,000
Net inc
134,500,000
123,700,000
Share earns
1.01
.95
Shares outst
120,612,000
130,843,000
Beginning in 1990, translation gains related to Brazilian debt have been credited to interest expense in order to approximate the real rate of interest on such debt.


First Empire State reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Empire State (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
12,766,000
b2,999,000
Per share
1.85
.41
Shares outst
6,915,000
7,256,000
b-After a loss of $9,455,000 from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle.


Coca-Cola Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,148,278,000
1,910,604,000
Net inc
283,465,000
259,809,000
Share earns
.83
.72
Shares outst
335,660,000
352,790,000
The year-ago quarter's earnings included non-recurring gain of 3 cents a share from the sale of a coffee business.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Action Industries, Cheswick, Pa., a houseware and promotional giftware company, named R. Craig Kirsch, its president and chief operating officer, to the additional post of chief executive.
He replaces Ernest S. Berez, who will remain chairman.


Apple Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Computer (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,346,202,000
1,246,917,000
Net inc
131,815,000
56,372,000
Share earns
1.04
.44
6mo sales
2,839,585,000
2,652,054,000
Net inc
256,655,000
196,824,000
Share earns
2.00
1.54


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of Earth Day celebrations, 42d Street will be closed today to all vehicles except buses from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Prospect Park Drive and the East and West Drives in Central Park will be closed from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
In addition, parking and loading will be restricted on the following routes to allow for bike lanes: Avenue of the Americas, from Eighth to 59th Streets; Broadway, from 24th to 59th Streets and from Chambers Street to Park Place; Fifth Avenue, from Washington Square to 24th Street; Chambers Street, from Centre Street to Broadway.


Great Lakes Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Chemical Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
252,343,000
145,117,000
Net inc
34,308,000
28,575,000
Share earns
.98
.82


Brooklyn Bishop Is Installed
LEAD: In a majestic ceremony that gingerly sidestepped controversy, Bishop Thomas Vose Daily was installed yesterday as the sixth Roman Catholic Bishop of Brooklyn.


Census Chief Believes in Numbers and Optimism
LEAD: Long before she came to Washington, Barbara Everitt Bryant had established herself as an information-age alchemist, using survey research to transform the public's needs and habits into the numbers necessary to manage hospitals, television stations and schools.


Japanese Drinking Rises
LEAD: Alcohol consumption in Japan increased 3.7 percent in 1989 from a year earlier, to a record 2.3 billion gallons, the National Tax Agency said this week.
The agency attributed the rise to increased beer consumption spurred by the introduction of many new brands.
Beer consumption accounted for 70 percent of Japan's alcohol consumption in 1989.


Clorox Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clorox Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
386,913,000
340,146,000
Net inc
38,352,000
b38,432,000
Share earns
.70
.69
Shares outst
54,684,000
55,361,000
9mo sales
1,049,423,000
942,685,000
Net inc
111,280,000
b105,315,000
Share earns
2.02
1.90


A House Built To Be 'Healthy'
LEAD: ON an island off the Atlantic coast, there is a house that exemplifies some recent thinking in architecture.
Designed by Paul Bierman-Lytle of New Canaan, Conn., it has an indoor garden and a spiral staircase that wends its way up to a romantic lighthouse tower.
It also contains insulation derived from a mineral mined from sea water, ''natural'' grout and wood finishes made from linseed oil, citrus peel oil, juniper berries and rosemary.


Richard Stein, Architect Devoted To Conserving Energy, Dies at 73
LEAD: Richard G. Stein, an architect whose ideas on energy conservation have been influential in the design of buildings for two decades, died from a fractured skull at Phelps Memorial Hospital in Tarrytown, N.Y., yesterday.
He was 73 years old and lived in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Chemical Financial Offering Is Priced
LEAD: The Chemical Financial Acceptance Corporation is offering $119.7 million in asset-backed securities with a final maturity date of April 15, 1994, through underwriters led by Chemical Securities Inc.


Rapid Moves to German Unity Vex Soviets
LEAD: The Soviet Union has spelled out concerns about German unification in an unofficial note to the new East German Prime Minister, Lothar de Maiziere, a Government spokesman said today.


Teaming Up Function and Imagination
LEAD: IN Judith Sacks's living room, curtains never have to be sent to the dry cleaners because they are made of wood.
In the kitchen, dishes never have to be dried because they can drip dry through a wooden rack directly into the sink.
These design solutions are as functional as they are imaginative.


Justices, 6 to 3, Restrict Rights To Pornography
LEAD: Carving out an exception to the right to view obscene material in private, the Supreme Court held today that states can make it a crime to possess pornographic photographs of children.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Irwin Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Irwin Union Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,015,781
766,088
Per share
1.09
.81


First Indiana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Indiana Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,246,000
683,000
Per share
.42
.26


Fedders Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fedders Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
112,492,000
106,981,000
Net inc
8,085,000
6,824,000


Occidental Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Occidental Petroleum (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,200,000,000
5,100,000,000
Net inc
b108,000,000
b67,000,000
Share earns
.37
.24
b-Included losses from early extinguishment of debt of $2,000,000 and $9,000,000 for the latest and year-ago quarters, respectively.


Nepal's Tense Days: Foreign Aid Reported at Risk
LEAD: The World Bank and several nations that give aid to Nepal warned aides to King Birendra last month that financial help for this impoverished kingdom could be jeopardized if the King failed to respond to the democracy movement that has since started to take power, officials here say.


Commercial Intl Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Intl Corp.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
10,835,652
14,835,835
Net loss
321,026
689,582
9mo rev
32,417,768
47,626,521
Net loss
1,589,131
1,085,098


Books of The Times;   Waldheim as a Symbol Of the Flaws of the U.N.
LEAD:
Countenance of Truth
The United Nations and the Waldheim Case
By Shirley Hazzard
179 pages. Viking. $17.95.


Soviets Hold All the Cards
LEAD: Lithuania is ill equipped to withstand an economic siege by Moscow, Eastern European analysts agree.
The New Hampshire-sized republic is utterly dependent on energy purchased from the Soviet Government at bargain rates, Nor is there reason to believe that a retaliatory cutoff of Lithuanian exports would do much damage to the Soviet economy.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Companies


Michigan National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michigan National (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
20,014,000
b23,415,000
Share earns
1.30
1.52
b-Included a gain of $8,325,000, or 54 cents a share, representing the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Timber Industry Outlook
LEAD: United States timber harvests will increase 55 percent in the next 50 years, but industry employment will drop because of modernization, the Government said on Tuesday.
The South will feel the biggest effect, losing about 36 percent of its timber jobs, the General Accounting Office told the House Ways and Means Committee.


Thiokol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thiokol Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1989
1988
Sales
285,747,000
308,699,000
Net inc
10,534,000
bc9,141,000
Share earns
.54
-
9mo sales
842,284,000
871,460,000
Net inc
29,169,000
b6,986,000
Share earns
1.51
.37
Shares outst
19,289,000
19,136,000


Review/Dance;   'Dextra Dei,' A Message From Monte
LEAD: Elisa Monte's dances are for hedonists - or audiences who like to immerse themselves in the moment, particularly when that moment features good-looking performers in sensual, go-for-broke dancing.
But Ms.
Monte threw in a touch of extra, almost linear drama in her new ''Dextra Dei,'' presented by the Elisa Monte Dance Company on Tuesday night at the Joyce


Correction Officer Arrested
LEAD: A New York State correction officer was arrested in East Harlem yesterday and charged with possession and intent to sell cocaine, the police said.
The officer, identified as John M. Bright, 34 years old, of 957 Orlando Avenue, West Hemstead, L.I., was seized during a buy and bust operation by officers from the Police Department's tactical narcotics team.


Piniella Knows How to Please: 8-0
LEAD: When Lou Piniella managed the Yankees, his strongest asset was his ability to fend off and survive the intrusion of his employer, George Steinbrenner.
His weak point seemed to be the way he used his pitchers, yanking starters early and overusing or underusing Dave Righetti, his No. 1 reliever.


Laudner Is Ready
LEAD: Three weeks after leaving the Minnesota Twins' spring training camp for personal reasons, Tim Laudner is ready to play baseball again. ''Tim is ready, willing and able to return to major league baseball,'' Laudner's agent, Ron Simon, said yesterday. ''The next move belongs to the Minnesota Twins.''


Banks of Mid-America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banks of Mid-America Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
919,000
b1,743,000
Per share
.11
.20
b-After an extraordinary gain of $163,000, or 2 cents a share.


MCI Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCI Communications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,807,000,000
1,500,000,000
Net inc
163,000,000
b135,000,000
Share earns
.62
.51
Shares outst
253,000,000
249,000,000
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $10,000,000 on early debt retirements, less applicable income tax benefits.


Deals
LEAD:
Football


Electromagnetic Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electromagnetic Sciences
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
15,191,000
13,292,000
Net inc
136,000
755,000
Share earns
.02
.11


Multimedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multimedia Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
109,826,000
106,297,000
Net inc
6,051,000
4,640,000
Share earns
.49
.37


Showbiz Pizza Time Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Showbiz Pizza Time Inc.
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
47,467,000
44,351,000
Net inc
4,820,000
2,540,000
Share earns
.84
.49
Shares outst
5,668,000
5,000,000


First Interstate Net Falls 4%
LEAD: First Interstate Bancorp said today that profits fell 4 percent in the first quarter, but that its troubled Texas unit turned a $9.1 million profit and losses ended at its Arizona bank.


Takeovers Face New Obstacles
LEAD: In Harrisburg, Pennsylvania's capital, a long-running battle is being watched in corporate board rooms across the country because it raises issues that will affect how American companies are managed in the 1990's.


Action Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
3,632,000
b750,000
Per share
-
.68
6mo net loss
3,297,000
b1,607,000
Per share
-
1.46
b-Net income


Deposit Guaranty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deposit Guaranty Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
8,127,000
8,143,000
Per share
1.03
1.02


San Francisco Journal;   And Yet Again, the Earth Trembles For a Tiny Band of 1906 Survivors
LEAD: In the gloom before dawn, while most of the city slept on, undisturbed by memory or geology, a dwindling band of survivors of the 1906 earthquake assembled today to commemorate the day the earth shook and the sky burned.


Britain Is Convinced Its Customs Halted Giant Gun for Iraq
LEAD: The British Government said today that it was convinced that Iraq was attempting to build a giant gun but that British customs officers set back the project by seizing eight steel tubes last week.


BAKER IS CAUTIOUS ON HOSTAGE OFFER
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d reacted very cautiously today to reports that a pro-Iranian group intends to release one of its American hostages and said there were no plans at present to send an American diplomat to Damascus, as the group has demanded.


Guardsman Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardsman Products Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
47,686,000
46,941,000
Net inc
1,671,000
1,495,000
Share earns
.23
.22


Office Donor Linked to Figure in H.U.D. Inquiry
LEAD: A foundation created by Representative Tom Lantos, head of a House investigation into the Department of Housing and Urban Development, has been receiving free office space for more than a year from a public relations company that represented a major subject of the inquiry.


Apple's Profits Rebound on Strong Foreign Sales
LEAD: Driven by strong international sales, Apple Computer Inc. today reported unexpectedly strong sales and earnings for its second quarter.
The Cupertino, Calif., company had notified analysts on March 15 that results would be better than expected after a disappointing previous quarter, but today's numbers exceeded even the most bullish of revised estimates.


General Public Utilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Public Utilities Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
753,571,000
743,658,000
Net inc
77,461,000
80,436,000
Share earns
1.40
1.39
Shares outst
55,373,000
57,822,000
The net income and share earnings figures for 1989 reflected restatement for the effects of a change in accounting principle concerning incremental nuclear outage maintenance costs.


Text of Letter and Resolution by Lithuanians
LEAD: Following, in the official translation from Lithuanian, are the texts of a letter from the Lithuanian Parliament to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov, and of a parliamentary resolution on relations with the Moscow Government:
LETTER


Ashton-Tate Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashton-Tate Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
57,004,000
89,803,000
Net loss
979,000
b11,502,000
Share earns
-
.44
b-Net income


Multimedia Net Rises by 30.4%
LEAD: Two media companies yesterday cited advertising weakness in reporting their quarterly results.
Multimedia Inc. still posted a 30.4 percent earnings gain.
But McClatchy Newspapers Inc.'s profit was cut in half.


Artists' Gardens of Delight
LEAD: In a fitting tribute to springtime comes a exhibition that should excite working gardeners as well as more indolent souls who prefer a hammock.


Civic Sense Saves Dollars In Oakland
LEAD: rrOver more than two decades, the Raiders were shut out in Oakland only once: 17-0 by the Denver Broncos in 1981, their last season there.
But now the Raiders have suddenly been shut out there again: 6-0 by the City Council.
Shut out of town.
In a rare triumph for civic sense over sports dollars, Oakland's offer to retrieve the Raiders, sliced to $428 million from the original $602 million, was taken off the table Tuesday night by the City Council vote.


Legislators Tangle Over Trenton Budget
LEAD: Republican legislators tangled repeatedly today with their Democratic colleagues and members of the Florio administration as hearings opened on an austere budget everyone agrees will cost taxpayers more and give them less.


Nice Gesture by Coles
LEAD: Darnell Coles of the Seattle Mariners hit a home run Tuesday night, a night after his foul ball struck a little girl in the face and broke her jaw.
The home run was something he could do for 9-year-old Michelle Taft, said Coles, who has felt terrible since her Monday night injury at the Kingdome.
Coles, the Mariners' third baseman, visited Michelle in the hospital after the game on Monday night and again on Tuesday.


Tandem Computers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandem Computers (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
451,257,000
363,388,000
Net inc
26,827,000
16,858,000
Share earns
.25
.17
Shares outst
109,303,000
100,964,000
6mo rev
887,776,000
755,673,000
Net inc
57,562,000
48,153,000
Share earns
.53
.48
Shares outst
108,168,000
100,035,000


Review/Television;   'Inside a Terrorist Bombing,' on HBO
LEAD: American television doesn't have a monopoly on controversial docudramas.
Just ask Granada Television of Britain, producer of ''The Investigation: Inside a Terrorist Bombing,'' which has been acquired by Home Box Office and will be shown as a Showcase presentation on the pay-cable service.
The first HBO telecast is Sunday at 10 P.M.


Capital Cities/ABC Profit Increases 28%
LEAD: Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said yesterday that its first-quarter profit rose 28 percent, to $106.3 million, or $6.08 a share, from $82.8 million, or $4.59 a share, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 13 percent, to $1.26 billion, from $1.12 billion a year earlier.


Bridge
LEAD: When the opponents put on the brakes at a low level, it is fair to assume that they cannot make a game.
Occasionally, however, this assumption proves false with embarrassing results.
A case in point is the diagramed deal played recently in a cut-in Imp game at the Cavendish Club in Manhattan.


Great Lakes Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
16,400,000
16,600,000
Per share
.85
.83


U.S. Is Artfully Silent on Oil Threats to Lithuania
LEAD: The Bush Administration, which has been trying to avoid becoming embroiled in the struggle between Lithuania and Moscow, said late today that until it could confirm reports that the Kremlin had cut off Soviet oil to Lithuania it would not have any response.


Coke's Profit Rises by 9.1%
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company said today that its first-quarter earnings increased 9.1 percent compared with the period a year earlier, with the biggest gains continuing to be made overseas.


'Free Space' Sculpture to Honor Free Speech
LEAD: A mostly invisible sculpture that its creator says suggests the idea of ''free space'' has been chosen to commemorate the 1960's free speech movement.


Bancorp Hawaii reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp Hawaii (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
22,540,000
18,046,000
Per share
1.36
1.13
Per share earnings for all periods were adjusted to reflect a 10 percent stock dividend payable May 4 to stockholders of record April 12.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-13
Moscow cut off Lithuania's oil supply as part of its campaign to force the republic to retreat from its declaration of independence.
The action came after a confusing day of threats and denials.
Page A1


Miracle on 42d Street
LEAD: Finally, it looks like a go.
The redevelopment of shabby West 42d Street, an ambitious idea born two decades ago and then delayed by esthetic objections, lawsuits and economic pressures, has taken a giant stride toward reality.


Main Break Ties Up West Side
LEAD: A 109-year-old water main broke early yesterday on the Upper West Side, halting service on four subway lines for six hours and closing five blocks of Central Park West to vehicles.


LaPoint Bears Brunt Of Defeat
LEAD: By the time the Yankees had finally returned to the visitors' clubhouse today, Dave LaPoint had already showered, shaved, dressed and popped open a can of beer.
But he had not yet swallowed the circumstances of the third inning at Tiger Stadium.


Dinkins Names Sanitation Head
LEAD: Filling one of the last vacancies in his administration, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday named Steven M. Polan, a 39-year-old lawyer who is the general counsel of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, as New York City's Sanitation Commissioner.


Sealed Air Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sealed Air Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
101,428,000
95,676,000
Net inc
2,815,000
7,210,000
Share earns
.32
.88
Shares outst
8,704,000
8,203,000
The company said its net income in the latest quarter declined primarily because of about $10,470,000 of interest expense, mostly in connection with the debt incurred to finance the special dividend of $40 a share in 1989.


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alltel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
323,728,000
275,909,000
Net inc
42,268,000
38,955,000
Share earns
.63
.60
Shares outst
66,426,000
63,997,000


Chemical Bank
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation said it was exploring the sale of the United States and British institutional fund-management businesses of its Chemical Investment Group.
The company said that the Berkshire Capital Corporation would assist in the sale of the corporate and institutional equity and fixed-income asset-management operations based in Chicago, New York and London, which currently have $5 billion in assets under management.


Canada Works to Stop Money Laundering
LEAD: To the Editor:


State Acquires Most of Times Square Project Site
LEAD: After a six-year legal battle, New York State acquired most of the Times Square development area yesterday, and officials said demolition to clear the way for the $2.5 billion project could begin as early as the fall.


Lincoln Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,715,000
4,623,000
Per share
.68
.67


Quantum Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Chemical Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
682,800,000
814,100,000
Net inc
5,800,000
b75,300,000
Share earns
.23
3.00
Shares outst
25,463,983
25,092,539
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $3,900,000, or 16 cents a share.


Mountain West Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mountain West Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
156,000
421,600
Share earns
.09
.25
6mo inc
724,000
b884,500
Share earns
.41
-
b-Net loss


Jacobs Ends Fight Over CML Board
LEAD: CML Group Inc. said that the investor Irwin L. Jacobs had informed the company that he would not pursue his previously announced plan to conduct a proxy fight to replace CML's directors.
CML's chairman, Charles M. Leighton, said the company had met with Mr.
Jacobs to outline management's business plans and expectations of growth in the next 15 months.


Hostage Statement Issued by Militants
LEAD: Following is the text of a statement received today by a Western news organization in Beirut, as translated from the Arabic by Reuters.
The statement was accompanied by a photograph of an American hostage, Jesse Turner.


Magnetek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magnetek Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
286,495,000
247,439,000
Net inc
11,012,000
7,465,000
Share earns
.47
.37
Shares outst
23,427,000
18,115,000
9mo sales
774,156,000
704,237,000
Net inc
22,198,000
13,486,000
Share earns
.93
.62
Shares outst
23,485,000
18,090,000


Borland International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borland International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
34,841,000
25,918,000
Net inc
4,183,000
2,044,000
Share earns
.29
.17
Shares outst
14,315,000
12,358,000
Yr rev
113,285,000
90,555,000
Net inc
11,803,000
b2,844,000
Share earns
.90
-
Shares outst
13,136,000
11,715,000


Settlement Is Reached in Texas Bus Deaths
LEAD: A tentative settlement totaling $67.5 million has been reached with families of 16 of the 21 students killed last year when their school bus collided with a Coca-Cola truck in Texas, according to a lawyer connected with the case.


Advo-System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advo-System Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
157,804,000
139,326,000
Net inc
1,303,000
b3,190,000
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
17,183,000
12,024,000
6mo rev
321,298,000
292,298,000
Net inc
4,961,000
b4,788,000
Share earns
.29
-
Shares outst
17,007,000
11,902,000


Shearson Loses $915 Million For a Record on Wall Street
LEAD: The worst quarterly results in Wall Street's history were reported yesterday by Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., which said it had lost $915 million last quarter, compared with a loss of $15 million in the first quarter of 1989.


Ecolab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ecolab Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
268,879,000
235,364,000
Net loss
2,342,000
7,746,000
Shares outst
23,662,000
27,379,000


Central Fidelity Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Fidelity Banks Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
14,054,000
12,924,000
Per share
.91
.84


Living With a Heritage: Afrocentric Art and Design
LEAD: DR.
RICHARD A. LONG, an art historian, speaks as one might of old friends as he moves amid the African, Haitian and African-American art, textiles and furnishings in his spacious 18th-century house in Atlanta. ''Here are my Beardens,'' he said as a proud father might of his children.
In a sweeping motion he pointed to six prints by the black American artist Romare Bearden in an upstairs study.


Tandem Net Rises 58.5%
LEAD: Tandem Computers Inc. reported today that its second-quarter revenues and earnings were considerably above the comparable period a year earlier but below its own earlier expectations.
Tandem had cautioned Wall


General Dynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Dynamics Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,491,000,000
2,360,900,000
Net inc
b123,700,000
75,400,000
Share earns
2.97
1.81
b-After income from discontinued operations of $61.5 million, or $1.48 a share, reflecting gain from the settlement of company's anti-trust litigation against American Telephone and Telegraph Co.


Home Nutritional Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Nutritional Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,331,000
13,854,000
Net inc
2,190,000
1,272,000
Share earns
.19
.13
Shares outst
11,800,000
10,000,000


U.S. Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Surgical (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
105,899,000
79,290,000
Net inc
8,283,000
6,049,000
Share earns
.67
.53
Shares outst
12,363,000
11,428,000


Market Place;   Behind the Selloff Of 3 Mutual Funds
LEAD: THE publicly traded shares of three major mutual fund companies have been tumbling in recent weeks, as investors reacted to the fear that credit problems in the commercial paper market could affect the companies' immensely popular money market mutual funds.


Cavaliers Are Near Berth in Playoffs
LEAD: With little left to cheer about, except for Chris Dudley to go to the free-throw line and miss another shot, a crowd of 11,985 showed up at the Byrne Arena tonight to see the Cleveland Cavaliers defeat the Nets, 100-93, and move a step closer to the Eastern Conference playoffs.


A Paperback Meant to Fold
LEAD: ALTHOUGH origami is a Japanese invention, Robert Penny, an American graphic designer, created his own version of artful paper-folding.
Called ''American Home,'' it is a 10-page paperback that includes 43 precut and scored pieces of a typical suburban ranch house and its accouterments.


Telescope Shuttle Launching Is Now Planned for Tuesday
LEAD: NASA today advanced by one day, to next Tuesday, the second attempt to launch the space shuttle Discovery and its payload, the Hubble Space Telescope.


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,288,000
874,000
Share earns
.38
.25
6mo net inc
2,170,000
2,167,000
Share earns
.64
.61


A Painful Necessity, Deferred
LEAD: With their states facing budget deficits that require higher taxes, Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey and Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York haven't rushed to endorse another unpopular but necessary step: a proposed $1 toll hike on Hudson River bridges and tunnels that are operated by the Port Authority.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Howard Adler has been appointed group vice president and advertising director at Macy's Northeast Inc.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief Company News article in Business Day yesterday about a patent lawsuit by the Xoma Corporation against Centocor Inc. misstated the Centocor stock price in some editions.


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dana Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,266,900,000
1,303,300,000
Net inc
23,100,000
38,900,000
Share earns
.56
.96
The year-ago first quarter's net included the effect of the $15 million payment received in connection with the termination of a merger agreement.


Sumitomo Bank of California reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sumitomo Bank of California
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
9,800,000
7,700,000
Share earns
1.20
1.10
Shares outst
8,218,926
7,041,890


Zeal Won't Free Lithuania
LEAD: There's no shortage of absolutism in the Soviet Union, Lithuania or the United States on the question of Lithuanian independence:


Snap-On Tools Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Snap-On Tools Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
240,394,000
232,146,000
Net inc
b31,132,000
31,370,000
Share earns
.76
.77
Shares outst
41,133,000
40,930,000
b-Included a net gain of $2.5 million, or 6 cents a share, on sale of real estate.


Ivory Coast Cancels Austerity Measures After Street Clashes
LEAD: Facing growing political pressure, the Ivory Coast Government announced today that it was postponing austerity measures that would have involved big cuts in salaries.


How to Tell the Victims From the Torturers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviets Reject a Call For Criminal Action On 2 Ex-Prosecutors
LEAD: The Soviet Parliament rejected a call for criminal proceedings against two corruption investigators today, a day after 10,000 demonstrators rallied outside the Kremlin in support of the two men.


American Business Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Business Products (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
100,402,000
98,303,000
Net inc
3,827,000
3,329,000
Share earns
.53
.47
Shares outst
7,161,810
7,147,001


Profits Up 19% at Merck
LEAD: First-quarter earnings for the pharmaceutical giant Merck &amp; Company increased 19 percent, aided by growth in new product sales, the company announced today.
For the three months ended March 31, net income rose to $403.8 million, or $1.03 a share, from $340.4 million, or 86 cents a share, in the corresponding 1989 quarter,


Westport Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westport Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
1,167,000
b400,000
Share earns
-
.19
b-Net income


New Twists in the Legend of Mao's Onetime Heir
LEAD: For 20 years now, whatever it was that happened to Lin Biao, former Chinese Defense Minister and the heir apparent to Mao Zedong, has been among the great unresolved mysteries of the Communist world, one that remains shrouded in uncertainty even in these days of remarkable revelations.


U.S. Is Dropping Plan To Deploy New Missile
LEAD: The Bush Administration is abandoning plans to deploy new short-range nuclear missiles in West Germany, American officials said.


Charles Schwab reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charles Schwab (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
149,700,000
122,400,000
Net inc
3,700,000
4,000,000
Share earns
.14
.15


Insurer Posts Gain of 10.2%
LEAD: The American General Corporation, an insurance company in a proxy fight with the Torchmark Corporation, today reported 10.2 percent growth in its first-quarter earnings.


Hiroshima Journal;   At Atomic Shrine, All the Horror, Nothing of Guilt
LEAD: Millions of tourists have traveled to this western coastal city over the years, so it was logical for city officials to expand and renovate the museum and park that bear testimony to one of the greatest horrors of the 20th century.


Keegan Management Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keegan Management Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
12,708,000
10,476,000
Net inc
505,000
323,000
Share earns
.12
.11
Shares outst
4,182,000
2,900,000


Scientists Identify Sex of 3-Day-Old Embryos
LEAD: Scientists say that they have identified the sex of 3-day-old embryos in the test tube, and that two women implanted with tested embryos are each expected to deliver twin girls this summer.


Events: Craft Show In Capital
LEAD:
Capital Crafts, Departmental Auditorium, 1301 Constitution Avenue N.W., off 14th Street; Washington, D.C.; 202-357-2700.


Review/Dance;   Paul Taylor, Serious, Not Solemn
LEAD: Paul Taylor is often most serious as a choreographer when he is at his most comic, and it is this sense of humor, woven into a philosophical outlook on life, that has much to do with his indisputable popularity and wide appeal.


Review/Theater;   3 Zora Neale Hurston Tales Wrapped in a Bluesy Package
LEAD: When writers with clashing personalities share the stage, the result can often be a tug of war.
But in ''Spunk,'' the exuberant show at the Public Theater celebrating the fiction of Zora Neale Hurston, George C. Wolfe, the author of ''The Colored Museum,'' submerges his own irreverent sensibility to serve, and serve ingeniously, the spirit of a far different literary voice.


Kansas City Rights Leaders Praise Supreme Court Ruling
LEAD: Civil rights leaders here voiced satisfaction today over a Supreme Court ruling upholding the right of Federal judges to make local officials raise taxes to remedy problems left by a history of Kansas City school segregation.


Imatron Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imatron Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1990
1989
Revenue
13,745,000
11,533,000
Net loss
4,242,000
5,931,000
Shares outst
31,050,000
29,375,000


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,664,435,000
2,795,979,000
Net inc
41,306,000
b37,186,000
Share earns
.34
.31
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $1,697,000, or 2 cents a share.


Tax Problem Disputed
LEAD: The Chicago Bears said yesterday published reports had exaggerated the amount of taxes in dispute between the Internal Revenue Service and the team's owners.


U.S. Court Takes Control of Eastern From Lorenzo
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge appointed a special trustee yesterday to take over Eastern Airlines, removing control of the carrier from Frank Lorenzo, chairman of Eastern's parent, the Texas Air Corporation.


Prisons Are Clearly Not the Answer to Crime
LEAD: To the Editor:


Washington Water Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Water Power (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
171,663,000
173,943,000
Net inc
28,521,000
28,500,000
Share earns
1.15
1.14
Shares outst
22,345,000
22,311,000


Southtrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southtrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
12,635,000
17,414,000
Share earns
.47
.66
Shares outst
27,142,000
26,571,000


Wean Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wean Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
22,770,000
33,186,000
Net inc
b1,051,000
316,000
Share earns
.29
.06
b-Included a tax credit of $293,000, or 9 cents a share.


New Drug Found Helpful in Treating Rare Cancer
LEAD: A new cancer drug is proving remarkably effective in the treatment of hairy cell leukemia, a rare but often fatal malignancy of the blood and bone marrow, researchers say.


Simmons Files Suit On Lockheed Proxy
LEAD: Harold C. Simmons, the Dallas financier, filed a Federal lawsuit today challenging the legality of the proxy contest he lost last month for control of the Lockheed Corporation's board.


The Dollar Declines Broadly Despite Trade Deficit Data
LEAD: The dollar lost ground yesterday against all major currencies in heavy trading despite expectations that the currency would rise on new data showing that the nation's huge trade imbalance improved significantly in February.


AMR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMR Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,688,200,000
2,451,000,000
Net loss
19,300,000
b101,000,000
Share earns
-
1.60
b-Net income


M.I.T. Provost Enters Dispute Over R.O.T.C.
LEAD: The provost of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has urged Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney to drop the military's policy barring homosexuals from the Reserve Officers Training Corps.


Computer &amp; Communications Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer &amp; Communications Technology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
17,591,000
18,883,000
Net loss
12,431,000
13,895,000
Yr rev
61,483,000
107,776,000
Net loss
17,343,000
15,898,000


Metropolitan Federal S &amp; L Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Federal S &amp; L Assn (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
2,613,000
6,305,000
Yr net loss
11,515,000
6,946,000
Metropolitan converted from mutual ownership to stock form of ownership on Jan. 9, 1990.


Bonwit Teller Fills Top Post
LEAD: As expected, Frank Doroff, chairman of Federated and Allied Merchandising Services, was named chairman and chief executive of the reorganized Bonwit Teller chain on Tuesday, the Pyramid Companies said.
Pyramid, a mall-development company, purchased the Bonwit name and store leases in Buffalo and Boston at a bankruptcy court hearing on


Citadel Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citadel Holding Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,286,000
3,017,000
Share earns
2.21
.92


Spring Cleaning Is Giving Way To Age of Dirt
LEAD: THEY do windows. But not much else.


New York's Waters Cleaner, But Pollution Is Still Daunting
LEAD: After spending billions of dollars in the last 20 years, New York City has made large strides toward cleaning up its polluted waterways.
But daunting problems have to be overcome before New Yorkers can safely swim at most beaches and eat fish from local waters.


Pepsi Signs Burma Deal
LEAD: Pepsi said today that it signed an agreement to operate in Burma, despite calls by dissidents and human rights groups not to invest after a military crackdown.
The agreement was signed last month with a private partner, and Pepsico International has a 35 percent share in the venture, said Barry Shea, company vice president for southeast Asia.


First Mutual Savings Bank of Bellevue, Wash.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Mutual Savings Bank of Bellevue, Wash.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
466,507
400,752
Per share
.33
.29


Publishing Plans of American Express
LEAD: ''We want to develop magazines in the top 20 markets in the United States,'' said Thomas Ryder, president and executive publisher of the American Express Publishing Corporation. ''We are either going to start them or we're going to buy them.
We are in the midst of building a major publishing company.


Marine Midland And Ford in Talks
LEAD: The Ford Motor Credit Company said it was in talks to acquire the operations and certain assets of the automotive financing business of Marine Midland Banks Inc.
Terms were not immediately available.
Ford said the unit, called the Marine Midland Automotive Financial Corporation, provides private-label financing programs in the United States for Mazda, Jaguar,


Dionex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dionex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
20,502,000
18,306,000
Net inc
3,363,000
2,937,000
Share earns
.38
.31
Shares outst
8,934,000
9,531,000
9mo sales
59,641,000
55,675,000
Net inc
10,141,000
9,648,000
Share earns
1.12
1.00
Shares outst
9,065,000
9,610,000


15 Killed in Attack on Beirut School Bus
LEAD: A rifle-fired grenade slammed into a school bus and exploded today during Christian factional fighting, killing 11 schoolchildren and at least four other people, witnesses said.


Stormy Time in Sight For Rangers-Capitals
LEAD: ''We're pretty even in toughness,'' Roger Neilson, the coach of Rangers, said when asked how his team matched up against the Capitals. ''And we're pretty even in goaltending, pretty even in defensive play,'' Neilson is pretty much right. ''Maybe,'' concluded Neilson, ''no one will win.''


Oates Quotes Crane
LEAD: To the Editor:


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
Berger Advances
Jay Berger of the United States, the top-seeded player in the Philips Open, survived a third-set tie breaker yesterday to beat Henri Leconte of France, 6-3, 1-6, 7-6, in a second-round match in Nice, France.
Sixth-seeded Guillermo Perez-Roldan of Argentina was forced to withdraw with a knee injury.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,150,038,000
1,059,780,000
Net inc
110,310,000
143,303,000
Share earns
.60
.77
Shares outst
183,663,000
187,116,000


Media General Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Media General Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
148,041,000
149,266,000
Net inc
2,706,000
11,891,000
Share earns
.10
.46
Shares outst
25,957,000
25,949,000


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''A court order directing a local government body to levy its own taxes is plainly a judicial act within the power of a Federal court.''
- Justice Byron R. White.[A22:1.]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   A Worldly Image for Della Femina
LEAD: THE French are trying to do to their advertising what they once did for existentialism: give it international cachet.
Having landed last year in downtown Manhattan, at the Della Femina, McNamee WCRS agency, they are beginning to make a difference.


Prague Communists Threatened With Ban
LEAD: The Prague prosecutor has threatened to outlaw the Communist Party within the city just as campaigning is about to begin for Czechoslovakia's first free elections, a newspaper said today.


Prisons Are Clearly Not the Answer to Crime;   Clean Up Holding Pens
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: INSTALLING window and door screens is a spring ritual.
But screens usually need cleaning, and sometimes repair, before another season's use.


Bush Plans to Cut Short-Range Arms in Germany
LEAD: The Bush Administration is developing an arms control initiative that would cancel deployment of new short-range nuclear missiles in West Germany, Administration officials said today.


Inco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inco Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
734,500,000
1,117,500,000
Net inc
67,700,000
276,300,000
Share earns
.64
2.60
The latest period results included gains of $2.4 million from property disposals.


Heileman Seeking Equity for Banks
LEAD: The G. Heileman Brewing Company, burdened by a heavy takeover debt, is seeking to negotiate an arrangement to give its largest creditors partial ownership in the company to discourage any move toward liquidation.
A company spokesman, Bill Eiler, would not comment on the share of equity the banks might receive.


Life Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Life Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
37,708,000
34,324,000
Net inc
3,508,000
3,325,000
Share earns
.26
.24


Review/Music;   Rova Saxophone Quartet
LEAD: The Rova Saxophone Quartet is an equivalent of the Kronos String Quartet: both are San Francisco foursomes devoted to new music with a vernacular twist.
In Rova's case, the vernacular influence is overt, given the jazz connotations of the saxophone.
But the Rova, like the Kronos, is a serious avant-garde ensemble, as a puzzled and rambunctious group of teen-agers, apparently expecting something different, discovered at the group's concert Tuesday night at Town Hall.


DE KLERK STARTS INQUIRY ON CLASH
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk said today that he had appointed a judicial commission of inquiry to look into the shooting by the police of demonstrators in a black township on March 26.


Keystone Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,670,000
7,272,000
Per share
.66
.60
Shares outst
11,704,400
12,305,984


Media General Has 77.3% Fall
LEAD: Media General Inc. today reported a 77.3 percent decline in its first-quarter profit from the period a year earlier as newspaper earnings contracted because of a downturn in advertising.


U.S. TRADE DEFICIT FELL IN FEBRUARY TO A SIX-YEAR LOW
LEAD: The United States trade deficit took an unexpectedly sharp fall in February, the Commerce Department said today.
At $6.49 billion, it is the smallest gap between imports and exports in more than six years.


Caramoor Music Festival's 1990 Season
LEAD: A performance of Schumann's ''Scenes From Goethe's 'Faust,' '' the premieres of a work by the Russian composer Nikolai Karetnikov and by the accordionist William Schimmel, a series of music by J. S. Bach and sons, and a 40th-anniversary recital by the soprano Roberta Peters are among the highlights of the 45th annual Caramoor Music Festival, which starts June 23 in Katonah, N


Cooker Restaurant reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooker Restaurant (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
8,152,000
6,318,000
Net inc
413,000
314,000
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
10,940,813
7,490,813


Code-Alarm Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Code-Alarm Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
11,576,000
6,879,000
Net inc
687,000
247,000
Share earns
.27
.12
Shares outst
2,587,698
2,112,200


Multibank Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multibank Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,756,000
6,692,000
Share earns
.30
.72
Shares outst
9,164,000
9,304,000


German Money Talks Near
LEAD: East and West Germany began unification talks yesterday, and a Bonn spokesman said negotiations on monetary union could start tomorrow.


Oilers Crush Kings, 7-0, To Open Division Series
LEAD: Esa Tikkanen scored two goals and the goaltender Bill Ranford got his first-ever playoff shutout as the Edmonton Oilers beat the Los Angeles Kings, 7-0, tonight in the opening game of their Division playoff series.


A.T.&amp;T. Net Up 12.5%; MCI Gains
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company reported a 12.5 percent first-quarter earnings gain yesterday, and the MCI Communications Corporation, the second-largest long-distance telephone company after A.T.&amp;T., reported a 22 percent increase.


AMR Has Loss in Quarter; Higher Fuel Costs Cited
LEAD: The AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, yesterday reported its first quarterly loss since 1987, attributing it largely to sharply higher fuel costs.
Wall Street analysts predicted that other airlines would report losses bigger than AMR's in the next few days.


Trinova Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinova Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
485,606,000
484,252,000
Net inc
14,480,000
b18,401,000
Share earns
.46
.54
Shares outst
33,669,000
36,109,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $1,087,000.


Summit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
10,100,000
9,635,000
Share earns
.49
.47


Kelly Wins Court Case On Balloon Charge
LEAD: Jim Kelly, the Buffalo Bills' quarterback, won a credibility contest yesterday when a judge in Buffalo said a woman who contended that Kelly hit her in the face with a beer-filled balloon failed to prove her case.


The Secret Pipeline
LEAD: This is an astonished one-column look at a story of world importance that involves politics, war, race, national survival and lots of money.


The Contras Will Not Disarm Before Chamorro Inaugural
LEAD: The Nicaraguan rebels and Sandinista army officials prepared to sign a cease-fire today, but rebel leaders said they would not lay down their arms before the new, pro-American Government of Violeta Barrios de Chamorro takes office next week.


Inquiry on Agents
LEAD: The embattled sports agent, Bruce Allen, the son of the former Washington Redskin coach, George Allen, lashed out at those he said had encouraged the Federal Bureau of Investigation to investigate him, and he threatened yesterday to file a defamation suit after the N.F.L. draft, which begins Sunday.


Imre Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imre Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
505,000
431,000
Net loss
528,000
698,000
Yr sales
1,866,000
1,376,000
Net loss
2,151,000
3,859,000


George Horne, 87, Shipping Editor For The Times in Heyday of Port
LEAD: George Horne, who for more than 40 years covered the waterfront of New York, the world's busiest port, for The New York Times, died of congestive heart failure yesterday in Ardmore, Okla.
He was 87 years old and lived in Ardmore.


First Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bank System (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
28,500,000
50,300,000
Per share
.37
.77
The net income for the latest first quarter included $2.6 million in tax credits, compared with $6.9 million in similar benefits for year-ago period.


Fama Was the Gunman, Bensonhurst Jury Is Told
LEAD: Joseph Fama ''shot repeatedly and intentionally at Yusuf Hawkins,'' an assistant district attorney said yesterday as he opened the prosecution's case against the white Bensonhurst man charged with shooting the black teen-ager to death last summer.


Alberto-Culver Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alberto-Culver Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
194,726,000
180,606,000
Net inc
7,457,000
6,278,000
Share earns
.28
.24
Shares outst
26,707,000
26,191,000
6mo sales
371,056,000
343,072,000
Net inc
14,031,000
11,779,000
Share earns
.53
.45
Shares outst
26,471,000
26,150,000


COURT SAYS JUDGE MAY ORDER TAXES TO ALLEVIATE BIAS
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that Federal judges may order local governments to increase taxes to remedy constitutional violations like school segregation.


Gene Swap in Mice Offers Hope for Medical Gains
LEAD: After years of half-steps, missteps and fears that it could never be done, researchers have fashioned a strain of mouse harboring a specified genetic alteration in every cell of its body.


CMS Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMS Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
870,138,000
922,551,000
Net inc
103,318,000
106,321,000
Share earns
1.27
1.29


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winn-Dixie Stores Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 4
1990
1989
Sales
2,323,307,000
2,186,911,000
Net inc
42,033,000
37,435,000
Share earns
1.07
.93
Shares outst
39,360,046
46,048,269
9mo sales
7,468,919,000
6,998,097,000
Net inc
108,870,000
92,219,000
Share earns
2.75
2.30
Shares outst
39,623,280
40,051,952


Chemical Waste Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Waste Management (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
232,751,000
189,828,000
Net inc
34,705,000
28,973,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Share earnings for both periods reflected a 2-for-1 stock split paid in October 1989.


Chronicle
LEAD: The Rev.
SUN MYUNG MOON met privately with President MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV in Moscow last week during an international media conference sponsored by the South Korean religious leader.
In New York yesterday, a spokesman for Mr.
Moon's Unification Church, Dr.
TYLER HENDRICKS, said some 500 delegates from 60 countries, including 40 former heads of state and senior executives of newspapers founded by Mr.


John D. McElroy; Executive, 67
LEAD: John D. McElroy, retired vice president and general counsel for the liquor division of the former National Distillers and Chemical Corporation, which is now the Quantum Chemical Corporation, in Manhattan, died of cancer on Friday at Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
He was 67 years old and lived in Bronxville.


Eastern Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,390,085
19,427,234
Net inc
655,167
405,806
Share earns
.35
.22


Road to Better Air for Los Angeles
LEAD: In a radically different approach to commercializing electric vehicles and thereby cutting air pollution, the Southern California Edison Company and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power announced plans yesterday to build a road that transfers electric power from underground cables to cars and buses on the surface, without physical contact.


Dataflex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataflex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
21,491,000
14,564,00
Net inc
659,000
521,000
Share earns
.27
.21
Yr rev
79,915,000
47,137,000
Net inc
2,455,000
1,577,000
Share earns
1.00
.66


Society for Savings Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society for Savings Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,737,000
8,822,000
Share earns
.40
.74


Rohm &amp; Haas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rohm &amp; Haas (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
694,400,000
679,500,000
Net inc
54,100,000
53,100,000
Share earns
.81
.80


Computronix reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computronix
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
10,100,000
11,325,000
Net inc
320,000
433,000
Share earns
.04
.07
Shares outst
8,685,000
6,402,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Change for Goya Foods
LEAD: Citing creative differences, Angotti, Thomas, Hedge has resigned the $3 million advertising account of Goya Foods Inc.
The agency picked up the account in January 1989.


Review/Cabaret;   Characters In Song
LEAD: ''I was born Terry Sue and brought up in Scarsdale,'' the actress Tovah Feldshuh sings to the tune of ''Born in a Trunk'' in the opening number of her cabaret act at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel.
Written by Gerard Alessandrini, the creator of ''Forbidden Broadway,'' with additional lyrics by Jim Luigs and Robin Field, the song, titled ''Call Me Tovah,'' goes on to list the many names she does not want to be known by, including Tuna, Toe Shoe and Tora, Tora,


Feathering Their Nests
LEAD: BIRDHOUSE fever seems to have overtaken the imaginations of designers and collectors.
Birdhouses are small.
They are affordable (as works of art go).
And they are proliferating.


Oakland Moves to Block Deal Designed to Bring Raiders Back
LEAD: It's back to square one for the city of Oakland and the National Football League's Raiders.


New Israeli Ambassador for Poland


Merck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merck &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,758,400,000
1,571,400,000
Net inc
403,800,000
340,400,000
Share earns
1.03
.86


Minimum Wage Rise Doesn't Go Far Enough
LEAD: To the Editor:


Seagate Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seagate Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
676,081,000
357,560,000
Net inc
28,320,000
21,503,000
Share earns
.44
.42
Shares outst
64,346,000
51,099,000
9mo sales
1,745,104,000
1,001,105,000
Net inc
87,547,000
b23,667,000
Share earns
1.46
-
Shares outst
59,966,000
50,095,000


Arvin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arvin Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
395,470,000
369,470,000
Net inc
2,205,000
b2,753,000
Share earns
.01
.09
b-After income from discontinued operations of $433,000, or 2 cents a share.


Bush Denies Putting Off Action On Averting Global Climate Shift
LEAD: President Bush, responding to criticism that the United States had delayed taking concrete steps to address the threat of global warming linked to pollution, said today, ''We have never considered research a substitute for action.''


In Home Health Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* In Home Health Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,375,000
2,977,000
Net inc
151,000
b111,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
4,226,761
3,707,306
6mo rev
8,437,000
4,693,000
Net inc
301,000
b203,000
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
4,122,179
3,704,028


Littlefield, Adams &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Littlefield, Adams &amp; Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,607,000
6,009,000
Net loss
186,000
194,000


Court Orders Settlers to Leave Jerusalem Site
LEAD: An eviction notice ordering 150 Jewish settlers occupying buildings in the Old City's Christian quarter to evacuate them by nine this morning was approved overnight by Israel's High Court.


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaw Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
395,375,000
283,099,000
Net inc
14,952,000
9,634,000
Share earns
.48
.32
9mo sales
1,048,368,000
845,912,000
Net inc
43,651,000
30,384,000
Share earns
1.41
1.00
Shares outst
30,955,319
30,409,418


Methadone Is to Addicts As Insulin Is to Diabetics
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A subheading on Sunday with an article about an arrest in a Brooklyn subway assault referred incorrectly to a pistol that the police said they found in the suspect's apartment.


Vista Chemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vista Chemical Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
183,790,000
198,450,000
Net inc
16,235,000
32,515,000
Share earns
1.53
2.19
Shares outst
10,594,000
14,876,000
6mo sales
353,842,000
389,661,000
Net inc
30,356,000
63,704,000
Share earns
2.86
4.25
Shares outst
10,598,000
14,997,000


George Will Go First, but Where?
LEAD: The National Football League's 55th annual draft of college players on Sunday is ordinary in this respect: speculation about which players are coveted most is answered with more speculation, and questions about which teams will be most active with trades are answered with more questions.


Desoto Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Desoto Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
109,592,000
99,028,000
Net inc
2,556,000
1,411,000
Share earns
.63
.35
Year-ago quarter included $76,000 of income from a minority interest.


Oil Prices Stage a Rally; Technical Factors Are Cited
LEAD: Oil prices rebounded yesterday after sinking to a 19-month low on Wednesday.
While the prices were bolstered by reports that OPEC was planning an emergency meeting on May 2 to discuss ways to stabilize production and prices, traders attributed most of the advance to technical market factors.


A Benefit
LEAD: Eleven dancers, performance artists and companies are to be featured in ''Fresh,'' a benefit at 8 P.M. today and tomorrow for the Castillo Cultural Center, 500 Greenwich Street.
The performers include Linda Kent, Laurie Carlos, Gallman's Newark Dance Theater and Penny Arcade.
Bill T. Jones and Bertram Ross and John Wallowitch, a cabaret duo, are to be the hosts.


Ashland Coal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Coal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
90,200,000
76,611,000
Net inc
6,831,000
6,282,000
Share earns
.42
.38
Shares outst
15,045,000
15,019,000


Weyerhaeuser Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weyerhaeuser Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
2,282,503,000
2,321,292,000
Net inc
130,058,000
148,087,000
Share earns
.61
.70
Shares outst
204,756,000
207,827,000


Sterling Bancorp (N.Y.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Bancorp (N.Y.) (N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
571,535
b760,923
Share earns
.09
-
b-Net loss


As Early Birds Go, the Lark's a Nonstarter
LEAD: To the Editor:


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fidelity Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
21,110,000
b65,002,000
Per share
.30
1.07
Shares outst
58,809,380
57,793,722
b-After an extraordinary tax loss carryforward of $3,150,000.


Review/Dance;   Freud Meets Disney In Paul Taylor Works
LEAD: ''The Sorcerer's Sofa'' is Paul Taylor's anti-ode to shrinkhood, a paean to the revolt of the divans.
Imagine a psychoanalyst's couch named A Chaste Lounge as a leading character.
Then imagine that this couch winds up lying on a patient, and you get a whiff of the associations, free or otherwise, that inform the choreographer's latest comic delight.


Anchor Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anchor Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
b169,400,000
c1,000,000
9mo net loss
b189,000,000
cd3,800,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $4.5 million for the quarter and 9 months.
c-After extraordinary credits of $2.3 million for the quarter and $6.9 million for the 9 months.


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
341,503,000
307,400,000
Net inc
25,831,000
14,464,000
Share earns
1.78
1.00
9mo sales
747,176,000
685,840,000
Net inc
27,666,000
5,033,000
Share earns
1.91
.35


Japan Trade Pact Brings Skepticism in Congress
LEAD: In the first public exchange between the Bush Administration and Congress over a new trade agreement with Japan, lawmakers voiced skepticism today about Tokyo's commitments and the extent to which the accord would help American exports.


Evolution in Europe;   TOUGHENING STAND, MOSCOW CUTS BACK GAS FOR LITHUANIA
LEAD: The Kremlin sharply increased its economic sanctions against Lithuania today, slashing supplies of natural gas to the republic only hours after completely halting the flow of crude oil there.


Sen. Nunn On Vision Of Military
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the text of a speech about revising United States military strategy and forces that was delivered on the Senate floor today by Senator Sam Nunn, chairman of the Armed Services Committee:
Key Military Missions


Ike Would Have Wept To See State of Nation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Roy Schreiber, Entrepreneur, 72
LEAD: Roy Schreiber, an owner of McCreedy &amp; Schreiber, the family-operated Manhattan shoe store founded in 1922, died of Alzheimer's disease Monday at Northport Veterans Hospital on Long Island.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhasset Hills, L.I.


Outboard Marine reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Outboard Marine (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
309,200,000
402,600,000
Net loss
b3,800,000
c11,900,000
Share earns
-
.62
6mo sales
541,900,000
667,000,000
Net loss
b19,100,000
c12,900,000
Share earns
-
.67


Eastchester Deal
LEAD: The North Fork Bancorporation, based in Mattituck, L.I., reached a definitive agreement to acquire the Eastchester Financial Corporation for $20 a share, or a total of about $79.5 million.
Eastchester will become a division of Southold Savings Bank, a savings bank subsidiary of North Fork with eight branches in Suffolk County.


Trustee Has Experience, And Plenty of Problems
LEAD: The appointment of Martin R. Shugrue as the special trustee of Eastern Airlines puts the troubled company in the hands of an experienced airline executive, but analysts doubt that he will be able to attract the thousands of additional passengers that Eastern must have to emerge from bankruptcy as an independent airline.


76ers Top the Pistons And Take Atlantic Title
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers clinched their first Atlantic Division championship since 1983 as Charles Barkley scored 36 points to pace a 107-97 victory tonight over the Detroit Pistons in a game marred by a melee in the closing seconds.


MCA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCA Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
912,946,000
703,346,000
Net inc
31,578,000
b27,341,000
Share earns
.42
.37
Shares outst
74,496,558
73,141,056
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $1,054,000, or 1 cent a share.


Herbert West Memorial
LEAD: A memorial service for Herbert Buell West, former president of the New York Community Trust, a foundation, will be at 4:30 P.M.
Tuesday at the Farkas Auditorium of the New York University Medical Center, 550 First Avenue at 32d Street.
Mr.
West died on Jan. 14 at the age of 73.


Britain Will Offer Refuge to 50,000 Successful Hong Kong Families
LEAD: Despite a break in the ranks of the Conservatives, the House of Commons tonight approved by a large margin a Government bill that would offer refuge in Britain to 50,000 of the most successful people in Hong Kong and their families before China takes over the Crown colony in 1997.


Lone Star Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lone Star Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
42,042,000
58,258,000
Net loss
10,823,000
16,282,000
Shares outst
16,558,000
16,507,000


A Giant Artistic Gibe at Jesse Helms
LEAD: One of the sculptures to be seen this weekend has as its target Senator Jesse Helms, whose opposition to Federal financing of artworks he considers obscene has earned him notoriety on the SoHo art scene.
The sculpture is ''Helmsboro Country,'' an object in the shape of a monumental flip-top box of cigarettes, which is on view at the John Weber Gallery, 142 Greene


Hasbro Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hasbro Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
301,152,000
288,311,000
Net inc
19,431,000
18,727,000
Share earns
.33
.32
Shares outst
59,196,000
58,651,000
The latest first quarter consisted of 13 weeks, compared with 14 weeks in year-ago period.


Mitsubishi and Daimler In Research Accord
LEAD: In a significant step toward creating an alliance between two of the world's biggest industrial groups, Japan's Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and Daimler-Benz of West Germany agreed today to conduct aerospace research jointly.


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puget Sound Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
11,465,000
10,330,000
Share earns
.70
.63


Oklahoma School Strike Resolved
LEAD: Lawmakers today broke a deadlock on school financing legislation that would raise teachers' salaries, ending a strike that had halted classes for more than 300,000 Oklahoma students this week.


Valley Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Capital Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
8,796,000
b7,667,000
Share earns
.82
.68
Shares outst
10,722,614
11,242,544
b-Included non-recurring item of $2,088,000 from recovery of overfunding of defined benefit plan.


Frank DiLuzio, Johnson Interior Aide, 77
LEAD: Frank DiLuzio, a civil engineer who worked on nuclear projects and became an Assistant Secretary of the Interior in the Johnson Administration, died of a heart attack on Sunday at his home in Santa Fe.
He was 77 years old.


Eastern's Fate Now With Trustee
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge Wednesday night accomplished what organized labor had sought for years: he took control of Eastern Airlines from Frank Lorenzo and appointed an outsider to run the troubled carrier that had become a symbol of labor strife in the 1980's.


Glenfed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenfed Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
622,825,000
628,938,000
Net inc
b26,261,000
c20,160,000
Share earns
.85
.68
9mo rev
1,950,948,000
1,823,298,000
Net inc
b92,838,000
c86,766,000
Share earns
3.03
2.95


Chart House Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chart House Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
36,202,000
33,729,000
Net inc
1,563,000
648,000
Share earns
.19
.13
Shares outst
8,128,000
5,011,000


Millipore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Millipore Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
164,717,000
160,785,000
Net inc
13,015,000
12,427,000
Share earns
.47
.45


Brenton Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brenton Banks Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,412,200
2,083,419
Per share
.50
.43
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted to reflect 2-for-1 stock split paid Jan. 30.


Helene Pons, 91, a Top Designer Of Broadway and Ballet Costumes
LEAD: Helene Pons, a leading costume designer for almost four decades until her retirement in 1965, died of kidney problems yesterday at a private clinic in Rome.
She was within two weeks of her 92d birthday.


Sikma Sinks Knicks With 2 Free Throws
LEAD: A pair of free throws by Jack Sikma, one of the National Basketball Association's best foul shooters, enabled the Milwaukee Bucks to edge the Knicks, 96-95, tonight at the Bradley Center on a night the Knicks learned their first-round playoff opponent would be the Boston Celtics.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We now have a fixed date for the end of the war. It is a reason to celebrate.''
- Humberto Ortega Saavedra, the Nicaraguan Defense Minister.
[A1:3.]


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bausch &amp; Lomb (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
314,600,000
276,300,000
Net inc
22,400,000
19,200,000
Share earns
.74
.64
Shares outst
30,125,000
30,091,000


Diamond Shamrock Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diamond Shamrock Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
584,600,000
466,500,000
Net inc
4,300,000
14,900,000
Share earns
.11
.56
Shares outst
24,500,000
24,000,000


Linear Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linear Technology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
19,069,000
16,460,000
Net inc
2,955,000
2,197,000
Share earns
.18
.13
Shares outst
16,801,000
16,825,000
9mo sales
54,810,000
47,047,000
Net inc
7,900,000
6,514,000
Share earns
.47
.39
Shares outst
16,766,000
16,868,000


Agencies' Perceptions Of the Press
LEAD: THE Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle says, in part, that observation of events can determine the course of those events.
It was devised to explain quantum physics, but Burt Manning believes it also applies to advertising.


Durr-Fillauer Med.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Durr-Fillauer Med.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
200,807,000
171,876,000
Net inc
3,568,000
2,786,000
Share earns
.35
.36
Shares outst
10,109,000
7,761,000


Economic Scene;   It's 'Slugflation,' Not 'Stagflation'
LEAD: IS the United States economy on the verge of stagflation, that baleful mixture of stagnation and inflation from which it suffered in the late 1970's and early 1980's?


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:
Fred Ward's 'Blues'
No, Fred Ward is not toothless.


American Airlines
LEAD: American Airlines yesterday awarded its advertising account for Latin America to DDB Needham Worldwide.
The agency also created the European half of a campaign to promote the airline's new ''international flagship service'' between the United States and Europe.
The campaign, which begins next Thursday, tempts Europeans with the creation of elegance.


First Albany Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Albany Cos. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
16,598,000
17,425,000
Net inc
98,000
135,000
Share earns
.03
.04
6mo rev
34,733,000
33,661,000
Net inc
196,000
330,000
Share earns
.06
.10


American Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Brands Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,203,700,000
3,245,900,000
Net inc
195,400,000
172,200,000
Share earns
2.00
1.80
Shares outst
95,821,524
93,494,967


Hon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hon Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
173,803,000
146,940,000
Net inc
11,517,000
9,596,000
Share earns
.68
.54
Shares outst
16,850,111
17,884,258


New Push to Expose Drug Profits in Banks
LEAD: Intensifying an effort to uncover illegal narcotics profits, the world's seven leading industrial countries proposed broad regulatory and banking reforms.
Their bid was joined by eight other nations, three well-known for bank secrecy -Switzerland, Austria and Luxembourg.
Page D1.


Thomson in Deal to Sell Unit
LEAD: Thomson McKinnon Inc. agreed on Wednesday to sell its interest in an asset-management subsidiary for more than $6 million, as the parent of the failed Wall Street firm Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc. continues liquidating.


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Atlantic Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,018,600,000
2,768,300,000
Net inc
355,300,000
330,800,000
Share earns
.90
.84
The year-ago quarter's share earnings adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split declared on March 16.


MCA Profit Is Up 15.8%
LEAD: MCA Inc. reported today that its first-quarter earnings increased 15.8 percent to $31.6 million, or 42 cents a share, from $27.3 million, or 37 cents a share, in the year-ago period.


Inquiry Fails to Learn How Manufacturer Got Secret Report
LEAD: New York City's Investigation Commissioner said yesterday that a five-month inquiry by her agency had failed to find out how a voting machine manufacturer obtained a confidential report that could have helped the company win a $50 million city contract.


Group of 7 Asks Money-Laundering Curbs
LEAD: Representatives of the Group of Seven industrial countries proposed a broad set of regulatory and banking reforms today to combat the growing problem of concealing illegal narcotics profits in banks and other financial institutions.


Evolution in Europe;   SOLIDARITY MEETS TO PONDER FUTURE
LEAD: With Communism vanquished as a political force in Poland, Lech Walesa and the Solidarity trade union he founded began grappling today with the question of what next, for the union, for the Government it dominates and for Mr.
Walesa himself.


McCartney Tickets
LEAD: Tickets for Paul McCartney's July 11 concert at Giants Stadium at the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J., go on sale tomorrow at Ticketmaster locations and on Sunday at noon at the stadium box office.
Tickets are $32.50 and are limited to eight per person.
Information: 307-7171 or (201) 507-8900.


Komag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Komag Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
30,075,000
13,906,000
Net inc
b1,574,000
c6,429,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
14,279,000
12,894,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $119,000, or 1 cent a share, from tax loss carryforwards.


Time Warner's Global Image
LEAD: Once they were two, a staid magazine publisher called Time Inc. and an old-line Hollywood movie studio known as Warner Brothers.
Today, they are Time Warner Inc., and in its first corporate image television advertising campaign, the company is presenting itself as the hippest of the hip.


Pacificare to Bid For Maxicare
LEAD: Pacificare Health Systems Inc. said it would make an offer to acquire Maxicare Health Plans Inc., a health maintenance organization that is preparing to emerge from bankruptcy proceedings.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
FILMS FROM HUNGARY


SCE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SCE Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,590,838,000
1,530,294,000
Net inc
171,649,000
117,538,000
Share earns
.79
.54
SCE Corp., the parent of Southern California Edison Co., said the latest quarter increase reflects principally a January regulatory decision that altered its quarterly earnings pattern.


Jack Shamash, Leading Importer Of Chinese Textiles, Is Dead at 65
LEAD: Jack Shamash, a major textile importer and business broker, died of a heart attack on Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Review/Film;   Cop, Thief and Prostitute in Miami
LEAD: An early scene in ''Miami Blues'' finds three characters sharing a hearty dinner: Susie Waggoner (Jennifer Jason Leigh), a good-hearted and very newly retired prostitute who just loves to cook; Junior Frenger (Alec Baldwin), a dashing, reckless sociopath who has latched onto Susie during the course of a crime spree, and police Detective Hoke Moseley (Fred Ward), who suspects Junior may have killed someone and has stopped by to ask a few questions.


Rosamunde Pilcher Book Hits Best-Seller List as No. 1
LEAD: Seemingly from nowhere, a new book, ''September'' by Rosamunde Pilcher, has become the No. 1 hard-cover best seller in fiction.


First Hawaiian Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Hawaiian Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
15,852,000
13,165,000
Per share
.59
.49
Per share earnings reflected 2-for-1 stock dividend paid in January.


Auctions
LEAD: Rembrandt's ''St.
Peter in Prison,'' from 1631, one of the most important early paintings by the artist still in private hands, is to be auctioned at Christie's in New York on May 31.
The presale estimate for the painting, from the period before the artist moved from Leyden to Amsterdam, is $10 million to $15 million.


MILITANTS DELAY HOSTAGE'S RELEASE
LEAD: Pro-Iranian kidnappers in Beirut announced today that they had postponed the freeing of an American hostage because the Bush Administration refused to meet their demand to dispatch a senior Middle East policymaker to Syria to coordinate the release.


Top Executive Retiring At Owens-Corning
LEAD: The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation said yesterday that William W. Boeschenstein, who warded off a hostile takeover attempt in 1986, will relinquish the chief executive post on Oct. 1 to Max O. Weber.


U S West Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U S West Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,426,100,000
2,393,600,000
Net inc
271,900,000
249,600,000
Share earns
.73
.68
Shares outst
375,107,000
364,914,000


Soviet Team Holds Talks With Afghan Rebels
LEAD: Soviet negotiators seeking the release of prisoners of war in Afghanistan met for the first time today with an Afghan guerrilla organization.


Unwelcome Ideas, Welcome Guests
LEAD: Foreign visitors seeking visas to the U.S. should not be subjected to political tests.
But the question becomes more complicated in the case of seven Russian writers who have just begun a monthlong tour financed by the United States Information Agency.
The visitors hold anti-Zionist views that smack of anti-Semitism.





Union Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,726,000,000
1,551,000,000
Net inc
128,000,000
138,000,000
Share earns
1.27
1.22
Shares outst
100,600,000
112,900,000


Two Banks Report Rise In Earnings
LEAD: The BankAmerica Corporation, the nation's third-largest banking company, said yesterday that its first-quarter profits rose 1.1 percent, to $278 million, from $275 million a year earlier.
It attributed the gain to steady growth of its consumer banking business and a rise in fees from arranging corporate financing.


Texas Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Instruments Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,536,000,000
1,597,000,000
Net inc
b13,000,000
85,000,000
Share earns
.05
.90
Shares outst
81,658,519
84,618,412
b-Included a pretax non-operating gain of about $15 million from the previously announced sale of a majority interest in the company's photomask operation to Toppan Printing Co.


Theater Led by Dukakis To Close Over Finances
LEAD: The Whole Theater of Montclair, N.J., directed by the actress Olympia Dukakis, will close this month because of financial difficulties.


Mocking Peace And Law
LEAD: Why are some people who ordinarily deplore brutal governments reluctant to hold China's tyrants to account?
Is it cultural condescension, a feeling that Chinese suffering doesn't matter so much?
Or a cynical calculation that one must stay on good terms with the old men clinging to power in that great country?


Taking New York City Private
LEAD: New York clearly has a lot of problems and, beset with the same revenue shortfall felt throughout the Northeast, not enough money to deal with them.
Does that mean that New Yorkers, who constantly have their patience tested, must further compromise the quality of their lives?
Mayor David Dinkins offers one sensible solution: a call for more public-private partnerships.


Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,164,000,000
3,017,000,000
Net inc
335,000,000
318,000,000
Share earns
1.51
1.43


Peru Rebels Said to Kill 74 Peasants
LEAD: Opening a new offensive, Shining Path guerrillas killed 74 peasants in two recent incidents, the police said today.


Fruit of the Loom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fruit of the Loom Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
323,700,000
282,000,000
Net inc
12,800,000
7,700,000
Share earns
.21
.12


Disease Agency Blocks Lab Monkey Imports
LEAD: The Federal Centers for Disease Control has halted imports of research monkeys into the United States until importers present plans to combat a potentially deadly virus.


Wilson Mothershead, Banker, 84
LEAD: Wilson Mothershead, retired chairman of the Indiana National Bank and its parent organization, the Indiana National Corporation, died Tuesday at Methodist Hospital here.
He was 84 years old and lived in Indianapolis.


Hanna (M.A.) Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hanna (M.A.) Co.(N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
267,892,000
256,412,000
Net inc
3,564,000
13,816,000
Share earns
.13
.54
Shares outst
27,790,596
21,608,808
The company said latest quarter figures included a charge of $8.6 million related to the bankruptcy filing by a major customer of Hanna's coal affiliate, Colowyo Coal Co.


CBS Studies TV Audience
LEAD: As part of its campaign to induce television advertisers to appeal to older audiences, CBS has released a marketing study that asserts that the important audience demographic group in the 1990's should be viewers aged 35 to 54.


Champion International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,284,406,000
1,288,709,000
Net inc
69,774,000
113,508,000
Share earns
.68
1.19
Shares outst
92,547,000
95,309,000
The latest common share earnings are after dividends of $6,938,000 on preference stock.


Lockheed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lockheed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,254,000,000
2,094,000,000
Net inc
69,000,000
62,000,000
Share earns
1.09
1.04
Shares outst
63,300,000
59,500,000


BellSouth vs. Newspapers
LEAD: The BellSouth Corporation asked Congress on Wednesday to end the ban barring local telephone companies from providing information services, but the American Newspaper Publishers Association said the restriction should remain.


Healthsouth Rehabilitation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthsouth Rehabilitation (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
60,423,000
31,056,000
Net inc
2,572,000
1,649,000
Share earns
.24
.16
Shares outst
10,826,016
10,493,423


Chris-Craft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chris-Craft Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
64,110,000
58,816,000
Net inc
b235,269,000
1,255,000
Share earns
9.13
.04
Shares outst
25,746,000
24,894,000
b-After an unusual gain of $219,970,000, or $8.54 a share, reflecting gain on the disposition of the company's remaining interest in Warner Communications Inc.


Bear Stearns Companies reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bear Stearns Companies (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
587,618,000
623,579,000
Net inc
34,652,000
41,059,000
Share earns
.34
.39
Shares outst
98,395,595
101,433,884
9mo rev
1,746,103,000
1,735,079,000
Net inc
85,848,000
124,830,000
Share earns
.82
1.16
Shares outst
99,959,155
102,097,585


Accounting Group Urged To Admit Non-C.P.A.'s
LEAD: A special committee of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has urged the organization to admit people other than certified public accountants for the first time.


Earth Day Spirit Is Bright and Clear (at Least on 42d Street)


On Car-Free 42d Street, Only Merchants Fumed
LEAD: The spirit of Earth Day came to 42d Street yesterday, clearing the air of all workaday fumes except those from buses and vendors' food carts.


No Support Means No Victory For Perez
LEAD: Pascual Perez allowed himself to smile.
He shrugged, he said these things happen, and then he dressed and packed.


Pohl Defends His Plan For Mark Conversion
LEAD: The president of the Bundesbank, Karl Otto Pohl, defended the West German central bank's proposals for monetary union today and lashed out at the nation's political leaders for leading East Germans to expect a one-to-one conversion rate with the West German mark.


McDonald's Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonald's Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,533,100,000
1,381,800,000
Net inc
158,100,000
141,700,000
Share earns
.43
.38


27 Philippine Muslims Killed
LEAD: Government forces killed 27 Muslim guerrillas after driving them out of a remote town in the south, the military said today.


SHORTAGE IS FOUND IN SHIP INSPECTORS
LEAD: An internal Coast Guard study undertaken after a series of major oil spills says there is a severe shortage of trained Coast Guard inspectors and ''barely adequate'' inspections of oil tankers.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,457,711,000
2,264,963,000
Net inc
409,075,000
343,587,000
Share earns
.78
.66
Shares outst
526,159,000
521,985,000


6 at St. John's Are Questioned In Sexual Attack
LEAD: Six students at St.
John's University in Queens were questioned yesterday by law-enforcement authorities about another student's accusation that she was sexually assaulted at an off-campus residence.


Scrap Immigration Act's Backfiring Sanctions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Olin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olin Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
636,000,000
671,000,000
Net inc
32,000,000
34,000,000
Share earns
1.60
1.67
Shares outst
19,000,000
19,500,000


American Express Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Express Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,904,900,000
5,867,000,000
Net loss
b619,800,000
c251,900,000
Share earns
-
.59
b-Included charges related to Shearson Lehman Hutton of $630 million, after tax, for restructuring and $157 million, after tax, for the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principles.


Elderly, Not Dependent
LEAD: To the Editor:


TV and the Environment
LEAD:
TODAY
''GOOD MORNING AMERICA,'' ABC, 7 to 8:30 A.M., a segment on what children can do to help the environment.
''NINE BROADCAST PLAZA,'' Channel 9, 10 A.M. to 1 P.M., John Denver opens the show's three weeks of environmental coverage.
Rolland Smith interviews environmental specialists in Washington.


Pacific Telesis reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Telesis (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,373,000,000
2,343,000,000
Net inc
262,000,000
317,000,000
Share earns
.65
.76


MNC Financial Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MNC Financial Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,189,000
57,387,000
Share earns
.05
.67
Shares outst
84,692,000
82,152,000
First quarter results included a $135 million provision for possible credit losses, which is an $83 million increase over the fourth quarte of 1989.


Wilmington Trust Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wilmington Trust Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
14,394,000
12,701,000
Share earns
.84
.73


Bombardier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bombardier Inc.
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
836,200,000
359,400,000
Net inc
30,300,000
bc1,500,000
Share earns
.45
-
Yr sales
2,093,800,000
1,396,200,000
Net inc
91,500,000
c68,300,000
Share earns
1.36
1.03


Piano Premieres
LEAD: Phoenix, an ensemble specializing in contemporary music, is to present the world premieres of two new piano works by Otto Luening, ''Sonority Form 3'' and ''Chords at Night,'' as part of the group's fifth-anniversary concert tonight at 8 at St.
Michael's Episcopal Church, 225 West 99th Street.
The pieces are to be played by Barry Salwen, who is also to perform Mr.


National Savings Bank of AlFbany reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Savings Bank of AlFbany
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,000,245
829,133
Share earns
.84
.70
6mo net inc
1,872,546
1,711,437
Share earns
1.58
1.45


Yellow Freight System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Yellow Freight System (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
567,462,000
529,899,000
Net inc
13,431,000
b44,958,000
Share earns
.47
1.56
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $29,200,000, or $1.01 a share.


BankAmerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankAmerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
278,000,000
275,000,000
Per share
1.23
1.38
Shares outst
210,953,000
188,196,000
The results in the latest first quarter reflected no Brazilian cash interest payments while year-ago period's earnings included $46 million of such payments, which increased first-quarter 1989 net by $38 million.


UST Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
175,250,000
157,569,000
Net inc
b52,645,000
44,015,000
Share earns
.46
.38
Shares outst
114,848,000
116,467,000
b-Included a pretax gain of $3 million, or 2 cents a share, resulting from the early termination of a licensing agreement for the distribution of certain imported pipe tobaccos.


Results Plus
LEAD:
HOCKEY


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
Keith Jarrett Plus Two


Donald B. Armstrong Jr., Executive, 74
LEAD: Donald B. Armstrong Jr., retired executive vice president of the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency, died of a malignant melanoma on Tuesday at his home in Porte Vedra Beach, Fla.
He was 74 years old and had previously lived in Manhattan and Scarborough, N.Y.


McDonald's Net Up 12%
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation today reported its 100th straight quarter of record year-to-year increases in net income, earnings per share and revenues since going public in 1965.
First-quarter net income climbed 12 percent, to $158 million, from $142 million in the comparable period of 1989.


Textron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Textron Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,883,900,000
1,826,000,000
Net inc
66,200,000
63,300,000
Share earns
.73
.73
Shares outst
90,624,000
86,954,000


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
French-Scandinavian Punsch


Lockheed Posts Gain of 11.3%
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation said today that first-quarter earnings increased 11.3 percent, to $69 million, or $1.09 a share, from $62 million, or $1.04 a share, in the 1989 period.
Sales rose 7.7 percent, to $2.25 billion from $2.09 billion.


Topics of The Times;   Fabulous 42d
LEAD: Yesterday at 9:59 A.M. a New Yorker emerged from the subway at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street to the usual tumult and shouting.
Exactly one hour later she returned to the same corner and headed west.
This time, she heard her high heels tapping the pavement, in itself a surprise.
She could even hear herself think.


Comdisco Off $8.50 On Profit Outlook
LEAD: Shares of Comdisco Inc. lost nearly a third of their value yesterday after the computer-leasing company said it expects earnings for the quarter ended March 31 to fall as much as 30 percent from last year.
Comdisco stock fell $8.50 a share, or 32.1 percent, to $18, on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the second-most-active issue and the biggest percentage loser.


Oh, Those Imperial Judges!
LEAD: Three years ago a Federal judge in Kansas City, Mo., stirred howls of protest from conservative critics of the courts.
He ordered the school district to raise its tax rate to pay for long-deferred racial desegregation.
The Imperial Judiciary had struck again, this time taxing the people, without representation, just to buy fancier schools that would draw white kids back from the suburbs.


Regan Attacks Proposal to Reduce State Payments to Pension Funds
LEAD: Comptroller Edward V. Regan, in an unusually stinging attack, today accused other state leaders of trying to solve their budget problems through irresponsible reductions in payments to public employees' largest retirement funds.


Heritage Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
18,878,000
b2,837,000
Per share
-
.38
Shares outst
7,277,927
7,437,066
b-Net income
The company said the loss in the latest first quarter was primarily due to a $20 million provision to loan loss reserves.


Schlumberger Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schlumberger Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,221,761,000
1,181,756,000
Net inc
128,554,000
82,326,000
Share earns
.54
.35


Flyrodders Rally Round the Podium
LEAD: If you have toyed with the idea of going after saltwater species such as bluefish and striped bass with a fly rod, one way to help bring that urge to fruition would be to attend the 23d annual rally of the Salty Flyrodders of New York.


Review/Art;   Black Images, American History
LEAD: After all is said and done, ''Facing History: The Black Image in American Art 1710-1940,'' which opens today at the Brooklyn Museum, is a triumph.
It is a didactic show with an academic feel and many contentious moments, but anyone who is willing to consider it patiently, work by work, is likely to come out of it changed.


Mexico Says Suspect's Seizure Imperils Aid to U.S. on Drugs
LEAD: The Mexican Government warned today that it might curtail drug-control operations with the United States as a result of the arrest of a Mexican doctor who was brought to the United States this month to face charges in the 1985 slaying of an American drug agent.


Cushion Linked to Baby Deaths Recalled
LEAD: A foam cushion believed to be responsible for 19 infant deaths in recent years is being recalled by manufacturers after pressure from the Federal Consumer Product Safety Commission.


Unisys Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unisys Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,306,300,000
2,201,800,000
Net loss
3,200,000
78,700,000
The company said that business operations posted operating income of $86 million compared to an operating loss of $37 million in the 1989 first quarter, gross profit margins exceeded the depressed levels of each of the past four quarters, and debt decreased in a quarter when debt typically increases.


Two Utilities Agree to Venture
LEAD: DQE Inc. and General Public Utilities said they had agreed to generate and transmit electricity from western Pennsylvania to eastern Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
The companies will build a new 200-mile transmission line, to carry about 1,500 megawatts of power, at a cost estimated at $480 million.


Prices of Treasury Issues Decline
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped for the fifth straight session in light trading yesterday, but traders said that after the big losses of the last few days bargain-hunters were creeping back.


Restaurants
LEAD: At times, especially after 9 P.M., China Grill resembles a restaurant in which the adult proprietors have gone home and the teen-agers have taken over.
On a recent Thursday evening, the sound system was cranked up until the percussive artillery of a Sting song hammered the towering marble walls; an animated young woman dressed in black hunched over the reservations desk, giggling on the telephone; a busboy dropped a service of coffee all over the Marco


Holders Back Plan At Georgia Gulf
LEAD: Shareholders of the Georgia Gulf Corporation approved a recapitalization of the company, a move management proposed three months ago to ward off a takeover bid by the Texas investor Harold C. Simmons.
The company did not release the vote totals, but said if financing is completed as expected the recapitalization will take effect next


Schering-Plough reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schering-Plough (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
865,100,000
831,800,000
Net inc
150,400,000
125,700,000
Share earns
1.33
1.12


Reviews/Film;   A Psychological Study Of an Eccentric Loner
LEAD: ''Monsieur Hire'' was shown as part of the 1989 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 5, 1989.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the 68th Street Playhouse, at Third Avenue.


Washington Talk;   First Fisherman Casts An Environmental Line
LEAD: When President-elect Bush visited Islamorada in the Florida Keys after his election, he was just ''goin' fishin'.'' When he returns to Islamorada this weekend, he will be ''enjoying the splendors of our great outdoor heritage.''


Knight-Ridder Net Up 26.4%
LEAD: Knight-Ridder Inc. said yesterday that its first-quarter profits rose 26.4 percent.


Oil Issue: How Much for Reserve?
LEAD: The oil reserve established by the Government 15 years ago as an insurance policy against supply disruptions is coming under new scrutiny as imports rise and the budget-conscious Bush Administration looks for ways to cut costs.


PNC Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PNC Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
74,500,000
123,600,000
Share earns
.78
1.32


Amax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amax Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
927,900,000
979,600,000
Net inc
50,000,000
114,200,000
Share earns
.57
1.34
Shares outst
86,900,000
85,200,000


Knight-Ridder Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knight-Ridder Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
554,915,000
540,744,000
Net inc
25,849,000
b20,489,000
Share earns
.50
.39
Shares outst
51,791,000
52,592,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $195,000.


People
LEAD: *
Joel Kaufman has been promoted to senior vice president and director of local broadcast at Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore.


Eastern Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
302,684,000
257,263,000
Net inc
31,498,000
31,453,000
Share earns
1.35
1.35
Shares outst
23,317,000
23,216,000


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Illinois Tool Works Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Tool Works Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
567,689,000
493,844,000
Net inc
40,618,000
37,028,000
Share earns
.76
.70


Colgate-Palmolive Up
LEAD: The Colgate-Palmolive Company said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings rose 20.8 percent as its revenue increased 8 percent.
The consumer products company said it earned $81.2 million, or $1.16 a share, up from $67.2 million, or 98 cents a share, in the quarter.
Revenue totaled $1.3 billion, up from $1.2 billion.


American Express Has Worst Loss
LEAD: The American Express Company, reflecting record losses at its Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. subsidiary, reported the worst quarterly results in its history yesterday - a loss of $619.8 million in the first quarter, compared with a gain a year earlier of $251.9 million, or 59 cents a share.


Sovran Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sovran Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
66,581,000
61,891,000
Share earns
1.11
1.03
Shares outst
60,075,000
59,822,000


New Chief at McCann
LEAD: After a lengthy search, McCann-Erickson has found a leader for its New York office.
John Fitzgerald is leaving his position as chairman of Ketchum Advertising U.S.A., the nation's 17th-largest advertising agency, to become vice chairman and chief operating officer of the New York office of McCann, the 13th-largest agency, starting May 16.


Clashes on Indian Fishing Are Down in Wisconsin
LEAD: For eight nights, Wisconsin Chippewa Indians asserting century-old treaty rights have speared spawning fish while opponents of the spearfishing hurled racial taunts from the shores of lakes throughout northern Wisconsin.


Digital Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Equipment (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,079,603,000
1,993,677,000
Net inc
24,934,000
256,442,000
Share earns
.20
2.05
Shares outst
124,959,457
125,316,368
9mo sales
6,080,804,000
5,935,244,000
Net inc
331,119,000
759,395,000
Share earns
2.65
5.94
Shares outst
125,180,200
127,796,630


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Allwaste Inc., Houston, an environmental services company, named I. T. Corley executive vice president and chief financial officer.
The company named James H. Haddox senior vice president, treasurer and chief accounting officer.


Colgate-Palmolive Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colgate-Palmolive Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,301,168,000
1,203,624,000
Net inc
81,239,000
67,203,000
Share earns
1.16
.98
Shares outst
65,976,000
68,694,000


Bruins Stop Canadiens in Opener
LEAD: Dave Poulin's power-play goal and Andy Moog's first career playoff shutout gave the Boston Bruins a 1-0 victory over the Montreal Canadiens tonight in the opener of the Adams Division finals.


Stewart's Big Finish May Signal New Start
LEAD: The spectacular manner in which Payne Stewart won the MCI Heritage last Sunday could signal the next stage in the career of the 33-year-old potential superstar.


Lafarge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lafarge Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
239,369,000
207,380,000
Net loss
40,433,000
19,633,000
Shares outst
51,520,000
49,954,000


Old Stone Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Stone Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,046,000
8,603,000
Share earns
.28
.94
The company said net interest income of $24.4 million in this year's first quarter was 17.5 percent lower than last year first quarter on a $400 million smaller asset size and a higher level of nonperforming assets.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.31
8.37
9.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.80
8.65
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.84
7.86
8.49
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.86
8.86
9.25
30-YR.


Tandy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,013,548,000
943,685,000
Net inc
53,034,000
66,680,000
Share earns
.67
.75
Shares outst
79,605,000
89,490,000
9mo sales
3,456,113,000
3,283,299,000
Net inc
233,421,000
266,639,000
Share earns
2.82
2.97
Shares outst
82,837,000
89,715,000


Union Carbide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Carbide Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,173,000,000
2,241,000,000
Net inc
94,000,000
201,000,000
Share earns
.66
1.44
First quarter earnings do not include gains that will accrue on completion of the sales of its polysilicon and primary alcohol ethoxylates businesses accounced during the quarter.


Affiliated Publications reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Publications (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
133,668,000
131,023,000
Net inc
6,502,000
b9,909,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Net loss and after a loss from discontinued operations of $18,773,000.


Thomas &amp; Betts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomas &amp; Betts Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
153,143,000
137,387,000
Net inc
15,500,000
15,440,000
Share earns
.91
.91
Shares outst
17,021,000
16,979,000


Alaska Air Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alaska Air Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
230,797,000
197,664,000
Net loss
2,060,000
b6,406,000
Share earns
-
.40
Shares outst
14,389,000
15,858,000
b-Net income


Our Towns;   Price of Freedom And Budget Cuts: Retraining on L.I.
LEAD: It's painfully easy for Alan Muller to remember the day he lost his job at the Grumman Corporation: Jan. 13, 1989.
Friday the 13th.


Topics of The Times;   Oakland: Winning by Losing
LEAD: The city of Oakland, Calif., is a city of sorrow, burdened with high unemployment, inadequate housing and bankrupt schools.
Yet it was prepared to shell out $428 million to lure the Los Angeles Raiders professional football team back to the city where the Raiders played until nine years ago, when they moved south.


At the Bar
LEAD: For many years, Simon H. Rifkind spurned all entreaties to tell his life story, except for frequent autobiographical luncheon speeches to Paul, Weiss associates.
But recently his law firm, Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, did the next best thing: It published the third - and for now, at least, the last - volume of ''One Man's Word: Selected Works of Simon H.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
Three Reggae Bands


Beverly Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beverly Enterprises Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
501,887,000
511,101,000
Net inc
682,000
b9,359,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
54,299,000
53,597,000
b-Net loss and included pre-tax restructuring charges of about $8,081,000.


Dow Retreats by 20.94 on Inflation Fears
LEAD: Stock prices continued to weaken yesterday amid strong computerized selling brought on by new inflationary fears.
Such fears could dampen bond prices, raise interest rates and bring the stock market down still further.


Japan Student Exchange Buys Good Will for U.S.
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Medical Buildings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Medical Buildings (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,418,000
15,213,000
Net inc
6,000
360,000
Share earns
-
.03
Yr rev
38,085,000
46,165,000
Net inc
150,000
b6,364,000
Share earns
.01
-


Reebok International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reebok International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
554,404,000
488,487,000
Net inc
52,719,000
49,409,000
Share earns
.46
.43
Shares outst
114,635,000
113,959,000
The company said sales in its international business accounted for most of its sales growth; sales outside of the U.S., more than doubled to $116 million from $57 million in the year- ago quarter.


Books of The Times;   Lyrical Loss and Desolation of Misfits in Chicago
LEAD:
The Coast of Chicago
By Stuart Dybek
173 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.


South African Police Kill 4 Demonstrators
LEAD: The South African Police opened fire on demonstrators today, killing four black youths, in a black township about 100 miles south of here, the police and local residents said.


Southern New England Telecommun. Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern New England Telecommun. Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
401,500,000
407,100,000
Net inc
39,000,000
41,300,000
Share earns
.62
.66


On Stage
LEAD:
Buddy Holly on Broadway


Review/Art;   Sculptural Paintings by Larry Poons
LEAD: It is unlikely that the small retrospective of paintings by Larry Poons at the Salander-O'Reilly Galleries will completely change anyone's opinion about this artist.
The works that have been brought together describe what is by now a familiar path to those who have followed Mr.
Poons's career.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Sikh Parade, Broadway will be closed tomorrow from Union Square Park to 39th Street from 1 to 3 P.M.


Gooden Back in the Groove As Mets Defeat the Cubs
LEAD: Baseball historians will find it hard to believe someday, considering that he won 101 games and lost only 41 in the big leagues by the age of 25, but Dwight Gooden went 10 months without winning a game - until yesterday, that is.


Guarding The Family D-Word
LEAD: News item: The proprietors of a bar in Brooklyn, named the Brooklyn Dodger, have been sued by the proprietors of a baseball team in Los Angeles, named the Los Angeles Dodgers.
The owner of the baseball team, one Peter O'Malley, claims to have control over the name Brooklyn Dodgers. ''Who is this Dickens?


Central Jersey Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Jersey Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,287,000
4,779,000
Per share
.38
.54
Per share earnings are fully diluted.


Profits Down At Carbide
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation said today that its net income fell 53.2 percent in the first quarter because of weaker chemical prices and a period of extremely cold weather that shut down some Southern plants.


The Teaneck Killing and Justification
LEAD: Any charges that a grand jury might bring against the officer who fatally shot a black 16-year-old here last week are likely to hinge on a disputed point.
Did the youth have his hands raised when he was shot?
Or was he reaching to pull a weapon from a jacket pocket?


Professors' Theories on Race Stir Turmoil at City College
LEAD: Clashing theories of racial superiority articulated by two tenured professors, one white and one black, have been stirring turmoil at City College and have prompted the college's president to ask for an inquiry into the limits of academic freedom.
The inquiry panel will study the professors' conduct as well.


Fama Confessed, a Prisoner Testifies in Bensonhurst Trial
LEAD: A prisoner with a criminal record testified yesterday that Joseph Fama had confessed to killing Yusuf K. Hawkins in a jailhouse conversation last month. ''I shot him.
I shot him.
I can't bring the guy back,'' Mr.
Fama told him, the prisoner said.


Drop at Texas Instruments
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc. today reported an 84.7 percent decline in first-quarter earnings as a sluggish semiconductor market continued to plague the electronics industry.


Cease-Fire Begins in Nicaragua As the Contras Agree to Disarm
LEAD: Leaders of the Sandinista Government, the government-elect and the contra rebel army signed agreements today for an immediate cease-fire in Nicaragua's eight-year civil war and the complete disarming of the rebel army by June 10.


TV Weekend;   One by Havel and One About Havel
LEAD: Who exactly is this playwright who has become president of Czechoslovakia?
In his official appearances, Vaclav Havel is modest and unpretentious to the point of being almost nondescript.
This most public of dissident writers is a fiercely private man.
But then there are his plays, revealing a supple, playful mind fascinated with paradox and irony.


Kimball International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimball International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
146,777,000
152,655,000
Net inc
10,206,000
8,354,000
Share earns
.48
.39
9mo sales
460,612,000
438,072,000
Net inc
31,710,000
24,149,000
Share earns
1.50
1.14


Thornburgh Confirms Aide's Role In Report but Denies Policy Breach
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh acknowledged today that his press secretary had played a role in confirming for a CBS reporter a politically damaging report about Representative William H. Gray 3d that the network later broadcast.


Businessman Held in Coercing Rivals
LEAD: A New Jersey businessman who sent thousands of youngsters door-to-door selling candy in 30 states for more than two decades was arrested today by F.B.I. agents on charges he used terrorist tactics to eliminate competition.


Firstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstar Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
23,626,000
20,271,000
Per share
1.01
.86


Credit Extension Sought by Ames
LEAD: Ames Department Stores Inc., plagued with finanacial problems, is seeking another extension in a credit agreement established when the company bought the Zayre Stores.
The company received a waiver of the agreement several weeks ago from its creditors, but the extension expired on Tuesday, said Douglas K.


Death-Penalty Supporters Gain Vital Vote Against Cuomo Veto
LEAD: A Democratic Assemblyman from Rochester announced today that he had abandoned his opposition to the death penalty, a move that could provide the last vote needed to override Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's veto.


Alleghany Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alleghany Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
331,100,000
254,000,000
Net inc
11,000,000
7,000,000
Share earns
1.71
1.11
Shares outst
6,442,000
6,311,386


Reviews/Music;   From Arias to Show Tunes With von Stade
LEAD: Trying to grade superstars is unedifying business.
So rather than quibble about whether the mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade qualifies as such, even buttressed by her ''special guests,'' the tenor Jerry Hadley and the bass Samuel Ramey, one will grant that their concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday evening was indeed a superstar event.


Uncovered Short Sales Edge Down on Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that short interest declined slightly in the month ended April 12, after reaching a record level for the month ended March 15.
It fell by 625,328 shares, or about one-tenth of 1 percent.


U.S. Move on Wood Talks
LEAD: The United States will send a top trade negotiator to Japan to resume stalled talks on opening up the Japanese market to foreign wood products, a Japanese official said today.


Saxophone Virtuosos Of Whisper And Howl
LEAD: For 20 years, between 1935 and 1955, the tenor saxophone defined instrumental sensuality.
Whether it was Coleman Hawkins playing ''Body and Soul'' in 1939, or Joe Houston honking and screaming through ''Houston's Hot House,'' the tenor saxophone was the lead instrument in popular music.
The guitar changed all of that, but by the late 1940's, jazz had begun to splinter anyway, moving from an entertainment music to an art form.


Review/Film;   Documentary Glorifies Hunters and the Hunted
LEAD: ''In the Blood,'' which opens today at the 57th Street Playhouse, purports to be a documentary celebrating family ties, manly virtue and historical tradition, not to mention wildlife conservation.
Its real objective is to present an ennobling view of big-game hunting, and as such it ought to attract the attention of those who oppose the killing of animals for sport.


Alexander &amp; Baldwin reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alexander &amp; Baldwin (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
203,416,000
336,823,000
Net inc
b47,125,000
c135,334,000
Share earns
1.02
2.87
b-Included $28.4 million, or 62 cents a share, from the sale of an undeveloped property.


Excerpts From High Court Decision That Judges May Order Tax Increase
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision on Wednesday that Federal judges may order local governments to increase taxes to remedy constitutional violations like school segregation.
Justice Byron R. White wrote the majority opinion, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy the dissenting opinion.


Notebook;   Wood Favorites Carry Weight of an Old Rivalry
LEAD: On Aug. 4, 1984, the Whitney Handicap at Saratoga was the scene of one of the most humiliating defeats one horse has ever inflicted upon another.


Reviews/Film;   Visiting Martians Who Read Earthlings' Thoughts, and Reveal Them
LEAD: One of the ideas behind ''Martians Go Home'' is that Mars is inhabited by green-faced creatures who sound like second-rate, mildly obnoxious stand-up comics.
Take a screeching comedian like Sam Kinison, tone down his act and paint him green, and you'll have a fair idea of this movie's quaint notion of alien humor.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
A NEW ERA AT EASTERN
A Federal bankruptcy judge accomplished what organized labor had sought for years.
He took control of Eastern Airlines from Frank Lorenzo and appointed an outsider to run the troubled carrier, which had become a symbol of labor strife in the 1980's.
The judge's goal is to keep the airline flying at least until it becomes palatable to a buyer.


Gander Mountain reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gander Mountain (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
22,632,000
23,119,000
Net loss
399,000
541,000
9mo sales
95,402,000
92,588,000
Net inc
2,704,000
1,730,000
Share earns
.98
.63


Democrats Say A Failed Census Needs a Change
LEAD: A group of Congressional Democrats today declared the first phase of the 1990 census a failure.
They called on the Commerce Department to consider using statistical methods to adjust the totals to make up for people not being counted.


Chronicle
LEAD: The mezzo-soprano REGINA RESNIK is going home again, to the New York City Opera, where she sang in 1944, and to the Metropolitan Opera, where she became a star overnight in a storybook debut that year.


Hostages' Fate: What Bush Can Do
LEAD: If a pro-Iranian faction ultimately makes good on its offer to release an American captive seized in Lebanon, the White House should respond in a way that sets in motion a solution to the hostage problem.


Bankers Trust N.Y.  Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers Trust N.Y.  Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
198,000,000
164,000,000
Per share
2.36
2.02


Leader of the Wolfpack
LEAD: North Carolina State is expected to name Todd Turner of the University of Connecticut as its new athletic director today, filling a post once held by Jim Valvano, who agreed two weeks ago to leave as basketball coach.


Nepal's New Premier Takes Office
LEAD: Nepal's experiment with multiparty democratic government formally began today on an enthusiastic and emotional note.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Albania Easing Its Isolation
After three decades of shunning the United States and the Soviet Union, Albania said it would seek relations with the superpowers.
Page A7.
Recall on Infants' Cushion
A cushion believed responsible for the suffocation of 19 infants is being recalled by manufacturers under Government pressure.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
CRH P.L.C., Dublin, a building materials group, said its U.S. subsidiary Oldcastle Inc. and Georgia Investors had each acquired a 50 percent interest in the architectural glass division of HGP Industries, a custom glass fabricator, for a total of $100 million.


Net Off 15.6% at Bear Stearns
LEAD: The Bear Stearns Companies said yesterday that its third-quarter profit fell 15.6 percent and revenue declined 5.8 percent at a time of recession on Wall Street.


Commerce Clearing House reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Clearing House (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
224,886,000
212,910,000
Net inc
29,151,000
28,836,000
Share earns
1.64
1.60


Addenda
LEAD: *
Hill &amp; Knowlton USA has formed Hill &amp; Knowlton Entertainment, and named Alfred S. Newman managing director.


Associated Banc-Corp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Banc-Corp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,455,000
4,073,000
Per share
.59
.54


Ralston Purina reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ralston Purina (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,714,500,000
1,589,300,000
Net inc
91,600,000
90,800,000
Share earns
1.49
1.39
Latest quarter results were adversely affected by an after-tax charge of $6.8 million related to a pet food plant closure and the settlement of a patent infringement suit.


Raising New York Housing Allowance Won't Cut Homelessness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Falls Against Yen As It Closes Mostly Mixed
LEAD: The dollar was mixed yesterday in domestic currency exchange trading, losing ground against a revived Japanese yen but rising against most other leading currencies.


Rose Set to Admit in Court Today That He Filed False Tax Returns
LEAD: Pete Rose, who was suspended from baseball for life eight months ago, has agreed to plead guilty in United States District Court in Cincinnati today to two felony counts of filing false Federal income tax returns, according to court papers released yesterday.


Nunn Proposes Sharp U.S. Military Cuts in Europe
LEAD: Saying the receding threat of conflict with the Soviet Union calls for major changes in military strategy, Senator Sam Nunn proposed today that the United States sharply reduce its nuclear and conventional forces in Europe.


Premier Bankshares Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Bankshares Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,188,000
1,301,000
Share earns
.35
.38


Nicholls Leads Ranger 'Gunners' Past Capitals
LEAD: The puck was up for grabs, and as it slid from one zone into another, the suspicion swept Madison Square Garden that the game was there for the taking, too.
The score read: Rangers 4, Capitals 3.
The clock read: 8:15 in the third period.
The race was on.


Benching Backfires for Capitals' Coach
LEAD: Terry Murray, the coach of the Washington Capitals, criticized John Cunniff of the Devils severely when Cunniff benched his hot goaltender in the fourth game of their Patrick Division semifinal series last week.


GATX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GATX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
190,900,000
153,000,000
Net inc
19,900,000
17,400,000
Share earns
1.71
1.84
The company said the decrease in share earnings in the latest quarter is primarily the result of the dividend related to its $3.875 convertible preferred stock issued during the third quarter of 1989.


The Limits of Power;   High Court Ruling in Kansas city Case Reflects Sharp Split Over Judges' Role
LEAD: The Supreme Court's ruling in the Kansas City, Mo., school desegregation case on Wednesday demonstrated that the Court is beset by powerful philosophical disagreements as it struggles to find the boundary of Federal judicial power over local governments.
The ruling, in which the


Mattel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mattel Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
233,967,000
195,303,000
Net inc
8,427,000
4,327,000
Share earns
.17
.09
Shares outst
50,526,000
48,987,000


Review/Film;   A Mideast Variation Of 'Romeo and Juliet'
LEAD: A film about an Israeli Romeo and an Arab Juliet has to work hard to avoid all those star-crossed cliches, to bring some freshness to those feuding families and foolish prejudices that trample young love. ''Torn Apart'' actually embraces the cliches, and self-destructs in the process.
When the Israeli Ben and the Arab


Marshall Field Deal By Dayton
LEAD: In a deal announced today, Marshall Field &amp; Company of Chicago, one of the oldest and grandest names in American retailing, is to be sold for $1.04 billion to another venerable retailer, the Dayton Hudson Corporation of Minneapolis.


Parker Hannifin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Hannifin Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
636,463,000
619,422,000
Net inc
29,714,000
c30,178,000
Share earns
.61
.62
9mo sales
1,803,474,000
1,759,512,000
Net inc
b78,096,000
c105,663,000
Share earns
1.60
2.17


House G.O.P. Chiefs Assail Dole's Stance on Israel
LEAD: House Republican leaders issued a stinging rebuke today to the Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, for comments on relations with Israel.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Tuesday misstated the corporate structure of the Leslie Fay Companies.
It is a publicly held company, not a subsidiary of Goldome and the New Lefco Corporation; New Lefco is Leslie Fay's former name.


Evolution in Europe;   Bush and Mitterrand Are Putting Moscow Ties Ahead of Lithuania
LEAD: President Bush and President Francois Mitterrand indicated today that they put a higher value on improved relations with Moscow than on an immediate resolution of the situation in Lithuania.


Santa Fe Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
744,100,000
690,100,000
Net loss
b61,400,000
c187,500,000
Share earns
-
1.18
b-Included out-of-court settlements of two major lawsuits, the ETSI Coal Slurry Pipeline litigation and the Texas Utilities (TU) Chaco Royalty litigation.


Tredegar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tredegar Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
147,660,000
158,586,000
Net inc
772,000
2,242,000
Share earns
.06
.19
Shares outst
11,703,000
12,100,000
The 1989 figures reported on a pro forma basis; Tredegar was spun off from Ethyl Corp.


Tandon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
105,079,000
92,687,000
Net inc
7,007,000
b9,863,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
64,404,000
62,282,000
b-Net loss and included $5 million restructuring charge.


Westmoreland Coal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westmoreland Coal (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
127,992,000
149,722,000
Net inc
2,749,000
3,450,000
Share earns
.33
.42


Across a Sad, Severed Isle, a Wall That Endures
LEAD: It never rivaled Berlin's Checkpoint Charlie for drama or tension.
But for the last 16 years, the Ledra Palace Checkpoint here - 200 yards of empty road fenced by mountains of rusty barbed wire - has been the only breach in the hermetic division of Cyprus into a Turkish North and a Greek South resulting from the Turkish invasion of 1974.


Emile de Antonio's Thoughts on Himself and the F.B.I.
After he completes each new film, Emile de Antonio reports in ''Mr.
Hoover and I,'' people tend to ask, ''Why a documentary?''
The New York-based producer and director was always amused by the question, which assumes that documentary films are somehow inferior to fiction films.


Jule Gordon, 87; Executive Who Led A Cosmetics Group
LEAD: Jule Gordon, a retired executive who founded the National Barber and Beauty Manufacturers Association, died of cancer on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.


Apple Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Bancorp Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,647,000
b6,119,000
Per share
1.01
1.33
b-After an extraordinary credit of $700,000, or 15 cents a share, from tax loss carryforwards.


Bucs Get Anderson
LEAD: The San Diego Chargers yesterday traded Gary Anderson, their dissatisfied running back, to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers for a third-round selection in the draft Sunday and a second-or third-round choice in 1991.


Central &amp; South West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central &amp; South West Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
559,000,000
576,000,000
Net inc
40,000,000
80,000,000
Share earns
.35
.77


How a '74 Fracas Led to a High Court Libel Case
LEAD: Sixteen years have passed since the wrestling match between the Mustangs of Maple Heights High School and the Mentor High Cardinals degenerated into a vicious brawl.
But for Michael Milkovich, the melee lives on, though the people grappling now are lawyers, and their arena is the United States Supreme


Review/Film;   A Family That Could Drive You Crazy
LEAD: The terms cult figure and midnight movie were made for Alejandro Jodorowsky.
When ''El Topo,'' his 1967 symbolic extravaganza about a Christ figure, mysterious gunmen, Mexican bandits and resurrection, made its way to New York in 1971, it played for months at midnight to fanatical crowds convinced that the director was a visionary.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on April 12 about a new development bank for Eastern Europe misidentified the ranking Republican on the Senate Appropriations Committee.
He is Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, not Robert W. Kasten Jr. of Wisconsin.


Review/Art;   Sculpture in the City, From Blankets to Bronze
LEAD: ONE thing is apparent in the art galleries this weekend: sculpture lives.
In fact, it thrives in a state of unusual diversity.
This sense of liberation is not particular to the medium; at the moment, many kinds of art are possible.
Yet sculpture seems especially open, if only for purely physical reasons: to a greater extent than painting, sculpture can be made out of anything, and its new materials can in turn open up new meanings.


Robert Brown, Professor, 56
LEAD: Robert Brown, a professor of Spanish at Upsala College in East Orange, N.J., died of cancer on April 11 at the Hospital Center at Orange.
He was 56 years old and lived in East Orange.


Review/Art;   Nature as Subject and Substance
LEAD: In the visual arts, designated Earth Day observances are few and far between, but no matter.
Painters and photographers have long been concerned with nature as a subject and in the case of sculptors and so-called Earth artists, as raw material as well.
Walter De Maria's New York Earth Room, for example, is celebrating its 10th anniversary this year.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-8


Mysterious Death of Owner, Then Arms Company Closes
LEAD: A multinational arms company operated by a Canadian artillery expert who was shot to death at the door of his apartment here four weeks ago announced today that it was going out of business ''for security reasons.''


For Eastern's Public, Guarded Optimism
LEAD: Passengers and travel agents responded with cautious optimism to the appointment of a trustee to run Eastern Airlines.
But some expressed concern that the naming of Martin R. Shugrue, a former executive at Continental Airlines, might signal the beginning of liquidation for the airline.


Marla Maples Talks on TV But Says Little of Trump
LEAD: Several journalistic organizations reportedly offered large sums of money for an interview with Marla Maples, the model-turned-actress who has been romantically linked with Donald Trump.
But Diane Sawyer got the scoop free this week.


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 508 money market mutual funds decreased by $1.25 billion, to $388.6 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 160 institutional funds decreased by $1.02 billion, to $90.23 billion.
The assets of the 246 general-purpose funds were down by $467.30 million, to $133.05 billion.


Carpenter Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carpenter Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
157,046,000
169,592,000
Net inc
14,232,000
b572,000
Share earns
1.61
.06
Shares outst
8,832,000
9,174,000
9mo sales
430,084,000
463,035,000
Net inc
32,859,000
b15,390,000
Share earns
3.68
1.68
Shares outst
8,936,000
9,166,000


National Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
28,515,000
43,709,000


Saks Store Closing
LEAD: Saks Fifth Avenue said it would close its store in the West Oaks Mall in Houston on May 1.
Earlier this week, Lord &amp; Taylor said that it will close its store in the same mall by April 30.
Melvin Jacobs, chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue store, said that in spite of Houston's strengthening economy, the Saks store in West Oaks Mall ''has not met our projections.


Waste Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waste Management (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,220,638,000
958,866,000
Net inc
144,027,000
115,539,000
Share earns
.31
.25


Italian Teams Thrive in Soccer
LEAD: The unprecedented qualification of four Italian soccer teams for the finals of the three European cups has raised fans' hopes for a historic triple triumph in the year the World Cup is held in Italy.


S.E.C. AUTHORIZES A FREER MARKET FOR BIG INVESTORS
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today authorized the creation of a new market for stocks and bonds in a move that could increase the dominance of large investment firms in the United States financial markets.


Deals
LEAD:
Basketball


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on the Health page yesterday about preventive health procedures misstated the recommended frequency of mammograms to detect breast cancer for women over 50.
It is one to two years, not every two years.


Coghlan Busy
LEAD: Eamonn Coghlan, the world indoor record-holder in the mile, plans a full weekend.
Tomorrow, he will be the master of ceremonies for the Trevira Twosome, a 10-mile couples race in Central Park preceded by a two-mile run featuring Jim Ryun.


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Gulf Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
251,639,000
317,765,000
Net inc
37,383,000
55,351,000
Share earns
1.52
2.12
Shares outst
24,634,640
26,070,957


Evolution in Europe;   Kremlin Talks Go On To Overhaul Economy
LEAD: The Gorbachev Government today continued its long and thus far inconclusive deliberations to form a long-term plan for overhauling the stagnant economy.


Digital, Expecting a Loss, Ends Up Reporting a Profit
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation, which said two months ago that it might post a quarterly loss for the first time in its 32-year history, instead reported profits yesterday of $24.9 million, or 20 cents a share, for its fiscal third quarter, after a $150 million charge.


Chronicle
LEAD: LINDA SMITH, the daughter of JOAN KROC, the owner of the San Diego Padres, has filed for divorce from JERRY KAPSTEIN, a former baseball player who is the team's chief executive, according to reports in The San Diego Union and The San Diego Tribune.
The couple were married 18 months ago.


Cooper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,420,300,000
1,039,200,000
Net inc
59,800,000
38,000,000
Share earns
.43
.37
Shares outst
110,420,000
102,137,000


Keith Group of Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keith Group of Cos.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
1,743,917
1,589,442
Net inc
312,454
b71,944
Share earns
.12
-
6mo rev
3,785,854
3,139,971
Net inc
439,002
b196,017
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss


Devon's Aztech Chief Will Head New Unit
LEAD: Andrew I. Cramer was a bit beside himself yesterday, trying to figure out how to meld his relatively new Aztech Financial Printers unit with elements of the Chas.
P.
Young Company, one of the nation's oldest financial printing firms.


Alex Brown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alex Brown Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
68,465,000
60,113,000
Net inc
2,509,000
b6,286,000
Share earns
.16
-
b-Net loss and included after-tax charge of $6.9 million related to anticipated expenses in eliminating excess office space.


Avemco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avemco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
19,672,000
25,459,000
Net inc
3,669,000
4,713,000
Share earns
.46
.52
Shares outst
8,063,731
9,017,462
The year-ago quarter was restated to conform to 1990 presentation.


Union Camp Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Camp Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
701,489,000
706,226,000
Net inc
67,407,000
79,718,000
Share earns
.98
1.16
Shares outst
68,904,079
78,810,894
Latest quarter results included a gain of about 8 cents a share from the sale of land in northeastern Florida to several Florida government agencies.


Nash Finch Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nash Finch Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Revenue
510,739,152
486,844,950
Net inc
1,905,584
1,802,653
Share earns
.18
.17
Results for 1990 included partial first-quarter results of Timberlake Grocery Co., acquired Jan.


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PPG Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,478,200,000
1,459,400,000
Net inc
125,300,000
129,800,000
Share earns
1.16
1.15
Shares outst
108,300,000
113,200,000


Boeing Raises Pilots' Retirement Age
LEAD: In a move likely to rekindle the debate over the age at which airline pilots should be forced from the cockpit, Boeing has agreed to raise the mandatory retirement age of its own test pilots to 63 from 60, provided the pilots undergo rigorous mental and physical tests.


Bowater Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bowater Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
338,300,000
358,700,000
Net inc
22,200,000
38,900,000
Share earns
.59
1.04


Maytag Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maytag Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
762,100,000
678,600,000
Net inc
32,600,000
34,100,000
Share earns
.31
.35
Shares outst
105,600,000
97,300,000
The company said the increase in sales in the latest first quarter was primarily due to the inclusion of Hoover's results for a full three months this year, compared to only two months in 1989's first quarter.


6 Notebooks at Marcos Trial Detail 5 Years of Spending
LEAD: One day on a trip to Moscow in 1982, Imelda Marcos spent $7,842.31 on scarves and chocolates.
On another day she spent $1,332 on macadamia nuts, and she apparently lost $1,000 in an airborne poker game.
On a single day in September of that year, she spent almost $190,000 in jewelry and $62,000 on artwork in Manhattan.


Evolution in Europe;   Hard-Line Albanians Signal Desire to Resume Ties With U.S. and Soviets
LEAD: The Government of Albania, one of the last hard-line Communist regimes in the world, signaled today that it was willing to take up relations with the United States and the Soviet Union.


Foster Suspended After Positive Test
LEAD: A new hurdle awaits Greg Foster, the two-time world champion who was the silver medalist in the high hurdles at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Games.


2 Hasidic Groups Clash In Dispute in Brooklyn
LEAD: Two rival groups within the Satmar Hasidic movement clashed for more than an hour outside a synagogue in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn last night, the police said.


My Garbo Sighting
LEAD: At last I am at liberty to reveal the details of my encounter with Greta Garbo. (How's that for a lead?) You have been misled.
I have no right to say ''at last,'' as if her death at 84 released me from some bond of confidentiality, because I referred once before to my unsettling Garbo encounter.
Nor was the episode significant to her, though its circumstances elevated it in my mind to one of life's turning points.


Embassy Hotel Chain's Sale Set
LEAD: Allied-Lyons P.L.C., the British liquor and food company, said today that it was selling its Embassy Hotels chain to Jarvis Hotels Ltd. for $331 million.


Victims of Attack on Beirut School Bus Are Mourned


Review/Film;   True-Life Drama of Mental Hospital
LEAD: In ''Chattahoochee,'' Gary Oldman plays Emmett Foley, a Korean War hero driven by despair to commit the acts that landed him in the Florida state mental hospital of the title.
The film shows how Mr.
Foley worked his way out with the help of two books: a simplified legal volume and a Bible.
In the latter he kept records of the guards' abuses against himself and other prisoners, and his complaints eventually brought about changes in the way Florida's mental patients are treated.


Shearson Lehman Hutton reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shearson Lehman Hutton (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,600,000,000
3,000,000,000
Net loss
b915,000,000
c15,000,000
b-Included restructuring charge of about $630 million associated with a reduction program and plans to withdraw from or curtail certain business activities, a charge of $157 million from a change in accounting principle, an increase of $50 million to reserves for litigation, an addition of $32 million to its reserve for loan losses, $34 million in losses related to fluctuations in the h


Scrap Immigration Act's Backfiring Sanctions;   The Victim's View
LEAD: To the Editor:


L. R. Chenault, 92, Economics Professor
LEAD: Lawrence R. Chenault, emeritus professor of economics at Hunter College, died Monday at Centre Community Hospital in State College, Pa.
He was 92 years old and lived in State College.


Board of Elections Will Investigate G.O.P.
LEAD: The State Board of Elections voted unanimously today to investigate whether the state Republican Party intentionally filed incomplete financial reports to conceal its debt.


Reviews/Music;   The Glory of Wit and a Tune: A Reminder
LEAD: It is worth examining the depths of our nostalgia for such Broadway musicals as Jerome Kern's ''Cat and the Fiddle.'' What is it that we have lost that makes revivals like the current one at Weill Recital Hall happy, even euphoric occasions?


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
KALEIDOSCOPE DANCERS FOR CHILDREN, a program of dances with music from live instruments and synthesizers to traditional folk music from around the world, after which children in the audience may join the dancing onstage, 2 P.M. tomorrow, at University Theater, New York University, 35 West Fourth Street.


To Celebrate and Protect the Earth
LEAD: NEW YORK CITY is barely a dot on the planet, occupying just 322 square miles of the earth's nearly 197 million, but this weekend it will overflow with outdoor performances, environmental exhibitions, street fairs, nature walks, cleanup projects and other activities on the 20th anniversary of Earth


Lotus Development reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lotus Development (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
165,500,000
120,000,000
Net inc
22,800,000
5,300,000
Share earns
.53
.13


Allen Organ Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allen Organ Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,313,887
6,138,006
Net inc
1,092,624
1,086,958
Share earns
.73
.72
Shares outst
1,491,118
1,504,323


It Is 10 P.M., Parents; How Do You Plead?
LEAD: Patrick Hildreth has always liked that little nightly spot on his local television station: ''It's 10 P.M.,'' the announcer intones. ''Do you know where your kids are?''


Chronicle
LEAD: Cookbook writers rarely open restaurants, but MARCELLA HAZAN is putting her money where her mouth is.
Mrs.
Hazan, whose books on Italian cuisine and cooking classes, held in Italy, influenced a generation of American cooks, is a partner in Veni, Vidi, Vici, which is to open on Monday in the I.B.M.


Rating Review For Citicorp
LEAD: Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that it might lower debt ratings of Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, and Citibank, its primary subsidiary.


3 Bell Units Post Gains In Profits
LEAD: Three of the seven regional Bell operating companies announced moderate growth in first-quarter earnings and sales yesterday, while a fourth, the Pacific Telesis Group, said its sales rose slightly while earnings fell.


Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baxter International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,903,000,000
1,774,000,000
Net loss
b383,000,000
c101,000,000
Share earns
-
.34
Shares outst
250,000,000
280,000,000
b-Included a pre-tax provision of $566 million for restructuring program.


Martinez's No-Hit Bid Spoiled in 8th
LEAD: Dennis Martinez's bid to pitch baseball's second no-hitter in nine days ended when Darren Daulton doubled with one out in the eighth inning tonight in the Montreal Expos' 5-0 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies.


Chicago Journal;   Art and Ire Mix Again, This Time Over Race
LEAD: It began with the best of intentions.
City officials, a major bank and two museums, including the Art Institute of Chicago, would join to sponsor a spring exhibition showcasing the rich ethnic and racial diversity of the city's artists.


Cavalier Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cavalier Homes Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
14,177,625
17,426,955
Net loss
240,959
44,143


Press Ban Held Improper
LEAD: An appeals court in Brooklyn ruled yesterday that the judge presiding over the Bensonhurst murder trial should not have excluded reporters from two pretrial proceedings without granting a hearing.


Nynex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nynex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,298,900,000
3,234,700,000
Net inc
b291,400,000
283,600,000
Share earns
1.46
1.44
b-Included a pretax charge of $39 million for the company's previously announced early retirement incentive plan.


Promus Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Promus Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
204,181,000
194,842,000
Net inc
b17,639,000
-
Share earns
.68
-
b-Included property transaction gains of $7,946,000.
As a result of the reorganization of Holiday Corp., Promus Corp.


Dinkins Withdraws Money From Bank Under Criticism
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, long an advocate of laws that would ban New York City from using banks that do business with South Africa, yesterday withdrew most of the tens of thousands of dollars he and his wife had deposited in a bank that is a main target of anti-apartheid groups.


New Soviet Czar
LEAD: Vitaly Smirnov, head of the sports committee of the Russian republic, was elected president of the Soviet National Olympic Committee yesterday.
Smirnov, who received 72 of the 110 votes cast, replaces Marat Gramov, who retired from the post he held since 1983.(AP)


Evolution in Europe;   East German Leader Rejects Subsidiary Role in Unity Talks and Reassures Moscow
LEAD: Prime Minister Lothar de Maiziere pledged today that East Germany's first freely elected Government would have a decisive say in the process of reuniting Germany and offered assurances to still Soviet concerns.


Review/Music;   Van Buskirk Gives Recital On Fortepiano
LEAD: Not all of New York's big halls are suitable for the soft pipings and gentle scrapings of original instruments.
But Merkin Concert Hall, where John Van Buskirk performed a fortepiano recital Wednesday night, is ideal, at least for intimate offerings.


Kennametal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kennametal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
161,483,000
124,571,000
Net inc
10,666,000
9,552,000
Share earns
1.02
.92
Shares outst
10,436,000
10,351,000
9mo sales
432,668,000
347,651,000
Net inc
23,174,000
21,317,000
Share earns
2.22
2.06
Shares outst
10,421,000
10,338,000


Israeli Legislator Who Switched Switches Again
LEAD: The religious-party politician who changed his mind at the last minute last week, depriving the Labor Party of the majority it needed to form a government, changed his mind again tonight and decided to rejoin Labor.


Evolution in Europe;   The Pope and Prague
LEAD: The Vatican and Czechoslovakia restored diplomatic relations today in a step that expands the Roman Catholic Church's influence in the former Communist-governed countries of Eastern Europe.


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Federal Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
9,728,000
12,915,000
Share earns
.32
.42


Charles Huggins, 60; Modernized Storage Of Red Blood Cells
LEAD: Dr.
Charles Edward Huggins, a physician and cryobiologist who helped develop the process for freezing and reusing red blood cells, died of pancreatic cancer on Wednesday at his home in Boston.
He was 60 years old.


Dennison Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dennison Manufacturing (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
178,810,000
180,295,000
Net inc
b2,027,000
c6,220,000
Share earns
.13
.39
Shares outst
15,895,000
15,884,000
b-Included pre-tax gain of $4.7 million from dilution of equity interest in a joint venture and a pre-tax $4.3 million charge related to severance costs and other provisions associated with expense reductions and asset revaluations.


Chronicle
LEAD: ARCHIBALD L. GILLIES is the new president of the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, established according to the artist's wishes after he died in 1987.
The foundation, with assets valued at about $100 million, concentrates on arts education, developing curatorial projects in museums and aiding architectural preservation and urban design.


9% Decline in Toxic Pollution Is Cited in Survey by E.P.A.
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency said today that its second annual inventory of toxic substances released into the environment by industry showed a substantial decline from 1987 to 1988, but it cautioned that the data did not necessarily indicate improved pollution control.


Gillette Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gillette Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,047,200,000
941,000,000
Net inc
87,000,000
77,600,000
Share earns
.75
.80
Shares outst
96,924,000
96,647,000
The latest quarter's share earnings reflected preferred dividend payments of $14.2 million.


Independent Bankgroup reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bankgroup
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,068,000
1,224,000
Per share
.54
.61


Patents;   Producing Healthier Fried Foods
LEAD: In the continuing search to indulge people who want to improve their diets while satisfying their tastes for artery-clogging foods, inventors this week patented methods for making healthier potato chips and french fries, as well as a method for making eggs with the purported benefits of fish oil.


Brazil Squeezes and the Arts Gasp
LEAD: In Rio, the Museum of Modern Art is fighting the threat of closing with a ''maximum austerity'' budget.


Marjorie Weil, 90, Creator of Way To Produce Slices of Melba Toast
LEAD: Marjorie Weil, who devised a way to mass produce Melba toast in 1932 and was honorary chairman of the Devonsheer Melba Corporation when she retired in 1975, died in her sleep on Wednesday at her home in Palm Beach, Fla.
She was 90 years old.


National Education Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Education Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
85,393,000
99,523,000
Net loss
8,431,000
b7,015,000
Share earns
-
.24
b-Net income


YANKS END HOMER SLUMP BUT STILL MANAGE TO LOSE
LEAD: The Yankees' home-run famine finally ended tonight, but their mini-losing streak took another step forward.
Nolan Ryan was a reason why.


Niagara Share Corp. reports earnings for As of March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Niagara Share Corp. (NYSE)
As of March 31
1990
1989
Assets
b226,410,243
203,364,222
Per share
16.96
15.75
Shares outst
13,351,376
12,910,844
b-Represented distributions from capital gains of $1.007 per share paid Dec.


Bonilla's 2 Homers Leads Pirates Over Cubs
LEAD: Bobby Bonilla, playing third base for the first time this season, hit two home runs to drive in three runs, leading the Pittsburgh Pirates to a 9-4 victory over the Chicago Cubs in a rain-shortened game tonight.


Coachmen Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coachmen Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
76,333,410
91,767,586
Net inc
73,427
b2,855,500
Share earns
.01
.38
b-Included a gain of $3 million, or 40 cents a share, from the sale of a subsidiary.


Contender Quits Florida Race
LEAD: An opponent of former Senator Lawton Chiles in the Democratic campaign for governor has dropped out and endorsed him.
The former foe, State Senator George Stuart, had been seeking the Democratic nomination since 1988, but withdrew Wednesday and said he would run for state treasurer and insurance commissioner.


Canadian Food Merger Is Set
LEAD: Two leading Canadian food companies, Maple Leaf Mills and Canada Packers, agreed today to merge in a $860 million (United States) deal intended in part to make them more competitive in the United States.


Tribune Co.'s Profit Off 8.7%
LEAD: The Tribune Company today reported an 8.7 percent drop in its first-quarter earnings and blamed its losses at The Daily News in New York and a weakness in its newsprint business for the slump in profitability.


Pantorama Industries reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pantorama Industries
Year to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
114,530,000
94,117,000
Net inc
3,219,000
2,579,000
Share earns
.20
.16
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Bridge
LEAD: The reader who thinks he can see something wrong with the deal shown in the diagram is right, but should read on.
It occurred in one of the world's oldest competitions, New York City's Inter-Club Contract League, which completed its 58th season April 3.


Evolution in Europe;   Also Known As . . .
LEAD: Czechoslovakia's Parliament changed the country's name today for the second time in three weeks.


U.S. Report Describes Weak Soviet Economy
LEAD: The Soviet economy is in such bad shape that a ''single major event,'' like a long strike or new ethnic unrest, could cause economic chaos, Congress was told yesterday.


Indiana Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Indiana Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
288,000
309,000
Per share
.44
.48


Walesa Wins Solidarity Vote of Confidence


Why There'll Always Be an England
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kellogg Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kellogg Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,208,800,000
1,134,100,000
Net inc
96,300,000
b159,500,000
Share earns
.79
1.30
b-After a gain of $48.1 million from the cumulative effect of change in method of accounting for income taxes.


Newmil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmil Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
959,000
1,507,000
Share earns
.21
.25
9mo net inc
2,920,000
4,380,000
Share earns
.62
.71


ECI Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ECI Environmental (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
5,974,000
4,176,000
Net inc
108,000
247,000
Share earns
.02
.07
Shares outst
4,482,000
3,497,050
6mo rev
12,504,000
8,001,000
Net inc
514,000
255,000
Share earns
.13
.07
Shares outst
3,951,050
3,497,000


Rose Pleads Guilty to 2 Tax Charges
LEAD: Pete Rose, who has spent the last eight months wondering if he will ever again be allowed to participate in major league baseball, must now spend the next month wondering if his off-field troubles with the Internal Revenue Service will result in a prison term.


Some White House Effect
LEAD: ''Not beneficial to discuss whether there is or is not warming. . . .
In the eyes of the public we will lose this debate.'' So warned the White House in a briefing paper for Cabinet officials attending the international conference on the greenhouse effect that President Bush convened this week.


Cal State Chancellor Quits in Dispute Over Raises
LEAD: The head of the 20-campus California State University system abruptly submitted her resignation today after a dispute with the system's trustees over raises she had given herself and other top executives.


Bankers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,136,000
2,875,000
The per share earnings were not applicable since it converted from mutual to stock ownership on March 23, 1990.


Schism in a Hasidic Sect Erupts in Violence
LEAD: A schism within a passionately anti-Zionist Hasidic sect in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn erupted in violence late Thursday and early yesterday when an angry crowd dragged three rivals out of a car and set the vehicle on fire.


Firstier Financial Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstier Financial Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,453,000
6,880,000
Per share
1.11
1.19


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column on Wednesday about the Japan Prize, an award for achievement in science and technology, misidentified the winner for technology.
He is Marvin Minsky, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who is considered the father of artificial intelligence.


Amistar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amistar Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,885,000
5,048,000
Net loss
237,000
b109,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Tide Reaching Africa
LEAD: Attenuated to be sure, little more than ripples, the tide of impulse to democracy is spreading from Europe to reach Africa.


Aceto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aceto Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
34,028,000
36,038,000
Net inc
1,720,000
1,911,000
Share earns
.43
.48
9mo sales
89,220,000
79,594,000
Net inc
3,467,000
3,404,000
Share earns
.86
.85


Copper Prices Fall Sharply As Better Supplies Are Seen
LEAD: Copper futures prices fell sharply yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange amid improved prospects for supplies and perceptions that demand for the metal would begin a seasonal decline.


NFS Financial (Corp.) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NFS Financial (Corp.)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
53,000
748,000
Share earns
.02
.26


INSIDE
LEAD:
Nunn on the Military Budget


Walwyn Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walwyn Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
19,125,611
20,304,659
Net loss
2,724,691
b37,900
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Patents;   Producing Healthier Fried Foods: Omega-3 Chickens
LEAD: Another process, for producing chickens and eggs that contain the often-stated health benefits of fish oil pills sold in health food stores, won patent approval for a chemist and a physician on Long Island.


Review/Music;   'La Wally,' a Cult Classic, Edges Closer to the Spotlight
LEAD: ''La Wally,'' Alfredo Catalani's final opera, was a hit when it had its La Scala premiere in 1892, but began a descent into obscurity - along with the rest of Catalani's works - soon after the composer's death the next year.
In the United States, ''La Wally'' has been a rarity since the last Metropolitan Opera staging in 1909.


Cadence Design Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadence Design Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
46,115,000
29,264,000
Net inc
8,981,000
6,262,000
Share earns
.29
.22
Shares outst
30,755,000
28,485,000


Standard Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Trustco
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
52,958,000
47,282,000
Net inc
2,809,000
3,903,000
Share earns
.36
.52
Included are gains on investments of $59 million versus $18 million and provisions for losses of $2,535,000 versus $278,000.


The Cable Picture, Still Clouded
LEAD: New York City's Conflicts of Interest Board ruled that Mayor Dinkins, along with City Council President Andrew Stein, couldn't vote on Manhattan cable television franchise renewals because of potential conflicts.
So what did Mr.
Dinkins do?
He named Milton Mollen, his Deputy Mayor for Public Safety, to vote in his place.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Multiple Birdie Day
Dale Douglass and Charles Coody birdied 6 holes in a row and 9 of their last 11 yesterday to expand their lead to six strokes after two rounds of the Legends of Golf tournament in Austin, Tex.
The leaders combined for a 10-under-par 62 and completed 36 holes in 121, a record 23 under par in the 13-year-old better-ball event.


Union Planters reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Planters (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
5,700,000
b7,400,000
Share earns
.30
.39
b-Restated to reflect the acquisition last November of National Commerce Corp., which accounted for as a pooling of interests.


First Federal Savings-LaFGrange reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings-LaFGrange
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
301,604
365,374
Per share
.37
.45


Marsh's Ban Is Upheld
LEAD: An appeals panel yesterday upheld the suspension of Henry Marsh, a 36-year-old steeplechaser from Utah, for failing to appear for a drug test.
The two-year ban was effective Jan. 15.
A hearing panel of The Athletics Congress announced April 3 it would ban the four-time Olympian for failing to report last December under the year-round out-of-competition testing program.


Minorities at Baruch College Charge Neglect of Ethnicity
LEAD: The student body president is black.
Social life has not been marred by the kinds of ugly racial incidents that have rocked other schools.
Fliers posted in campus buildings reflect a mosaic of cultures: Chinese, Puerto Rican, African-American.
Yet Bernard M. Baruch College in Manhattan is in tumult these days over the question of race.


Hastings Mfg Co reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hastings Mfg Co (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
16,620,113
16,648,976
Net inc
623,420
241,336
Share earns
1.48
.57
Shares outst
419,925
419,758


Framingham Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Framingham Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
1,142,000
b1,095,000
Per share
-
.27
Shares outst
4,082,000
4,082,500
b-Net income
The company attributed its loss in the quarter to the charge of $1.5 million to the provision for loan losses, the lost income on non-performing assets and the expense of foreclosure and loan workout efforts.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: LEE ATWATER, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, returned home yesterday after spending a day in the hospital for a leg scan that a committee spokesman described as routine.
Mr.
Atwater, who undergoes daily radiation treatments for a brain tumor that was found last month, was examined at the George Washington University Medical Center in Washington, The Associated


McDonnell's Income Falls
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said yesterday that it earned $2 million, or 5 cents a share, in the first quarter, after subtracting a large loss from its MD-80 and MD-11 aircraft production business.


Flexsteel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flexsteel Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
43,857,203
44,796,490
Net inc
1,213,812
1,804,739
Share earns
.17
.25
9mo sales
128,995,386
127,851,011
Net inc
b5,046,726
5,310,492
Share earns
.71
.74


BENSONHURST WITNESS SAYS 2 DEFENDANTS LED PURSUERS
LEAD: A witness at the Bensonhurst murder trial testified yesterday that the defendants Keith Mondello and Joseph Fama were at the head of a group of as many as 40 whites seconds before Yusuf K. Hawkins was shot to death.


LSI Logic reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Logic (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
139,072,000
133,897,000
Net inc
b2,096,000
8,035,000
Share earns
.05
.19
Shares outst
41,391,000
41,437,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $955,000, or 2 cents a share, due to a gain on the early retirement of debt.


Roosevelt Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roosevelt Financial (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
b4,509,000
c4,498,000
Share earns
-
.79
b-After $7.7 million charge attributable to reduction in the high yield bond portfolio.
c-Net income


Evolution in Europe: Gorbachev's Game;   The Soviets Must Make Things Hard Or Risk More Calls for Independence
LEAD: In closing the energy tap on rebellious Lithuania, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is struggling with a far larger sovereignty crisis than the one presented by the resilient Baltic republic.


Metro Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,281,000
b1,427,000
Share earns
.54
.61
6mo net inc
2,839,000
b2,940,000
Share earns
1.20
1.01
b-Reflected $719,000 charge for staff reduction and early retirement program.


Genicom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genicom Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
66,921,000
64,403,000
Net loss
589,000
1,005,000
Shares outst
10,579,000
10,910,000


Scott Paper Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott Paper Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
130,017,000
82,513,000
Net inc
4,370,000
4,241,000
Share earns
.29
.28
The company said the first-quarter sales increase of 57.6 percent reflects its purchase of the White Swan division of E.B.


Gentex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gentex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,800,826
6,078,613
Net inc
429,573
506,691
Share earns
.06
.08
Shares outst
7,650,173
5,982,074


2 Brooklyn Areas Ask What Factories Are Doing to Them
LEAD: One block from the elementary school and its 1,200 students is a storage site for radioactive and hazardous wastes.
New York City's biggest sewage plant and one of its three incinerators are nearby.


Work Release Viewed as Likely for Dentist
LEAD: Sentencing was postponed yesterday in the case of Marcia Cohen, a dentist and recovering drug addict who faces from one and a half to four years in state prison for her conviction on burglary charges in November.


Dollar Advances Broadly Amid Tensions on Lithuania
LEAD: The dollar closed higher on world currency markets yesterday, as investors sought a safe haven amid heightened tensions over Lithuania.


Manville Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manville Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
517,950,000
508,305,000
Net inc
24,900,000
34,352,000
Share earns
.18
.26
The company said it took an $8.5 million charge in the 1990 quarter for deferred taxes related to an increase in the Brazilian tax rate.


Rayonier Timberlands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rayonier Timberlands (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
26,674,000
28,338,000
Net inc
19,498,000
21,264,000
Share earns
1.06
1.10
Net income represents partnership income; share earnings are in units.


Informix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Informix Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
41,506,000
31,002,000
Net inc
2,233,000
481,000
Share earns
.17
.04
Shares outst
13,440,000
12,668,000


Corporate Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corporate Software Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
47,712,000
31,291,000
Net inc
1,244,000
1,146,000
Share earns
.24
.23


Study Finds Mild Gain in Drive on Illegal Aliens
LEAD: A report by two influential research organizations has concluded that the Government's efforts to seek penalties against employers who hire illegal aliens has been only a modest deterrent to illegal immigration.


MILKEN SET TO PAY A $600 MILLION FINE IN WALL ST. FRAUD
LEAD: Michael R. Milken, who created the ''junk bond'' market that financed many big corporate takeovers in the 1980's, agreed yesterday to plead guilty to six criminal charges related to securities transactions and pay $600 million in fines, people who have been briefed about the decision said.


Bronx Boy, 11, Fatally Shot By Playmate, 13, Police Say
LEAD: An 11-year-old boy was fatally shot yesterday by a 13-year-old playmate in a Bronx apartment house, the police said.


Manufacturers National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
21,913,000
24,844,000
Share earns
1.44
1.64
First quarter results included a $6 million charge to cover consolidation costs and a $4.8 million gain on the exchange of LDC debt.


Shutdown by Ford To Furlough 2,700
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would halt production of the Thunderbird and Cougar models for a week beginning on April 30.
About 2,700 hourly workers will be laid off at Ford's assembly plant in Lorain, Ohio, as a result.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With a Window Box
LEAD: There is no simpler way to have a garden in the country or the city than in a window box.
The display doesn't require many plants, just a few geraniums, petunias, dwarf dahlias or almost whatever you like.
Herbs, for example, can be grown this way, too.
The only requirement is to use plants that suit the exposure of the box.


Phoenix Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phoenix Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,715,000
17,638,000
Net loss
b4,587,000
c2,310,000
Share earns
-
.21
6mo rev
16,506,000
32,264,000
Net loss
9,523,000
c5,175,000
Share earns
-
.46


Albany International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Albany International Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
131,037,000
118,166,000
Net inc
2,502,000
9,361,000
Share earns
.10
.37
Shares outst
25,564,860
25,102,799
Year-ago results included a gain equaled to 10 cents a share on the sale of real property in Sweden.


Oklahoma Teachers Return to Work After Compromise on School Bill


Figgie International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Figgie International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
340,413,000
320,355,000
Net inc
12,095,000
b14,734,000
Share earns
.69
.66
Shares outst
17,534,654
22,271,511
b-After income from discontinued operations of $175,000, or 1 cent a share.


Dow Off 15.99; Bigger Drop Averted
LEAD: Stock prices bounced back sharply in late trading yesterday but ended on a weak note amid concern that rising interest rates would continue to depress stock and bond prices.


Wavetek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wavetek Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
24,855,000
21,761,000
Net inc
962,000
287,000
Share earns
.11
.03
6mo sales
47,282,000
43,117,000
Net inc
1,789,000
452,000
Share earns
.20
.05
Shares outst
8,927,000
8,896,000


Left the Car Lights On? Device Saves the Battery
LEAD: For absent-minded drivers who leave the lights on in their cars, an inventor in Birmingham, Mich., has invented an ''intelligent switch'' that prevents the car's battery from becoming drained.


5 Escape Center For Immigrants In South Queens
LEAD: Five inmates escaped earlier this week from a new immigration jail in Rosedale, Queens, that had been bitterly opposed by residents of the neighborhood.


Vicon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vicon Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
11,354,000
11,053,000
Net loss
3,000
b17,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
2,758,000
2,654,000
6mo sales
22,610,000
21,083,000
Net loss
215,000
243,000


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If you give in to a demand, it's actually like dealing with a terrorist group.
I can kind of understand that because if we give in this time, maybe a week, a year, two years from now they'll start all over again with taking hostages.
But there are so many things we don't know and will never know or understand.


American Filtrona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Filtrona Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
37,215,000
37,269,000
Net inc
1,853,000
2,085,000
Share earns
.50
.57
Shares outst
3,712,000
3,683,000


Francis W. H. Adams, 85, Dies; Led New York City's Police Force
LEAD: Francis W. H. Adams, a lawyer, a leader in New York City's Reform Democratic movement and a former New York City Police Commissioner, died of heart failure yesterday at Devon Manor, a convalescent home in Devon, Pa.
He was 85 years old and also had an apartment in Manhattan.


Mountaineer Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mountaineer Bankshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
995,000
1,165,000
Share earns
.38
.44


Canadian Oil Deal
LEAD: Two of Canada's largest oil and gas companies shuffled assets.
Imperial Oil Ltd., debt-burdened since buying Texaco Canada for close to $5 billion (Canadian) last year, sold a share in Interhome Energy Inc. for $492 million to Gulf Canada, majority-owned by the Reichmann family's Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd.


McDonnell Douglas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonnell Douglas (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,825,000,000
3,216,000,000
Net inc
b2,000,000
c169,000,000
Share earns
.05
4.43
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $2,000,000, or 5 cents a share.


U.S. HOSTAGE MOVE ANNOYS MILITANTS
LEAD: The kidnappers of three Americans held hostage in Lebanon expressed frustration today with what they described as United States unwillingness to cooperate in the captives' release.


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b5,116,000
5,013,000
Per share
.40
.39
b-After an extraordinary gain on extinguishment of debt of $756,000.


At Home, Hope Raised, Hope Dashed
LEAD: For Estelle Ronneburg, this was a day to put reason before the dictates of a mother's heart, to seek patience with a process that has still not returned her only child, a hostage in Lebanon, after 39 months.


Federal Screw Works reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Screw Works (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
15,726,000
20,306,000
Net inc
260,000
1,045,000
Share earns
.22
.87
9mo sales
45,597,000
54,981,000
Net inc
1,319,000
2,270,000
Share earns
1.11
1.88


Commonwealth Bancshares Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Bancshares Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,201,000
2,539,000
Per share
.51
.41


Nunn Urges Cutting Bush Budget For Military by Up to $18 Billion
LEAD: Senator Sam Nunn today recommended cutting President Bush's 1991 military budget proposal by as much as $18 billion, setting the stage for a battle with the Pentagon as well as House Democrats, who are seeking even deeper cuts.


Hungarians Can't Be Written Out of Transylvania
LEAD: To the Editor:


How McGovern Became Involved in Lawsuit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Paul Mueller Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paul Mueller Co.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
17,767,000
16,249,000
Net inc
1,400,000
880,000
Share earns
1.20
.75


SPORTS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: Richie Guerin has been in the news lately for something someone was about to do to him.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allegheny International Inc., Pittsburgh, a maker of electrical appliances, said most of its creditors and a majority of its stockholders had voted in favor of its Chapter 11 reorganization plan, but it fell short of the two-thirds majority needed in two classes of creditors.


Don't Stigmatize Haiti
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oriole Homes Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oriole Homes Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
25,586,625
27,834,015
Net inc
1,565,362
b2,142,083
Share earns
.41
.56
b-Included gain of $936,810, or 24 cents a share, for the sale of a parcel of land in Parkland, Fla.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, APRIL 21, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


Home Port Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Port Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
272,000
631,000
Per share
.13
.29


Lyondell Net Off 41.8%
LEAD: The Lyondell Petrochemical Company, spun off last year from ARCO, today reported a 41.8 percent decrease in its first-quarter earnings as higher crude prices offset increased sales.
For the quarter ended March 31, the company's net income was $78 million, or 98 cents a share, compared with $134 million, or $1.67 a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.


President of Eastern Resigns As Trustee Starts to Work
LEAD: Philip J. Bakes Jr., the veteran airline executive chosen in 1986 by Frank Lorenzo to turn Eastern Airlines around, resigned as president and chief executive yesterday, less than two days after a bankruptcy court forced Mr.
Lorenzo to turn control of Eastern over to a trustee, Martin R. Shugrue.


Coors (Adolph) Co.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coors (Adolph) Co.(O)
Qtr to March 25
1990
1989
Sales
394,326,000
324,082,000
Net inc
7,687,000
b4,805,000
Share earns
.21
-
b-Net loss and after a tax credit of $2.7 million.


Profit Lags at Caterpillar
LEAD: Caterpillar Inc. announced today that it had put into effect a white-collar hiring freeze after the company's profit fell short of last year's performance for the second consecutive quarter.


Newsprint Gamble Proving Costly
LEAD: Newsprint executives these days compare their business to a high-stakes poker game in which the minimum bet has been raised abruptly.
And many companies are now questioning whether the potential payoff is worth the gamble.


Evolution in Europe;   Riots Hit Pretoria Township Where Police Killed 5
LEAD: Riots shook the black township of Rammulotsi in the Orange Free State today after five youths were shot to death by the police on Thursday.


Hungarians Can't Be Written Out of Transylvania;   A Parallel to Israel
LEAD: To the Editor:


KNICKS FALL BUT EWING SETS A SCORING RECORD
LEAD: The Knicks closed out their regular-season home schedule last night to a mixture of boos and cheers as they lost to the Atlanta Hawks, 126-112, at Madison Square Garden.


Berkeley Classrooms Boycotted in a Move For Ethnic Diversity
LEAD: The corridors and classrooms of the University of California here were nearly deserted today, on the second day of a two-day class boycott organized by students calling for greater ethnic diversity on campus.


Review/Dance;   A Flashback to the 60's In Judson Church Show
LEAD: For much of its hundred-year history, the Judson Memorial Church on Washington Square in Greenwich Village has been important as a cultural as well as a religious center.
The church honored its dancing past on Thursday night with ''Dance at Judson: A Concert With Lucinda Childs and David Gordon,'' one in a series of celebratory programs called Judson


Donnelly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelly Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
55,084,000
54,220,000
Net inc
1,055,000
1,761,000
Share earns
.19
.32
9mo sales
150,766,000
143,846,000
Net inc
318,000
4,007,000
Share earns
.05
.72


Mexico Ending Paper Control
LEAD: Mexico's President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, said Thursday that his Government was lifting its control over newsprint, a monopoly often criticized as an obstacle to press freedom.


It's Green and Growing Fast, But Is It Good for the Earth?
LEAD: As the ''green'' consumer movement grows, advocates are battling one another and shoppers are becoming increasingly confused.
One reason: Green is also the color of money.


First Chicago Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Chicago Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
68,600,000
124,700,000
Per share
.93
1.85
First Chicago said first quarter earnings were hurt by an increase in the loan loss provision due to troubled real estate loans.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Scholarship on Abraham Lincoln will get a notable assist with the announcement of a $50,000 annual prize for a book - or in ''rare instances'' an article, an essay, a work of fiction, poetry or a movie - about Lincoln, the Civil War or closely related subjects.


Roto-Rooter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roto-Rooter Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,211,000
16,041,000
Net inc
1,364,000
1,361,000
Share earns
.28
.28


Environmentalists Gain Partial Pesticide Victory
LEAD: Under pressure from environmentalists and the State of California, the Environmental Protection Agency has announced that it is extending to long-marketed chemicals its virtual ban on residues of cancer-causing pesticides in processed foods.


Jefferson Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
401,033
533,941
Per share
.12
.16


Hako Minuteman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hako Minuteman Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,783,000
7,712,000
Net inc
639,000
714,000
Share earns
.17
.19


Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Research Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,070,600
5,621,200
Net inc
24,200
343,600
Share earns
.02
.25


Glenmore Distilleries Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenmore Distilleries Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
40,727,000
36,419,000
Net inc
770,000
700,000
Share earns
.32
.29
9mo sales
122,610,000
95,363,000
Net inc
4,345,000
3,014,000
Share earns
1.77
1.22


Gorbachev Strips Moscow Council Of Power to Control Street Rallies
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev used his special decree powers today to undercut the authority of Moscow's new insurgent government, stripping the city of local control of street demonstrations and protest rallies in the center of the capital.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Tuesday about Gregory Kolovakos, director of the literature program of the New York State Council on the Arts, omitted the identity of his companion.
He was Bruce Becker.


G.M. Raises Prices On Power Options
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation raised prices $10 to $20 on some of its most popular power options despite slow early 1990 sales of its cars and light trucks.
Cruise control, power door locks, power windows and power seats will show increases, mostly of about $15 to $20, a G.M. spokesman, John Mueller, said.


Integrated Device Technology reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integrated Device Technology (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
52,138,000
47,579,000
Net inc
3,021,000
4,229,000
Share earns
.12
.17
Yr sales
209,475,000
180,730,000
Net inc
17,007,000
17,942,000
Share earns
.66
.70


E-Z-EM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Z-EM Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 3
1990
1989
Sales
18,068,000
19,505,000
Net inc
453,000
1,934,000
Share earns
.06
.24
9mo sales
58,072,000
54,898,000
Net inc
4,098,000
5,567,000
Share earns
.51
.70


West One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West One Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
8,789,000
7,813,000
Share earns
.71
.64
Shares outst
12,435,717
12,310,959
Share net reflected 3-for-2 stock split paid in December.


Jewish Settlers Get Reprieve
LEAD: The Supreme Court today blocked the eviction of Jewish settlers living in a compound in the Christian quarter of Jerusalem's Old City, temporarily setting aside an order by the Attorney General.
The 150 settlers can remain in the four 100-year-old buildings near the Church of the Holy Sepulcher until the high court hears more arguments.


FPL Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FPL Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,357,464,000
1,365,774,000
Net inc
39,389,000
70,550,000
Share earns
.29
.54
Shares outst
134,274,000
131,122,000


Mentor Graphics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mentor Graphics Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
116,747,000
100,508,000
Net inc
b11,557,000
11,658,000
Share earns
.26
.28
Shares outst
44,514,000
42,348,000
b-After merger costs of $3,660,000, or 6 cents a share.


Nicholls Is Producing as Promised
LEAD: One red light led to another, the glare of the goal light being replaced by the bright red light on top of the rinkside camera at Madison Square Garden.
Bernie Nicholls, whose third goal of the game Thursday night prompted the first light, was comfortable in front of the second one.


Connecticut Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Connecticut Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
500,000
b76,000
Per share
-
.08
b-Net income


Evolution in Europe;   U.S. SEES THREATS TO SOVIET ECONOMY
LEAD: The economy of the Soviet Union is in a ''near crisis'' state, and prospects for improvement are slight, United States intelligence agencies told Congress today.


Siliconix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Siliconix Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 25
1990
1989
Sales
27,877,000
26,338,000
Net loss
4,066,000
6,706,000


Spira Seeks New Venue
LEAD: David S. Greenfield, Howard Spira's lawyer, has asked that his client's extortion trial be moved to New York City from Tampa, Fla., because, among other reasons, George Steinbrenner is one of Tampa's most financially powerful and influential citizens.


PISTONS AND 76ERS RECEIVE $162,500 FINE AND 3 BANS
LEAD: The National Basketball Association acted as if a 24-hour clock were running yesterday in punishing the major offenders during a bench-clearing brawl Thursday night in the closing seconds of a game between the Philadelphia 76ers and the Detroit Pistons.


Review/Music;   A Composer Who Marries The Popular and Unpopular
LEAD: William Bolcom's identifying thumb print as a composer in recent decades has been his attempt to preside at the wedding of popular and unpopular American music.
Nothing new about that.
Many other composers with academic training have found ways to reconcile and exploit the stylistic and esthetic differences in these disparate and seemingly antagonistic varieties of music.


Carlisle Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carlisle Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
150,651,000
143,095,000
Net inc
4,089,000
6,139,000
Share earns
.51
.76


Buyer for Avon Japan Unlikely to Close Deal
LEAD: Avon Products Inc.'s tentative deal to sell its majority interest in a Japanese subsidiary appears to have fallen apart.


First Oak Brook Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Oak Brook Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
684,000
417,000
Per share
.57
.35


Standard Products Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Products Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
156,071,000
143,341,000
Net inc
1,899,000
9,083,000
Share earns
.19
.85
Shares outst
10,149,953
10,626,955
9mo rev
473,956,000
388,644,000
Net inc
6,909,000
21,317,000
Share earns
.68
2.00
Shares outst
10,219,362
10,634,204


Why Bankroll Africa's Ceausescu?
LEAD: Mobutu Sese Seko seized power in Zaire through a military coup in 1965, the same year Nicolae Ceausescu became the Communist boss of Romania.
Mr.
Mobutu is no Communist.
But his methods of rule resemble those of the executed Romanian tyrant.
Wholesale repression, corruption and megalomania have deformed Zaire.


Pledge to Build Bronx Center
LEAD: The President of Honduras and the archdiocese of New York promised yesterday to build a recreational center in the Bronx neighborhood where 87 people died in a fire at an illegal social club.


Frozen Food Express Indus reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frozen Food Express Indus (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
35,204,000
26,909,000
Net inc
596,000
886,000
Share earns
.14
.21


AnitaRose Longobardi Weds Joseph Dziwura
LEAD: AnitaRose Teresa Longobardi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raphael F. Longobardi of Douglaston, Queens, was married there yesterday to Joseph Raymond Dziwura, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Dziwura of Flint, Mich.
The Rev.
Edward S. Dunn performed the ceremony at St.
Anastasia's Roman Catholic Church.


Rexhall Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rexhall Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
10,855,000
5,866,000
Net inc
477,000
356,000
Share earns
.20
.23
Shares outst
2,405,000
1,569,000


Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,507,343,000
1,397,179,000
Net inc
32,609,000
b29,414,000
Share earns
.38
.34
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $910,000.


Eclipse Ends for a Rising Star
LEAD: Nearly 30 years ago, Robert Moskowitz was on the verge of stardom: one of his paintings had been bought by the Museum of Modern Art and his collages were being shown by the dealer Leo Castelli in company with works by Roy Lichtenstein and Frank Stella.
Fifteen years ago, Mr.
Moskowitz was driving a taxi in New


Herman Helpern, Physician, 81
LEAD: Dr.
Herman Helpern, a physician in private practice in New York for more than half a century, died yesterday, apparently of a heart attack, at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


Curtiss-Wright Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Curtiss-Wright Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
52,958,000
52,244,000
Net inc
b4,382,000
c8,962,000
Share earns
.87
1.80
b-After an extraordinary credit of $419,000, or 8 cents a share.
c-Included a gain of $1,237,000 from an adjustment in accounting, and after an extraordinary credit of $490,000, or 10 cents a share.


IBP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IBP Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,374,012,000
2,235,314,000
Net inc
4,390,000
1,380,000
Share earns
.09
.03
The company said net earnings were reduced in both quarters by a non-cash item of $2.8 million as a result of the effects of SEC-mandated pushdown accounting adopted by IBP when it sold its stock publicly in 1987.


Margaret Carnegie Miller, Philanthropist, 93
LEAD: Margaret Carnegie Miller, the only child of Andrew Carnegie, the steel manufacturer and philanthropist, died on April 11 at her home in Fairfield, Conn.
She was 93 years old.


Liberty National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liberty National Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
330,739
292,254
Per share
.09
.08


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
695,700,000
622,700,000
Net inc
94,200,000
88,300,000
Share earns
1.29
1.23
Shares outst
73,000,000
71,600,000


Pittson reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pittson (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
411,423,000
418,602,000
Net loss
10,102,000
b14,985,000
Share earns
-
.40
b-Net income and included utilization of operating loss carryforwards of $4,103,000, or 11 cents a share.


On Earth Day, Plans to Make a Point
LEAD: From Arizona to the Washington Zoo, from Brazil to Uganda, 140 countries and the United Nations have plans for marking Earth Day on its 20th anniversary tomorrow.
The common enemy worldwide: pollution in all its manifestations.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Home-Equity Loans
LEAD: Since the 1986 tax law ended most deductions for interest payments, home-equity loans have become one of the most popular forms of borrowing for homeowners.
Lending restrictions have tightened recently in the wake of the failure of some savings and loan institutions, which means borrowers will have to shop around more.


General Datacomm reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Datacomm (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
49,165,000
53,422,000
Net inc
b139,000
c313,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
100,267,000
104,666,000
Net inc
b1,144,000
c803,000
Share earns
.08
-


Margaret Craske Memorial
LEAD: A memorial for Margaret Craske, the ballet teacher, will be held at 6:30 P.M.
Wednesday at Ballet School of New York, 30 East 31st Street.
Miss Craske died on Feb. 18 at the age of 97.
Speakers at the memorial, which is free and open to the public, will include Martha Hill, director emeritus of the Juilliard School Dance Division; Nancy Zeckendorf, a patron of the arts, and Sallie Wilson, a teacher and a former principal dancer with the American Ballet Theater.


U.S. Says It Won't Return Mexican Doctor Linked to Drug Killing
LEAD: The Justice Department said today that it could not ''foresee any circumstances'' under which the Government would free a Mexican doctor whose arrest in the death of an American drug agent brought a Mexican threat to curtail drug-control operations with the United States.


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
813,500,000
837,100,000
Net inc
38,000,000
b30,000,000
Share earns
1.05
.84
b-After an extraordinary loss of $4 million from restructuring of long- term debt.


Robert H. Messing, 52, Executive and Author
LEAD: Robert H. Messing, a business executive and author, died of cancer on Thursday at his home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 52 years old and had also lived in Milford, Conn.


Greater New York Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greater New York Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b4,127,000
b5,852,000
Per share
.29
.44
b-After extraordinary credits of $1,156,000, or 9 cents a share, for the latest first quarter and $2,003,000, or 16 cents a share, for year-ago period.


Keptel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keptel Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
13,144,000
9,277,000
Net inc
557,000
721,000
Share earns
.12
.16
6mo sales
26,157,000
16,749,000
Net inc
1,160,000
1,224,000
Share earns
.24
.27


About New York;   Adventurer Went Against the Odds To Inspire Others
LEAD: Darryl Roberts came back to Public School 197 at 135th Street and Fifth Avenue on Wednesday afternoon.
The smells of cafeteria food and restroom disinfectant hadn't changed in a dozen years.
Hallways still resounded with children's shouts.
Nearby abandoned buildings where he played were still abandoned.


TGX Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TGX Corp. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1990
1989
Revenue
140,258,000
121,261,000
Net loss
13,067,000
938,000


Railroadmen's Federal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Railroadmen's Federal
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
685,000
522,000
Share earns
.56
.44


Fort Worth Strives to Keep Eakins's 'Swimming Hole'
LEAD: A movement has begun to keep Texas's only major painting by Thomas Eakins on public view in Fort Worth.


Bytex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bytex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,810,000
8,559,000
Net inc
918,000
498,000
Share earns
.15
.10
Shares outst
6,237,000
5,115,000


Fidelity Bancshares of NashFville, Tenn.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Bancshares of NashFville, Tenn.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,028,000
2,186,000
Per share
.58
.63
Yr net inc
6,864,000
7,034,000
Per share
1.95
2.00


Systems &amp; Computer TechFnology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Systems &amp; Computer TechFnology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
10,986,000
10,304,000
Net loss
b623,000
cd703,000
Share earns
-
.06
6mo rev
22,569,000
21,847,000
Net inc
b106,000
c2,879,000
Share earns
.01
.24


Frederic Rossif, Film Maker, 68
LEAD: Frederic Rossif, a film maker who documented the Spanish Civil War and the rise and fall of Nazi Germany, died of a heart attack on Wednesday.
He was 68 years old.


Heading to N.C. State
LEAD: Saying that trust is not earned until academics is the first priority, Todd Turner, athletic director at the University of Connecticut since 1987, was appointed athletic director at North Carolina State yesterday, the first permanent director since Jim Valvano dropped the title last year.


Selfix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selfix Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
6,808,177
5,575,250
Net inc
294,527
269,532
Share earns
.08
.08
Shaers outst
3,508,035
3,498,932
9mo sales
24,333,766
21,177,165
Net inc
1,858,357
1,688,308
Share earns
.53
.56
Shares outst
3,526,078
3,012,903


MERCK IS OFFERING TO CUT DRUG COSTS OF MEDICAID USERS
LEAD: Breaking with longtime drug industry resistance, Merck &amp; Company said yesterday that it would offer discounted prices to state Medicaid programs for the poor.


Ladd Furniture Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ladd Furniture Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
139,121,000
93,562,000
Net inc
2,600,000
5,745,000
Share earns
.14
.31
The company said its sales increase reflected the acquisition of the former Maytag Furniture Group in July 1989.


Religion Notes
LEAD: Holocaust and Earth Day It would be hard to miss the arrival of Earth Day on Sunday, a time for reflection on the fragile state of the planet.
But it is also a day set aside for a commemoration of another kind.
It is Holocaust Memorial Day, known in Hebrew as Yom Hashoah, a time to remember the murder of six million Jews by the Nazis during World War


Franklin Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
147,000
103,000
Per share
.16
.11
9mo net inc
530,000
246,000
Per share
.56
.26


Biotechnology Enters Political Race
LEAD: A furious four-year struggle that mixes concern about new farm technology with old-fashioned partisan politics has left Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson facing one of the most difficult decisions of his administration.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.31
9.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.70
7.76
8.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.81
7.84
8.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.93
8.86
9.21
30-YR.


Union Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Electric Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
446,853,000
449,390,000
Net inc
41,170,000
b36,058,000
Share earns
.37
2.46
b-Included charge of $10,145,000 for write-off of cancelled second unit of Callaway Nuclear Power plant.


Ballistic Recovery Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ballistic Recovery Systems
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,091,439
360,269
Net inc
44,818
b86,095
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
1,665,390
550,723
Net loss
74,442
169,952
b-Net loss


Homeowners Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homeowners Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
10,860,000
8,365,000
Net inc
1,122,000
898,000
Share earns
.19
.15


Baker and Soviets Confer on Strategic Arms
LEAD: Two senior Soviet officials met with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today and suggested some new ideas on strategic arms, Administration officials said.


A Dearth of Fans For Soccer Team
LEAD: Eric Wynalda says he is frustrated by the lack of fan support for the United States national soccer team on its pre-World Cup exhibition tour.


Pentagon's Technology Chief Is Out
LEAD: Sparking expressions of outrage from Capitol Hill to Silicon Valley, the Defense Department said yesterday that it had removed the director of its agency responsible for developing advanced technologies.


Sale by Southmark
LEAD: The Southmark Corporation has reached an agreement with its shareholders that will allow it to sell its insurance company, the Integon Corporation, and move closer toward reorganization.
Southmark has operated under bankruptcy court supervision since last July.
The sale of Integon to Chicago-based Jupiter Industries and Head Insurance Investors is valued at about $189 million.


Western Digital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Digital (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
286,756,000
243,221,000
Net inc
8,802,000
4,437,000
Share earns
.30
.15
Shares outst
29,285,000
29,269,000
9mo rev
776,600,000
748,590,000
Net inc
14,689,000
29,984,000
Share earns
.50
1.04
Shares outst
29,217,000
28,952,000


Hollywood and Networks Fight Drugs With Cartoon
LEAD: Hollywood and the television networks have joined forces in an antidrug initiative - a cartoon to be broadcast Saturday morning that will mark the first simultaneous broadcast of an entertainment show.


First Chicago Falls 45%; Troubled Loans Cited
LEAD: The First Chicago Corporation, parent of the First National Bank of Chicago, reported a sharp drop in first-quarter earnings today as expected.
The decline was attributed to a big run-up in its portfolio of troubled real estate loans.


First Home Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Home Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
327,909
391,168
Per share
.42
.51


NESB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NESB Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
13,910,000
b2,453,000
Share earns
-
.32
b-Net income
The company said in addition to the $14 million provision for loan losses in the first quarter, it took a $2 million provision for future losses on foreclosed and in-substance repossessed real estate.


Abington Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abington Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
123,000
b400,000
Per share
-
.19
Shares outst
1,863,000
1,932,900
b-Net income


Excel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Excel Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
61,619,00
77,663,000
Net inc
1,534,000
3,320,000
Share earns
.24
.52


Borden Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borden Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,892,451,000
1,817,392,000
Net inc
63,097,000
59,036,000
Share earns
.43
.40


Drunken Drivers Now Facing Themselves on Video Camera
LEAD: Two years ago two Houston police officers became frustrated with what they regarded as the gullibility and leniency of courts in dealing with drunken drivers.
With their own money, the officers bought a video camera, mounted it in their patrol car and began taping every arrest for driving while drunk.


Charter Federal Savings Bank-N.J.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter Federal Savings Bank-N.J.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
855,581
770,484
Per share
.62
.55
6mo net inc
1,543,903
1,577,167
Per share
1.11
1.14


National Sanitary Supply reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Sanitary Supply
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
63,558,000
62,008,000
Net inc
708,000
841,000
Share earns
.12
.14


Greyhound Dial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greyhound Dial (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
865,504,000
841,789,000
Net inc
16,890,000
14,836,000
Share earns
.42
.38
Shares outst
39,876,000
38,230,000


Com Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Com Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
25,970,000
14,933,000
Net loss
b4,016,000
8,367,000
Yr rev
97,356,000
61,068,000
Net loss
11,198,000
6,398,000
b-Included a provision of $2,093,000 for certain matters which included those relating to the anticipated costs of intergrating the operations of the company with TMC Comminications Inc.


Books of The Times;   Suspending Disbelief With a Puma
LEAD:
The White Puma
By R. D. Lawrence
329 pages. Henry Holt. $19.95.


Former Governor Takes Office at Drew University


Lithuania Considers Delaying Full Independence
LEAD: As the Kremlin tightened its economic squeeze on Lithuania today, the President of the rebellious republic said his government would consider a moratorium on full independence as part of a deal with Moscow.


Fastenal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fastenal Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
12,209,000
8,859,000
Net inc
1,336,000
720,000
Share earns
.14
.08


Amerifirst Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerifirst Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
8,900,000
21,100,000
6mo net loss
15,800,000
19,700,000


Andrew Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andrew Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
86,844,000
70,918,000
Net inc
3,632,000
2,890,000
Share earns
.36
.29
6mo sales
169,711,000
135,819,000
Net inc
7,161,000
5,358,000
Share earns
.71
.54


Zimbabwe Voters Give Mugabe Mandate
LEAD: To the Editor:


Crossland Savings FSB reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crossland Savings FSB (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
136,453,000
11,786,000


Greece Seizes Truck Carrying Arms to Iraq
LEAD: The Greek Government announced tonight that it had seized a truck bound for Iraq carrying parts of a large weapon.


John Paul Visits a New Prague Today
LEAD: When Pope John Paul II journeys to Prague on Saturday, his first visit to an Eastern European country outside his native Poland, he will be greeted by a sturdy old man in red who has long been a symbol of anti-Communist resistance.


The Cosmo Girl at 25: She Still Wants It All
LEAD: For 25 years, she has celebrated her own sensuality, fretted about work and talked about exercise.
Office romances?
She's had those.
Professional success?
She'll have that, too.
Her favorite magazine tells her about all these things.
Guess you could say she's That COSMOPOLITAN Girl.


RATES JUMP ON NEWS OF BUDGET GAP
LEAD: Interest rates climbed yesterday as prices of Treasury securities were battered by the report by the Government that it posted its largest monthly budget deficit on record in March.


Assemblyman Repeats Support For Death Vote
LEAD: After lobbying Assemblyman Gary Proud by telephone late today, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo convened a press conference to predict that Mr.
Proud would not cast the crucial vote needed to override the Governor's veto of the death penalty.


GTE to Buy 14 Cellular Phone Units
LEAD: The GTE Corporation said yesterday that it would pay $710 million in cash to the Providence Journal Company for cellular telephone systems in 14 cities in the Southeast.
The deal will be the first big purchase of cellular properties in nearly three years by one of the eight large providers of local telephone service.


Sobol Rules L.I. Teacher's Rights Violated
LEAD: A Long Island school district intruded on a teacher's rights by ordering her to drop an assignment about Jimmy (The Greek) Snyder's comments on blacks, the state Education Commissioner, Thomas Sobol, ruled today.


Prices of Co-ops Sag in New York About 5 to 10%
LEAD: Two years into a real-estate slump that has left the owners of New York City cooperatives and condominiums worrying how far the value of their homes has fallen - and many apartment hunters wondering if now is the time to buy - a review of recent sales suggests that prices have sagged 5 to 10 percent across the city.


Independence Bancorp (Pa.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independence Bancorp (Pa.) (O)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,151,000
5,411,000
Per share
.56
.52


Loctite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loctite Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
133,947,000
116,370,000
Net inc
15,819,000
14,127,000
Share earns
.87
.79
9mo sales
370,563,000
335,580,000
Net inc
43,772,000
38,357,000
Share earns
2.42
2.14


Neorx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neorx Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
917,000
1,728,000
Net loss
4,475,000
3,697,000
Shares outst
14,700,000
14,513,000
6mo rev
1,737,000
3,179,000
Net loss
10,042,000
7,570,000
Shares outst
14,678,000
14,501,000


Devil Reveals Injury
LEAD: Aleksei Kasatonov, one of the Devils' two Soviet defensemen this season, revealed yesterday that he had played the last three games of the opening round of the playoffs against the Washington Capitals with a broken jaw.


SFM Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SFM Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,197,000
7,254,000
Net loss
559,000
b7,000
Share earns
-
.01
Yr sales
27,366,000
26,068,000
Net loss
451,000
b74,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


Teleflex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teleflex Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
109,193,000
90,368,000
Net inc
7,273,000
6,823,000
Share earns
.66
.63


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chesapeake Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
203,617,000
187,972,000
Net inc
4,431,000
12,858,000
Share earns
.22
.63


Winter Clothes' Vacation
LEAD: It's just about time to store winter clothing.
Here is some advice from the experts.


Luis Arcadio Enriquez Is Married to Lucia Tsai
LEAD: Lucia Tsai, an economic analyst at the New York City Office of Management and Budget, and Luis Arcadio Enriquez, a management consultant, were married yesterday in a civil ceremony at the Municipal Building.
The couple were attended by Judith Stevens and Eggert Badagbjartsson.


W.R. Grace Net Up 11%
LEAD: W. R. Grace &amp; Company said yesterday that its first-quarter profit rose 11 percent, helped by improved results in its energy, medical and specialty divisions.
Grace said it earned $32.6 million, or 38 cents a share, compared with earnings of $29.4 million, or 34 cents a share, in 1989's first quarter.


For North, Missions That Have One Goal
LEAD: Oliver L. North is still a man with a mission.


CK Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CK Federal Savings
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
707,927
532,473
Per share
.52
.40
6mo net inc
1,394,913
1,207,860
Per share
1.03
.93


Bristol-Myers Deal
LEAD: The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, the New York-based pharmaceutical company, reached an agreement to acquire Concept Inc., a developer and manufacturer of orthopedic surgery products based in Largo, Fla.
The stock swap is valued at about $205 million.
The deal, intended to qualify as a tax-free pooling of interests, must be approved by Concept's shareholders by July.


From Ben Franklin, a Gift That's Worth Two Fights
LEAD: As the author of Poor Richard's Almanack, Benjamin Franklin, advised: A penny saved is a penny earned.


Don't Worry, Feel Good
LEAD: A bunch of famous rock musicians get together and make a record for a really good cause.


The Editorial Notebook;   For Children of Chaos
LEAD: Most mothers, even the best of them, couldn't do the work that Sarah Butler does.
A licensed family day-care provider, Mrs.
Butler is in charge of five children, one of whom can reduce a room to ruin within minutes.
Fortunately he is only 16 months old, and quite happy with his toy-filled playpen.


Pope Resources L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pope Resources L.P.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,177,000
8,530,000
Net inc
1,425,000
4,866,000
Share earns
1.21
4.14
The company said prior quarter results included a one-time gain of $5.6 million on the completion of a single large land and timber transaction.


Control Data Deal To Sell Chip Unit
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation reached a tentative deal to sell VTC Inc., its money-losing computer chip subsidiary, to Seattle Silicon of Bellevue, Wash.
Seattle Silicon would buy the assets of VTC, and Control Data would own 20 percent of the new company, which is to be headed by Amaury Piedra, Seattle Silicon's president and chief executive.


Shareholders Back Plan by Wheeling
LEAD: A committee representing the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation's shareholders has given conditional approval to the steelmaker's Chapter 11 reorganization plan.
Wheeling-Pittsburgh filed for bankruptcy protection from its creditors in April 1985.


Landmark Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
468,000
434,000
Per share
.31
.29


Kenneth Diao, 70, Dies; A Structural Engineer
LEAD: Kenneth Diao, a structural engineer who helped design the main span and approaches to the Tappan Zee Bridge, died of a heart attack on Wednesday at his home in Irvington, N.Y.
He was 70 years old.


Your Money;   Never Too Early For Tax Planning
LEAD: For taxpayers who are still suffering sticker shock over their 1989 tax bills - and accountants say there are many - now is the time to start reducing 1990 liabilities.
It can be done, despite uncertainty over what Congress may do about capital gains or family savings plans.


Coors's Profit At $7.7 Million
LEAD: The Adolph Coors Company said today that it had a profit of $7.7 million, or 21 cents a share, in its first quarter in contrast to a loss of $4.8 million in the corresponding period a year earlier.


BSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSB Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,821,000
1,803,000
Per share
.58
.58


Worldwide Value reports earnings for As of March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worldwide Value (NYSE)
As of March 31
1990
1989
Assets
53,951,268
60,925,876
Per Share
17.95
20.27
Assets represented net assets.


Tribune Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tribune Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
583,569,000
552,926,000
Net inc
33,521,000
36,774,000
Share earns
.43
.49
Shares outst
68,110,000
74,355,000


Effort to Save Otters in Spill Is in Dispute
LEAD: Sea otters rescued from waters fouled by the Exxon Valdez oil spill fared poorly after their return to the wild last fall, and scientists working under Government contract say at least half may have perished over the winter.


Jan Bell Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jan Bell Marketing (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
25,109,000
25,033,000
Net inc
1,983,000
2,085,000
Share earns
.09
.11
Shares outst
22,470,390
18,430,721


Evolution in Europe: Bucharest Journal;   Feuds and Fisticuffs, but No Once and Future King
LEAD: By barring the exiled King of Romania from returning over the Easter holidays, the Romanian Government had hoped to avoid conflicts in a period of explosive political volatility.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Suit Calls Coach and Doctors Negligent in Gathers's Death
LEAD: A lawyer for the Hank Gathers family charged in a lawsuit yesterday that the basketball coach at Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles twice asked a cardiologist to change or reduce the drug that Gathers was taking to control a dangerous heart rhythm before the star center collapsed in a game last month and later died.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Sikh Parade, Broadway will be closed today from Union Square Park to 39th Street from 1 to 3 P.M.


Donald C. Knutson, Gay Rights Advocate, 59
LEAD: Donald C. Knutson, a San Francisco lawyer who taught and wrote on the subject of homosexuality and the law and was a co-founder of the National Gay Rights Advocates, died of complications from AIDS Thursday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 59 years old.


New York State E&amp;G reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York State E&amp;G (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
438,293,000
413,113,000
Net inc
70,321,000
67,738,000
Share earns
1.17
1.13
Shares outst
57,651,000
56,815,000


Ewing Breaks a Knick Scoring Record


Commonwealth Edison reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Edison (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,378,649,000
1,362,976,000
Net inc
87,157,000
139,455,000
Share earns
.31
.54


Lyondell Petrochemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lyondell Petrochemical Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,488,000,000
1,268,000,000
Net inc
78,000,000
134,000,000
Share earns
.98
1.67


Becton, Dickinson &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Becton, Dickinson &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
520,762,000
462,926,000
Net inc
45,515,000
b45,066,000
Share earns
1.16
1.12
Shares outst
38,750,000
39,934,000
6mo sales
949,563,000
869,060,000
Net inc
73,258,000
b72,719,000
Share earns
1.87
1.81
Shares outst
38,936,000
40,099,000


Colonial Bancgroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Bancgroup Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,977,000
1,602,000
Per share
.30
.25


Colts and George Agree To $15 Million Contract
LEAD: The Indianapolis Colts and Jeff George, the University of Illinois quarterback, reached agreement yesterday on a six-year $15 million contract that would make George the fourth-highest-paid player in the National Football League.


Lee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
62,815,000
62,449,000
Net inc
4,875,000
6,337,000
Share earns
.20
.26
6mo rev
135,866,000
132,573,000
Net inc
16,139,000
17,400,000
Share earns
.66
.70


KEY EVENTS IN THE PROSECUTION
LEAD:
November 1986: The stock speculator Ivan Boesky agress to pay $100 million to settle charges of insider trading in information supplied by investment banker Dennis Levine.
He also agrees to cooperate with investigators and to plead guilty to a single criminal charge.
Mr.
Boesky is later sentenced to three years in prison.


Green (A.P.) Industries(O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Green (A.P.) Industries(O)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
46,220,000
43,324,000
Net inc
1,560,000
1,668,000
Share earns
.56
.63


Caterpillar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caterpillar Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,866,000,000
2,626,000,000
Net inc
99,000,000
141,000,000
Share earns
.97
1.39


BTU International reports earnings for Qtr to Arril 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BTU International (OTC)
Qtr to Arril 1
1990
1989
Sales
19,696,000
23,405,000
Net inc
265,000
2,010,000
Share earns
.03
.30
Shares outst
7,139,000
6,453,000


Superior Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Superior Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
62,914,000
62,987,000
Net inc
3,690,000
3,931,000
Share earns
.47
.50


FMC Gold Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Gold Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
36,800,000
36,800,000
Net inc
13,300,000
13,500,000
Share earns
.20
.21


Drug Makers' Profits Rise
LEAD: Two big pharmaceutical companies - the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company and the Schering-Plough Corporation - reported sharp increases in profits on Thursday.


Washington Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal Savings
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
282,804
233,075
Share earns
.18
.15


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
872,300,000
925,800,000
Net inc
b127,000,000
93,100,000
Share earns
1.26
.95
Shares outst
100,800,000
98,200,000
b-After income of $25 million, or 25 cents a share, from discontinued operations, which was the sale of Virginia Natural Gas.


Electronic 'Coupons': Savings but No Scissors
LEAD: The time-consuming task of clipping and saving discount coupons is gradually yielding to electronic discounts that are being provided at supermarkets, drugstores and other retail outlets.


Portland General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portland General Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
240,159,000
219,580,000
Net inc
36,537,000
b37,583,000
Share earns
.79
.82
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $1,115,000.


Inland Steel's Net Slides
LEAD: Inland Steel Industries said today that its first-quarter earnings fell 62.1 percent from a year earlier.
Profits for the quarter were $18.7 million, or 37 cents a share, down from $49.4 million, or $1.38 a share, in 1989.
Revenue fell 9.8 percent, to $992.5 million, from $1.10 billion in the first quarter of 1989.


Horizon Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Financial Services
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
306,632
301,224
Per share
.18
.19
Shares outst
1,665,534
1,610,000


Bellevue Trauma Unit Deserves Credit
LEAD: To the Editor:


National Westminster BanFcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Westminster BanFcorp Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
16,086,000
33,933,000
The company, a subsidiary of National Westminster Bank Plc, said core earnings were $14.5 million for the first quarter of 1990, down from $34.3 million in the same period a year ago.


F.D.A. Policy To Limit Blood Is Protested
LEAD: Tens of thousands of demonstrators swarmed across the Brooklyn Bridge into lower Manhattan yesterday to protest a Federal health policy on blood donations that they said unfairly stigmatized Haitians and Africans.


SMITH BAFFLES METS IN A SWEET 2D VICTORY
LEAD: After winning only one game with two teams last season, Zane Smith of the Montreal Expos has found a remedy for his losing ways: All he has to do is pitch against the Mets more often.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
3-5
The President of Lithuania said his government would consider a moratorium on full independence as part of a deal with Moscow, which continued to tighten its economic squeeze on the rebellious republic.
Page 1
Moscow's new insurgent government had its authority undercut by President Gorbachev.


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inland Steel Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
992,505,000
1,101,431,000
Net inc
18,743,000
49,390,000
Share earns
.37
1.38


5 Council Members Wary About Taking Trip to South Africa
LEAD: Several New York City Council members said yesterday that they remained uncertain over whether they would leave for South Africa tomorrow on a weeklong trip sponsored by the Johannesburg City Council.
All are Democrats.


People's Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* People's Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,800,000
11,200,000
Share earns
.06
.34


Settlement in Bridge Collapse
LEAD: New York State agreed today to pay a widow and her two children about $1.9 million in the first settlement of a lawsuit stemming from the collapse of a New York State Thruway bridge into Schoharie Creek in April 1987 in which 10 people were killed.
The claim, originally seeking $15.8 million, was filed by the estate of Robert Hoffman, a Niagara Mohawk worker who was killed when the car he was in plunged into the flood-swollen creek, about 40 miles west of Albany.


Eastern Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
752,000
710,000
Per share
.30
.27
6mo net inc
1,774,000
1,720,000
Per share
.70
.66


Mr. Bush, Lean on the Lithuanians
LEAD: It is all very well for President Bush to warn Mikhail Gorbachev against the use of force in Lithuania.
But it would be more to the point right now if he warned the Lithuanians not to push President Gorbachev any further into using it.


Big Donation Is Criticized In Campaign For Governor
LEAD: Representative Bruce A. Morrison, the leading Democratic candidate for governor, has been caught in political crossfire over a $100,000 contribution to one of his election committees.


U.S. Cites Frequent Barry Drug Use
LEAD: Federal prosecutors said today that they had compiled evidence that Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. had bought and used crack, cocaine and marijuana on scores of occasions in recent years.


Jennifer Gold Plans Bridal
LEAD: Jennifer E. Gold, a lawyer in the Justice Department in Washington, and Fred L. Levy, a partner in the Washington office of the Cleveland law firm of Squire, Sanders &amp; Dempsey, plan to marry in May.
Miss Gold, 34 years old and the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
I.
Roy Gold of Brooklyn, graduated from Smith College and received a law degree from Catholic University.


State Dept. Moves to Expel Top Kashmir Separatist
LEAD: Increasingly concerned about Hindu-Muslim violence in the disputed territory of Kashmir, at the border between India and Pakistan, the State Department has moved to expel the leader of a Kashmiri separatist group visiting the United States.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 50-year-old house has a brick chimney that goes up through the attic, and the bricks are exposed inside the attic.
There are four flues inside the chimney, and the bricks in the attic have developed a white, flaky material that my husband calls bloom.
There is also a white powder on top of some items stored next to the chimney.


Baseball Abominations
LEAD: To the Editor:


A View of the Park
LEAD: When Frederick Wiseman set out two years ago to make his documentary ''Central Park'' in the wake of the Jennifer Levin murder there, he did so not because of an interest in crime but because of a fascination with, as he puts it, the ''normal events occurring in the park - all the varieties of human behavior - and the importance of the park to New Yorkers as a fantasy land and as a place to relax and play.


INTELLIGENCE DOWN THE DRAIN IN VIETNAM
LEAD:
SLOW BURN
The Rise and Bitter Fall
of American Intelligence in Vietnam.
By Orrin DeForest and David Chanoff.
Illustrated. 294 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


For More Initiatives On Roadside Rubbish
LEAD: This month we will be focusing our attention on Earth Day.
There are multiple environmental issues that require our effort and attention.
The issue that I would like to bring to your readers' attention is one that affects not only my community but almost any community that one travels through.
It is an issue that


Just Another Animal Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


CORRECTION
LEAD: A chart on April 1 with the Mutual Fund column included an erroneous figure supplied by the Freedom Environmental Fund for its return for Dec. 31 to March 15.
The return was -5.82 percent, not -10 percent.


BEVERLY HILLS POP
LEAD:
HIS LITTLE WOMEN
By Judith Rossner.
366 pp. New York:
Summit Books.
$19.95.


Away From It All
LEAD: It's been a month since she ended her 10-year career as a downhill ski racer, but Maria Walliser has been so busy since then making personal tours and negotiating endorsement contracts that she decided she needed a little vacation from her retirement.


Cleaning Fireplace Chimneys
LEAD: FIREPLACE chimneys should be cleaned at least once a year.
This prevents the buildup of creosote and other sooty deposits inside that can cause a fire and hinder performance.


Katherine Schreiber to Wed
LEAD: Katherine A. Schreiber, the owner of Schreiber Associates Landscape Architects, and Stephen E. Tise, president of Tise Architects, both in Cambridge, Mass., are planning a May wedding, her father, George Schreiber of Saddle River, N.J., has announced.
A graduate of Skidmore College, Miss Schreiber, 36 years old, is a daughter also of the late Adrienne C.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the Campus Life pages on April 8 about coeducational fraternities misidentified a sorority at Bucknell University in Lewisburg, Pa., that is considering membership for men.
It is Beta Gamma.


Working Mothers And School Projects
LEAD: It was with much disbelief that I read the recent essay by Kathy Hayes, ''What Real Moms Are Made Of'' (Opinion page, March 25).
Being acquainted with numerous working mothers, I have yet to meet one with such a stilted and egocentric attitude as Ms.
Hayes.
Yes, there are parents who are not geared toward assisting with children's projects, but they have the generosity of spirit to help where needed.


Under Threat of Occupation
LEAD: To the Editor:


PLAY'S THE THING
LEAD:
THE TREASURES OF CHILDHOOD
Books, Toys, and Games From the Opie Collection.
By Iona Opie, Robert Opie and Brian Alderson.
Illustrated. 190 pp. New York:
Arcade Publishing/Little, Brown &amp; Company. $40.


Canseco Sees Racism
LEAD: There are a couple of theories among Oakland players as to why the National League champion San Francisco Giants gave a four-year, multimillion-dollar contract to their slugger, Will Clark, after the 1989 season, while the World Series champion Athletics limited their slugger, Jose Canseco, to a one-year contract.


Products Respond to the Earth's Plight
LEAD: TODAY is Earth Day, and it may bethe beginning of what will be considered the Environmental Decade.
During the next 10 years, concerned citizens hope that there will be heightened awareness of the earth's plight.
And many suggestions will be put forth to make the planet a better place for future generations.


Q and A
LEAD:
Unfair Flip Tax


Tech Notes;   Faster Than the Speed of Electricity
LEAD: Computer that use light instead of electricity to process information have the potential to process data far faster than today's supercomputers.
To do this, gallium-arsenide computer chips, which are sensitive to light, are linked by laser light to form a circuit.
Researchers at Bell Labs, in Holmdale, N.J., have now produced tiny laser emitting diodes that are between 1 and 5 microns in size and can be integrated into the computer chips themselves.


Love With Improper Strangers
LEAD: When Bacall first laid her sultry eyes on Bogart in ''To Have and Have Not,'' appearing in the doorway of his hotel room and wondering, ''Anybody got a match?,'' the sparks set off one of Hollywood's legendary romances, on and off screen.


Technology;   Probing the Cycle of Sleeping and Waking
LEAD: It looks like a typical power plant control room, complete with back issues of Nuclear Engineering magazine.
Operators sit at a console, studying computer screens that display ever-changing plant indicators.
The lights are low, the sotto voce chatter is mostly technical and the computer hum is often the loudest sound in the room.


POP WITH NO 'THERE' THERE: SOOTHING, OR JUST ANNOYING?
LEAD: As far as I'm concerned, the nastiest word in a rock critic's lexicon is ''bland.'' Not ''clumsy'' or ''crude'' or ''dumb'' or ''messy,'' all of which can be compliments, depending on the kind of music and whether there is some passion behind the mess.
But give me something with a dead-calm center, a voice or an instrumental sound that betrays no strain or ambition, and my hackles rise.


ALDO ROSSI: SENTIMENT FOR THE UNSENTIMENTAL
LEAD: Today in Los Angeles the Hyatt Foundation will announce that it is awarding the Pritzker Prize to Aldo Rossi, the architect from Milan whose brooding and thoughtful work was known mainly in academic circles until a few years ago, when he began to attract commissions for major commercial and institutional buildings around the world.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Some rapid-fire changes in the schedule of United States issues underline problems with stamp production that the public is rarely aware of.
Putting out stamps, superficially one of the humblest of Government functions, is a good deal more complicated than it seems.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
MARK TWAIN.
The Bachelor Years: A Biography.
By Margaret Sanborn. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Mark Twain is always a pleasure to read, even on loan, and this account of Twain's life and travels up to his marriage to Olivia Langdon in 1870, at the age of 34, makes free use of his letters and journals, his early newspaper writing and his later fictional retellings of his adventures to trace his development as a writer.


New York Is Ordered to Pay for Acupuncture
LEAD: New York Medicaid authorities were ordered by a New York State judge last week to pay the cost of acupuncture treatment for poor people, even when it is not performed by a physician.


Art Imitates Baseball, but Not Vice Versa
LEAD: Even if the owners and the players had continued their annoying impasse, there would have still been baseball.
Hours of baseball.
Tons of baseball.
Looking forward to the season of rejuvenation, publishers had authorized wheelbarrowfuls of baseball books, while television stations had slotted for April every baseball film ever made.


Campus Life;   Teaching Assistants Looking to Unions
LEAD: The union movement may have been in decline for years, but graduate teaching assistants seem to be running counter to the trend.


A Reminder of Gold Coast Estate Dining
LEAD: WITH a flick of their fingers, the merrymakers waved at the gatekeeper, drove down the tree-shaded lane and arrived at the circular courtyard in front of the Woodlands estate.
No, it is not Jay Gatsby and friends partygoing on Long Island's Gold Coast in the 1920's.


Kathleen Kelly Weds
LEAD: Kathleen H. Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. Kelly of Norfolk, Va., was married yesterday to Keith L. Oberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond L. Oberg of West Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Joy officiated at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Norfolk.
The bride, 30 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia and received an M.B.A.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
LEAD: AT the edge of the city, near its beginning and end, John O'Rourke sits, asking the time.
It's just after noon of a blustery midweek that does not feel anything like spring.


Lisa Sharf Plans Wedding in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic A. Sharf of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and New York have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Lisa Ann Sharf, and Eric Alan Green, the son of Craig A. Green of Marshall, Ind., and the late Diane Cox Green.


Foe of Castro, Party of One, Is Fighting On
LEAD: Slight of build, his face framed by flowing hair and a beard, Roberto Luque Escalona seems a man whose greatest passions are chain smoking filterless cigarettes and reconstructing, if for now only in his mind, Cuban society.


The Score on Drugs: It Depends on How You See the Figures
LEAD: ''A FEW honest men are better than numbers,'' said Oliver Cromwell in the 17th century.
That might still be the case today, as the Bush Administration and its opponents squabble over how to assess the nation's war on drugs.


Daphne Davison Ross to Wed John James Dalton
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jeremiah K. Ross Jr. of New York have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Daphne Davison Ross, and John James Dalton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
C.
Dalton of Plandome, L.I.


Tour Shopping With a Computer
LEAD: A KNOWLEDGEABLE traveler with a personal computer stands at the threshold of an electronic shopping mall of advice and travel services that go well beyond booking an airplane ticket.
The services make available information about adventure travel, cruises and other special interests.
And one program harnesses the computer's power to search and seize the best air fares and seats.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-19


O'Neill's 'Anna Christie' Revived at Long Wharf
LEAD: SO what if ''Anna Christie'' is second-rank Eugene O'Neill?
The cast of the ripping production at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven is going at it with such conviction and bravura that it might as well be one of the playwright's towering achievements.


Sam Slade Versus the Canon
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baseball Fans Must Fight Back
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrThe major league owners and the players' union have earned, indeed invited, both Federal regulation and a public boycott for their contemptuous behavior during the 32-day lockout (''Baseball Negotiators Cleaning Up Loose Ends,'' The Times, March 20).
Congress should mandate Federal regulation (overriding the Supreme Court's longstanding antitrust exemption) of professional baseball in view of the abuse of monopoly power and the callous disregard for basic


CAR STEREOS DESIGNS ARE UP TO THE MINUET
LEAD: Henry Ford didn't believe in giving his customers much of a choice.
When he launched his famous Model A in 1927, he felt that painting the cars in different colors was wasteful. ''They can have any color they want,'' he declared, ''as long as it's black.''


States Are Finding Pension Funds Can Be a Bonanza Hard to Resist
LEAD: LEGISLATORS here and in other state capitals use words like ''adjustment'' or ''revision'' when they change the formula that determines how much money will be set aside for state workers' retirement.
But in virtually all cases in recent years, these changes have gone in one direction, decreasing the amount the states paid to the funds.


Miss Crowther Wed in Virginia
LEAD: Barbara Miller Crowther, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Bosley Crowther 3d of Troy, Va., was married yesterday in Bremo Bluff, Va., to Clinton Vittorio Marziali, a son of Mrs.
Frank D. Brown of Winchester, Va., and Enrico Marziali of Washington.
The Rev.
Peter T. Way officiated at Grace Episcopal


Reviews/Music;   Double Band: Multi-layered Cubist Funk
LEAD: The music Ned Rothenberg writes for his Double Band is a cornucopia of riffs - strung together, staggered, overlapping or spiraling around one another like the parts of a DNA molecule.
At the Knitting Factory on Wednesday night, its music was a kind of jazz-funk in Cubist perspective, dizzying yet still visceral.


U.N. Says Ethiopia Thwarts Delivery of Food Aid
LEAD: As the threat of famine grows in Ethiopia, the delivery of emergency supplies of food is being blocked by the refusal of President Mengistu Haile Mariam to guarantee the safety of relief workers using the Red Sea port of Massawa, United Nations officials and Western diplomats say.


Erin M. Norton Is Wed To Chester J. Straub Jr.
LEAD: Erin M. Norton, a daughter of Barbara A. Norton of East Islip, L.I., and the late Raymond Norton, was married yesterday to Chester J. Straub Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Straub of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dennis McNally performed the ceremony at St.
Francis Xavier Roman Catholic Church in New York.


Campus Life: S.M.U.;   After Graduation, Class Still Keeps Neighbors Awake
LEAD: A farewell gift from the Southern Methodist University Class of 1989 has recently begun to keep its neighbors awake at night.


A Museum to Match Hawaii's Natural Beauty
LEAD: IT is difficult to compete with the natural masterpieces along the spiraling drive up Mount Tantalus, but the Contemporary Museum - perched on a ridge of the 2,000-foot mountain outside Honolulu - offers a cultivated beauty found nowhere else in the Hawaiian islands.


Penn and Brown Advance to Final
LEAD: Pennsylvania's men's varsity heavyweight crew defeated Yale by one boat length today to advance to the final Sunday against Brown for the championship of the fifth annual Redwood Shores-Stanford Crew Classic.


A Concert to Celebrate a Celebrated Composer
LEAD: IT would be difficult to overestimate the achievements of the composer William Schuman of Greenwich.


CRIME IN THE FAMILY
LEAD:
REASONABLE DOUBT
By Philip Friedman.
487 pp. New York:
Donald I. Fine. $19.95.


Accentuating The Negative
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Galley's Goal Gives Boston a 2-0 Lead
LEAD: Garry Galley's goal 3 minutes 42 seconds into overtime tonight gave the Boston Bruins a 5-4 come-from-behind victory over the Montreal Canadiens and a two-game lead in the Adams Division finals.


Lifestyle: Sunday Brunch;   East Side, West Side, All Around the Appetite
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Ferrier


Review/Dance;   The Moon As Witness To Rituals
LEAD: On one level or another, wholeheartedly or slyly, Paul Taylor's dances tend to sidle imperturbably into anarchy.
There is an undercurrent of unbridled sensuality in the dewily sweet ''Roses,'' which opened the program presented by the Paul Taylor Dance Company on Thursday at City Center. ''Runes'' is a dark, mysterious ritual whose urgency recalls one ancient root of the word that means both ''secret'' and ''cries.


Hopes Are Still Keen On Release of Hostage
LEAD: A Syrian official said he expected an American hostage to be released today to the United States Embassy, but the embassy had no comment.
Iran and the United States also raised hopes that a hostage would be released in the next few days, despite the absence of any evidence of progress in that direction.


ALMODOVAR ON THE VERGE
LEAD: WALL OR NO WALL, FEBRUARY IN BERLIN means Film Festival.
In front of the Zoo Palast Theater, near the center of the western part of the city, a giant cube has been erected, thrusting 30 feet into the air and painted on all four sides with scenes from ''Atame!'' (in English, ''Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!


Rich Field Causes Last-Minute Scramble
LEAD: A wave of underclassmen - a record high of 38 - is helping to make the National Football League's 55th annual draft of college players a bonanza of raw pickings so tempting that nearly everyone wants a quicker draw.
As the draft begins today at noon in the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Manhattan, the stage is primed for an afternoon of jockeying among the league's 28 teams.


At the Brink in Kashmir
LEAD: The most dangerous threat to world peace is boiling up between India and Pakistan.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
MARKING EARTH DAY


Gypsy Cabby Shot to Death by a Passenger in Brooklyn
LEAD: A gypsy cab driver was shot in the head and killed in Brooklyn yesterday, the police said.


BLACK STUDIES' NEW STAR
LEAD: As a recent Ph.D. recipient, I was dismayed by the uncritical attitude taken toward the academic ''star'' system in your article.
The bidding war for black scholars that Mr.
Begley describes so cheerfully is one part of an oppressive system that also exploits the majority of workers who are not stars.


EVOLUTION IN EUROPE: Reporter's Notebook;   In East Germany, Smiles and Fewer Formalities
LEAD: The political leaders of the world may be haggling and debating over the terms of German unification, but the German people on both sides of the border are making it happen so fast that you can almost miss it in a blink.


How Physicist's Weapons Genius Led Him to Greed and Then Death
LEAD: Gerald V. Bull was a gifted designer of military hardware: at age 22, a doctor of aerophysics; at 32, star of a Pentagon ballistics lab.
But when he could not earn a living making guns for the United States, he turned to illicit trade, and at 52 he was in a Federal prison for illegally exporting arms to South Africa.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on April 8 about businesses in the state affected by the real estate slump misidentified the man seen painting a window for the Renaissance Painting Company of Glastonbury.
He is Michael C. Caisse, an employee of the concern, not Mark Coley, its president.


Horst Sindermann; Communist Official in East Germany, 74
LEAD: Horst Sindermann, a powerful East German Communist official ousted in last year's pro-democracy revolt, has died, the official A.D.N. press agency said today.
He was 74 years old.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Strawberries and Rhubarb In a Compote for Spring
LEAD: Does anyone ever serve stewed rhubarb with strawberries to usher in the spring?


How the First Round Might Go
LEAD:
A projected first round as selected by Thomas George of The Times.
There are 25 selections instead of 28 because Dallas, Phoenix and Cleveland lost theirs in the supplemental draft.
1 INDIANAPOLIS
(From Atlanta)
Jeff George, QB, Illinois (6-3, 210 lbs.)
George, an Indianapolis native, now has the rare chance to play professionally at home.


Estimate Board Votes a Survey for Rent Increases
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate has gone along with Mayor David N. Dinkins and approved a city contract for the annual cost survey used to help determine rent increases for rent-stabilized apartments.


BLACK STUDIES' NEW STAR
LEAD: Gates's work makes it clear that he is a fine academician, one whose scholarship Americans can celebrate.
Similarly, the portraits of his family that illustrate the article depict America at its finest.
CAROLE KRAUTHAMER
Trenton, N.Y.


Marrying Later and Spending More
LEAD: WEN it comes to weddings today, local merchants report that they are selling a larger variety of goods and services to the bridal market than ever before.


Margo Donahue Wed in Palm Beach
LEAD: Margo Mutrie Donahue and Frederic Ashton de Peyster 3d were married yesterday at St.
Edward's Roman Catholic Church in Palm Beach, Fla., by the Rev.
Clement Hammerschmitt.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Peter Donahue of Litchfield, Conn. and Palm Beach.
Mr. de Peyster is a son of Mr.


Dawn M. Selya, Teacher, Is Wed
LEAD: Dawn Meredith Selya, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Bruce M. Selya of Providence, R.I., was married last evening in Boston to Brian George Sherman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norton Sherman of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Leslie Y. Gutterman officiated at the Ritz-Carlton.


Now Boarding
LEAD: In the eyes of a Federal bankruptcy judge, Frank Lorenzo was no asset for Eastern Airlines.
Blaming Mr.
Lorenzo for Eastern's staggering losses of more than $1.2 billion in the year that the company has been in bankruptcy proceedings, the judge granted a request by Eastern's creditors and ousted Mr.


Alomar Drives In Five Runs For Indians
LEAD: Sandy Alomar Jr., a rookie, hit his first American League homer and drove in five runs today, and Tom Candiotti overcame a shaky start as the Cleveland Indians beat the Chicago White Sox, 8-4, gaining consecutive victories over the Perez brothers.


Review/Music;   An Exploration of a Common History
LEAD: Louis Johnson and Joanne Tucker have put together a moving and thought-provoking piece in ''Let My People Go,'' a theater-dance work that was performed on Wednesday night at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion in Greenwich Village.
Mr.
Johnson, the dance director at the Henry Street Settlement, is a black choreographer known for the eclecticism and passion of his dances.


Arm of U.S. Law Is Too Long, Mexico Complains
LEAD: FOR better or worse, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh just happened to be at a drug conference in Mexico last week when a diplomatic furor erupted over reports that American agents had trampled Mexican sovereignty in pursuit of a drug suspect.


Oregon Betting Is Up and Down
LEAD: The Oregon Lottery's first experiment with betting on professional sports ends this weekend to mixed reviews.


LOVE AND RESENTMENT
LEAD: As a mother, I was deeply moved by the anguished ambivalence of Barbara Bick.
As a registered nurse, I wonder if Ms.
Bick is aware of the role that food allergies and hypoglycemia may play in her daughter's condition (mental illness, ''perpetual headaches and frequent stomachaches'' and Crohn's disease).


A Week to Hear Chamber Works
LEAD: CHAMBER and choral music lovers will find an especially bountiful concert harvest this week.
The instrumental performing rosters range upward in size from duos to chamber orchestra, and the vocal programs offer masses, oratorios and cantatas.


Ann Hunt Is Married
LEAD: At St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Albany, Ann Frances Hunt, a daughter of Mary D. Hunt of Albany and the late William E. Hunt, was married yesterday to Dennis Patrick Leddy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo P. Leddy of Spring Lake, N.J.
Msgr.
Joseph P. Conway officiated.
Mrs.
Leddy is a graduate of McGill University.


About a Poinsettia And a Woman With Five Hands
LEAD: Yes, but what is ''Lettice and Lovage'' all about?


Oil: Missing That Old, Cartel-Like Feeling
LEAD: Anyone pining for the days when the international oil cartel was worthy of that label would have been heartened last week at the faith displayed by oil traders.
Oil prices, of course, have been hammered for more than three weeks, as Middle East producers seemed unable to enforce quotas that would stem the flow of oil into a glutted market.


Dr. Mary Sciutto Weds J. P. Lowe
LEAD: Dr.
Mary Spelman Sciutto, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Sciutto of New York, and James Peck Lowe, a son of Kay Lowe Masuhr of Louisville, Ky., were married yesterday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York by the Rev.
Robert J. Haskins.


PERSPECTIVES: Modular Housing;   Widening the Role of Factory-Built Units
LEAD: A CRANE swings and a section of house is fitted into place at a development called Aqueduct Homes.
It happened last week in the University Heights section of the West Bronx.
It is also happening in the Hunts Point section, at a development called Villa Maria.


Wild Places, for a While
LEAD: TODAY is the 20th anniversary of Earth Day.
As I write this - some days before the event - I am 3,000 miles from home and traveling alone, a circumstance that provokes contemplation.
I've been thinking about where I've been in the last 20 years - between the two Earth Days - and what traveling has taught me about the world that books and lectures and museums devoted to the environment have not.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: ''It was just pathetic,'' said Larry Christiansen about the finish of his game with Vereslav Eingorn in the Visa/IBM Chess Summit Match in Reykjavik.
The Jackson Heights grandmaster, seeing that his Soviet opponent had only about a minute and a half left on his clock, could not resist initiating an attack that was proved after the game to be ''just a joke.


POSTINGS: Southbury Home Sites;   Ancestor's Initiative Paying Off
LEAD: Despite a bleak market, two developers in Connecticut - one of them a descendant of the man who bought the tract they are developing from the Indians - are reporting success in selling expensive lots and building upscale homes in the Town of Southbury in New Haven County.
Edward Hinman Williams of Southbury and Paul Tolk of Fairfield last year subdivided 104 acres into 38 lots of 1.5 to 5 acres, leaving 18 acres as deeded open space.


HOLOCAUST MUSEUM: A TROUBLED START
LEAD: IN THE HEART OF THE NATION'S CAPITAL, in sight of the Jefferson and Lincoln Memorials, an extraordinary museum is slowly being built.
While the other buildings around the Mall pay tribute to the nation's achievements, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum will commemorate one of the world's most terrible tragedies.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 22, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE NEGOTIATOR, by Frederick Forsyth.
(Bantam, $5.95.) An American expatriate tries to
thwart terrorists.
2
3
ALMOST HEAVEN, by Judith McNaught.
(Pocket, $4.95.) A historical romance set in
London's salons and Scotland's Highlands.


A Pianist Who Makes Longevity an Art
LEAD: They talk about musicians who played from here to eternity - those great veterans like Pablo Casals, Leopold Stokowski, Arthur Rubinstein, Isidor Philipp, all of whom were active in their late 80's and even middle 90's.
But their record is about to be shattered by Mieczyslaw Horszowski, who is giving a piano recital tomorrow in Carnegie


Now It's Red Poling's Turn at Ford
LEAD: Red Poling, the Ford Motor Company's new chief executive, keeps a model of a 1948 Jaguar XK-120 on his desk, symbolic of Ford's acquisition of the British car maker this year.
No doubt the toy is less a plaything than a reminder of the $2.5 billion paid for Jaguar and the hundreds of millions more


Style Makers;   Carol Goldman, Jewelry Designer
LEAD: Carol Goldman comes from a family of big women and, she said, since childhood she has known that ''big did not mean that you could not dress well and look well.''


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, an article about antiques today in Home Design, part 2 of The Times Magazine, appears with a line omitted at the top of page 59.
The sentence should read, ''Provenance also influences the decision to restore.''


O'Connor Defends Anti-Abortion Aid
LEAD: Running his fingertips back and forth over the sofa in his 20th-floor office on First Avenue in Manhattan during an interview last week, John Cardinal O'Connor said the Roman Catholic Church faced formidable obstacles in presenting its case against abortion and so far had done an ineffective job.


THE BIG GIVEAWAY
LEAD:
CITY ON THE ROCKS
Hong Kong's Uncertain Future.
By Kevin Rafferty.
Illustrated.
518 pp. New York:
Viking. $21.95.


FINE TUNING
LEAD: IF YOU HAVE REDONE your home, it may be a good idea to rethink some of its accouterments, particularly its audio and video systems.
Although everything eventually grows old or outdated, obsolescence probably comes fastest to home electronics, simply because of rapid progress in the field.
If your gear is more than about five years old, it may be time to subject it to the same serious reappraisal you have given your living space.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
New Fairfield, Conn.
$350,000
119 Warwick Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; interior wooded lot, pool, large deck, 3 acres; taxes $3,782.
New Milford, Conn.
$254,900
Pumpkin Hill
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath new colonial; heavily insulated, spectacular views, 1.4 acres; taxes not yet available.


R.K. Lindgren to Wed Miss Cleveland
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy J. Stone of New York have announced October wedding plans for Mrs.
Stone's daughter, Victoria Tipton Cleveland, and Robert Keith Lindgren, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Keith M. Lindgren of Chevy Chase, Md.


Chad Reports Rebel Deaths
LEAD: Chadian forces attacked Libyan-backed rebels for the second time in three days, killing 103 guerrillas and taking 45 prisoner, the army said today.
The fighting took place on Friday along the country's eastern border with Sudan in a reconnaissance operation after a battle on Wednesday that left 517 rebels dead, the high command reported.


A MORE PERFECT UNION
LEAD: THE VERY IDEA OF a face lift goes against the grain of most architects' thinking.
Their instincts lean much more toward all-out plastic surgery, reshaping the body to take on a whole different cast.
That is, if they are willing to keep the old body at all.
Throwing it out and starting from scratch probably gets closer to their way of doing things.


For Slovaks, a Hyphen Means Recognition
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sandra Poltenson Wed in Syracuse
LEAD: Sandra Lyn Poltenson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Poltenson of Syracuse, was married there last evening to Scott David Rechtschaffen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Rechtschaffen of New York.
Rabbi Sheldon Ezring officiated at the Temple Society of Concord.


They Need Our Know-How, Not Our Bucks;   The New Horsemen
LEAD: To the Editor:


FOCUS: Gas Station Design;   Nearly 400 Enter Contest in Portland
LEAD: WHEN Theo Holtwijk, a landscape architect and planner, approached the officers of C. N. Brown Company last September with the idea of sponsoring a national design competition to elicit fresh ideas for the company's newest gas station, he thought they would promptly turn him away.
After all, he reasoned, more often than not, when a gas station is built these days, the design reflects a prototype chosen by whatever major oil company supplies the fuel.


Syrian Official Says He Expects Release of Hostage
LEAD: A Syrian official said today that he expected an American hostage to be released Sunday to the United States Embassy.
The embassy had no comment.


Erte, a Master of Fashion, Stage and Art Deco Design, Is Dead at 97
LEAD: Erte, the Russian-born Art Deco designer whose prolific career in theater, sculpture and the graphic arts spanned most of the 20th century, died here today after a short illness.
He was 97 years old.


THE GUILT SHE LEFT BEHIND
LEAD: BECAUSE IT IS BITTER, AND BECAUSE IT IS MY HEART
By Joyce Carol Oates.
405 pp. New York:
A William Abrahams Book/E.P. Dutton. $19.95.


U.S. Drug Agency Denies Role in Mexican Capture
LEAD: An investigation by the Drug Enforcement Administration has concluded that the agency's employees did not cross into Mexico and take part in the apprehension of a Mexican doctor who is charged with aiding in the killing of an American drug agent in 1985, Justice Department officials said today.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Have you noticed any eyes prying into your life this week?
Perhaps they belong to one of the 5,000 members of the American Society of Magazine Photographers, more commonly known as ASMP.


Campus Life: Boston;   Tied for First, A Debating Team Long on Tradition
LEAD: Clothed in dinner jackets and semiformal dresses, four members of the Fulton Debating Society at Boston College matched wits last Tuesday in the college's 100th Fulton Prize Debate.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on March 18 with an article about horseback riding in Hungary misidentified the coat of arms on a building at Nagycenk, Hungary.
It was the coat of arms of the Szechenyi family, not of Hungary.


AIDS Spread Alarming, State Health Chief Says
LEAD: THE state's top health official, citing the spread of AIDS among women and children, expressed dismay last week that there is no ''public panic'' about the spread of the fatal virus.


Charges Brought Against Trucker Who Transported Part for Iraqi Weapon


College Teams And Economics
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


POSTHUMOUS PASSIONS
LEAD:
DORIT IN LESBOS
By Toby Olson.
430 pp. New York:
Linden Press/Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


French City With a German Accent
LEAD: IN France you eat well, in Germany you eat a lot and in Strasbourg you eat both well and a lot.
Or at least so the saying goes, a saying that is tested daily by German visitors who cross the Rhine for dinner and don't expect to go home hungry.
Here, even nouvelle cuisine cannot be tiny delicacies served up on huge plates.


Q and A
LEAD:
Irish Ferries


Bookbinder's Invention Clearly Shows Her Art
LEAD: AFTER spending more than 60 years preserving old books, Polly Lada-Mocarski decided to try something new.
The 87-year-old New Haven resident received a patent a few years ago for her first invention, a new kind of boxlike plastic exhibition case that can hold small objects like sculptures, dolls, documents - and lovingly preserved books.


FAMILY OF STEICHEN BATTLES ART MUSEUM OVER A MATISSE WORK
LEAD: As photographer, administrator and benefactor, Edward Steichen was a pillar of the Museum of Modern Art.
But now, the late photographer's heirs are wrestling with the museum over a painting by Henri Matisse which, they contend, belongs to Steichen's 6-year-old great-granddaughter.


Spending Money On the Best
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Someone's in the Kitchen With Freud
LEAD:
FAMILY PICTURES
By Sue Miller.
389 pp. New York: Harper &amp; Row. $19.95.


For the Movies, the Bronx Is Up
LEAD: When it comes to the five boroughs of New York, the Bronx usually receives a bad press.
No matter that its 42.5 square miles embrace everything from lovely mansions and expansive parklands to alluring retreats like City Island and exciting venues like Yankee Stadium; no matter its ethnic and cultural diversity, the Bronx is usually described in terms reserved for combat zones.


When Life Itself Is a Conflict of Interest
LEAD: NEW YORKERS last week got a strange taste of what might get done in their town when the handful of people who run it and the web of companies that serve it have too many ties to each other: Nothing.


Rene Davis Marries Christopher Hampton
LEAD: Irene Marie Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Davis of Red Bank, N.J., was married there yesterday to Christopher Kennedy Hampton, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter R. Hampton of Tariffville, Conn.
The Rev.
Daniel S. Flynn officiated at St.
James Roman Catholic Church.


Review/Theater;   An Officer's Life-or-Death Dilemma
LEAD: Heinrich von Kleist, a Prussian officer who traded his sword for a pen and became a major light of German Romanticism, could never resolve his ambivalent feelings toward the Prussian fatherland.
When he resigned his commission, he wrote a friend that while in uniform he was ''always in doubt whether to act as an officer or a human being.


Plan to Test Firefighters And Police For Drugs Is Questioned
LEAD: ORDINANCES proposed by municipal officials in Union City that establish a program of random drug testing for public safety personnel have raised Federal and state constitutional issues and may be an infringement on police officers' and firefighters' rights, legal experts and labor union officials say.


Ann Goodman and Joel H. Weinstein Are Married
LEAD: Ann Josephine Goodman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ernest J. Goodman of Oneonta, N.Y., was married there last evening at Cathedral Farms to Joel Henry Weinstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Weinstein of West Islip, L.I.
Rabbi Max Rothschild performed the ceremony.


Earth Day Extravaganza Sheds Its Humble Roots
LEAD: Millions of dollars and months of careful orchestration went into preparing events for this weekend marking Earth Day in some 3,600 communities in the United States and 140 countries abroad.
The broad effort bears little similarity to the almost informal organizing in 1970 that drew 20 million Americans outside for an afternoon to celebrate the environment and support actions to insure that it would be cared for.


Starting Over
LEAD: With the death of his parents in the northern California earthquake, 10-month-old Jimmy Brown may have a better chance in life.
Born to unwed teen-agers from families all too familiar with poverty and prison, Jimmy became the recipient of state compensation that may amount to a quarter-million dollars.


Patricia Hohn to Wed Bradley Brehm; Nancy Hohn to Marry Frank Frehill
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Hohn of Scarsdale, N.Y., and New York have announced the engagement of two of their daughters.
Patricia La Rosa Hohn is the fiancee of Bradley L. Brehm, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth E. Brehm of Coram, L.I.
Nancy La Rosa Hohn is engaged to Lloyd Frank Frehill, a son of Mrs.
Clyde Merry of Sherman Station,


Serbian Police Use Tear Gas To Disperse Albanian Protest
LEAD: The police fired tear gas to disperse ethnic Albanian youths throwing stones after a soccer match in Kosovo province today, the Yugoslav press agency said.


Robert Harris, Pianist, 74
LEAD: Robert Harris, a pianist who taught at The Juilliard School for 24 years, died of a stroke on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Campus Life;   Ten Students Receive Grants to Cambridge
LEAD: Ten American students have been awarded Winston Churchill Scholarships for graduate work in engineering, mathematics or science at Cambridge University in England.
They will receive $17,000 grants from the Winston Churchill Foundation, which was created in 1959 by his friends and admirers.
The recipients were:


Boys of Summer, 2d Time Around
LEAD: TAKE out the neat's-foot oil and stock up on liniment.
It's baseball season and the boys of summer are raring to go.


Bonnie Honig and Michael Whinston, Harvard Professors, to Marry in July
LEAD: The engagement of Bonnie Honig to Michael Dennis Whinston, the son of Dr.
George J. Whinston of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Joan Aronson Whinston, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
David Honig of Montreal.
A July wedding is planned.


WHY MEXICO NEEDS A FREE TRADE PACT
LEAD: During the 1980's, Mexico embarked upon what can properly be called its second revolution.
This revolution, which relies upon exports for economic growth, recognizes that the majority of Mexico's trade is with the United States and that this trade is in what are called intermediate goods - the engine and not necessarily the automobile, semi-conductors and not always computers.


David Smith's Nudes Come Out of Hiding
LEAD: It is rare to encounter an exhibition of a major artist as weird and challenging as ''David Smith - Nudes'' (at the Knoedler Gallery).
Although Smith worked from the female nude all through his 40-year career, his sustained involvement with one of the oldest and most traditional artistic motifs has rarely been addressed by scholars and critics.


FUNNY,IT DOESN'T LOOK LIKE GLASS
LEAD: Gloriously colored Chinese glass artifacts, as transparent as air or as opaque as clay, are exhibited in the first comprehensive survey of the craft at the China Institute in America, 125 East 65th Street.
The 68 vessels and jewelry items in ''Clear as Crystal, Red as Flame: Later Chinese Glass'' reveal how deftly artisans imitated ceramics and stones in objects fashioned from the 14th to the 19th centuries.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Lisa Blonkvist never watched the ABC soap opera, ''Ryan's Hope.'' Still, she had a very good idea what Mary Ryan, one of the principal characters, looked like.
In fact, Mary Ryan might have been, according to others, the reflection Ms.
Blonkvist saw in the mirror every morning, an oval face, green eyes, hair style not quite pageboy.


FICTION
LEAD:
SQUEEZE PLAY.
By Jane Leavy. (Doubleday, $18.95.) A woman in a locker room full of naked men, A. B. Berkowitz soon discovers, is not particularly welcome.
A sportswriter covering the born-again Washington Senators for The Washington Tribune, she keeps a steno pad at the proper level, but often is confronted with the solid evidence that there's more to baseball than being primed to play.


SOUTHERN EXPOSURE
LEAD: In the 1930's, years before the publication of her first short story and all the fame that would eventually surround her, Eudora Welty was a junior publicity agent for the Federal Works Progress Administration.
She wandered through county after county of her native Mississippi, talking to people about their lives, jotting down observations and otherwise taking official and unofficial note of the Deep South, her own land and the land that would figure so predominantly in her fiction.


Tarkanian Tribute
LEAD: In his first interview since retiring in 1987, Walter Byers, former executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, said Coach Jerry Tarkanian of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas ''beat the system'' in his 13-year battle with the N.C.A.A., the primary governing body of college sports.


Products Respond to the Earth's Plight
LEAD: TODAY is Earth Day, and it may bethe beginning of what will be considered the Environmental Decade.
During the next 10 years, concerned citizens hope that there will be heightened awareness of the earth's plight.
And many suggestions will be put forth to make the planet a better place for future generations.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester;   A Shopping Mall Opens East of Hartford
LEAD: THE malling of Connecticut in the last 20 years has produced 19 enclosed regional shopping centers.
Danbury Fair Mall, with 1.2 million square feet, is the largest, and some are as small as 160,000 square feet.
Half a dozen new ones are proposed but their developers have been unable to find anchor stores or get zoning approval.


Mutual Funds;   When All Junk Is Not Equal
LEAD: As managers of ''junk bond'' funds scramble to recoup losses and pull investors back into their shattered business, one of the biggest losers in last year's market collapse has come up with a plan to separate the wheat from the chaff - or at least the blue-chip junk from the junky junk.


Viola Sputters But Is 3-0
LEAD: In a messy early season that has been fraught with shoddy defense, lack of timely hitting and days spent in last place, the one thing the Mets have been able to rely on is the steady pitching of Frank Viola.


The French Fondness for Hypermarkets
LEAD: To the Editor:


ENSLAVEMENT IN SICILY
LEAD:
A HOUSE IN THE SHADOWS
By Maria Messina.
Translated by John Shepley.
133 pp. Marlboro, Vt.: The Marlboro Press.
Cloth, $15.95. Paper, $9.95.


Dian Delistovic to Marry
LEAD: May wedding plans for Dian Wubenhorst Delistovic and Joseph M. Sheer, the son of Mrs.
Emil G. Kotch of Freeland, Pa., and the late Raymond R. Sheer, have been announced by Ms.
Delistovic's Mother, Jo Wubenhorst of Hackensack, N.J.
Ms.
Delistovic, also the daughter of the late Gerald Wubenhorst, is an assistant vice president at Citicorp in New York.


Cleaning Fireplace Chimneys
LEAD: FIREPLACE chimneys should be cleaned at least once a year.
This prevents the buildup of creosote and other sooty deposits inside that can cause a fire and hinder performance.


Miss Shore to Wed John Le Boutillier
LEAD: June wedding plans for Susanna G. Shore and John Le Boutillier, a son of Martin Le Boutillier of Lyme, Conn., and Mrs.
Gilbert Lincoln of West Hartford, Conn., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Drs.
Miles F. and Eleanor G. Shore of Needham, Mass.


Schools Should Ban Smoking
LEAD: Long Island - Nassau and Suffolk Counties - has every right to be proud of its leadership role in limiting and even barring, smoking from most public areas.


Questioning the Need For Submarines
LEAD: In the Connecticut Q&amp;A column on March 18, with Congressman Sam Gejdenson, he is quoted as saying: ''People talk about cutting the B-1 or the MX or Star Wars and the Midgetman, but nobody talks about cutting submarines.
We need them.''


'Ever Yours, Florence Nightingale'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Melissa Hatch Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Hatch of Dover, Mass., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Melissa M. Hatch, and Jon K. Hirschtick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel Hirschtick of Des Plaines, Ill.
Miss Hatch, 28 years old and a graduate of Wheelock College, is an account executive at the Hatch-Anderson-O'Donnell Insurance Agency in Arlington, Mass.


Prenuptial Agreements In History
LEAD: Your readers may be interested to know that something so seemingly new - the prenuptial agreement [Long Island Sound, March 25]  - is quite old.
For example, the ancient Hebrew marriage contract known as the ketubah dates back at least 2,000 years.
In France, the customary prenuptial derives from the dowry, first recorded in the ninth century.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 50-year-old house has a brick chimney that goes up through the attic, and the bricks are exposed inside the attic.
There are four flues inside the chimney, and the bricks in the attic have developed a white, flaky material that my husband calls bloom.
There is also a white powder on top of some items stored next to the chimney.


Filming a Masterpiece
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOLMAN'S NEAR MISS
LEAD: Trailing the Seattle Mariners by six runs was bad enough; being held hitless and runless on their own field was even worse.
But to the world champion Oakland A's on Friday night, being on the imperfect side of a perfect game was simply intolerable.


A LIFE A LAUGHS
LEAD:
MADCAP
The Life of Preston Sturges.
By Donald Spoto.
Illustrated. 301 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


Housing Remedy Reviewed by Backer
LEAD: I read with great interest, ''A New Critique of Homeless Policy'' (April 1) and agree that the county is wasting millions of dollars keeping people homeless.


Sam Slade Versus the Canon
LEAD: To the Editor:


DEMOLITION ALFRESCO
LEAD: IF YOU ARE NOW EMBROILED in a renovation, you may have good reason to wonder why it ever seemed like a good idea.
The thought of taking on a second reconstruction is probably beyond your wildest nightmares.
But you may notice that while the inside of your home is slowly moving from chaos to order, the outside appears to be heading in the opposite direction.


Does Carter Expect More From Israel and Less From the Arabs?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Byers Weds William Smilow
LEAD: Kathleen Kay Byers, a buyer for Ann Taylor Stores, and William Scott Smilow, a sales assistant at Sports Channel America, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Lotos Club by the Rev.
Karl Gilmeister, a Presbyterian minister, and Rabbi Charles Lippman.


Campus Life: Emory;   Racial Attacks Leave Freshman In Severe Shock
LEAD: Repeated written and verbal racial attacks, varying from epithets scrawled around her dormitory room to death threats sent through the campus mail, have rendered an Emory University freshman almost mute.


Residential Resales
LEAD:
Closings in the week ended April 7
MANHATTAN
Battery Park City
$215,000
200 Rector Street
(Liberty Court)
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 650-sq.-ft. condo in a two- year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, balcony, hardwood floors, harbor view, pool and health club; common charge $366, taxes $603 (Broker: Battery Park City Realty)


6 Homers Insufficient To Save the Yankees
LEAD: The season has not yet turned to summer, but already the Yankees have met their first crisis.
After a quick start, they are suddenly in the midst of a losing streak, they are under .500 for the first time, and they seem to be flailing.


Case of Boy Abandoned by New Parents Prompts Look at Adoption
LEAD: Complaining that they had failed to ''bond'' with their 11-year-old adopted son, a suburban Chicago couple left the boy with an orphanage, then went to court to sever ties with the child.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
WHAT HAPPENED TO THEIR KIDS?
Children of the Rich and Famous.
By Malcolm Forbes with Jeff Bloch. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $18.95.) What did happen to Charles Boyer's son?
Or, for that matter, Galileo's daughter? ''What Happened to Their Kids?'' will take you down the littered trail of the offspring of the powerful, rich and famous.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: When a Manhattan business man Haig Manoogian withdrew money from a cash machine, he was surprised to see several old notes in his stack of bills.
Amid the silver certificates was a $10 National Currency Note, a half-century old.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the Real Estate section last Sunday about Larchmont misstated the party affiliation of Mayor Miriam Curnin.
She is a Democrat.


'TRAFFIK' TRACKS THE EVIL FRUIT OF THE POPPY
LEAD: Drug czar William Bennett has enough problems these days.
At a recent press conference he was forced to admit that his much-publicized war on drugs in the streets of Washington, D. C., did not, after a full year, greatly affect drug pushing or staggering crime statistics.
Then the new presidential front-runner in Peru, Alberto Fujimoro, publicly dismissed the United States Government's drug war as ''completely inefficient'' in its efforts to end coca farming in his country.


HIGHER THAN THE APES
LEAD:
ADAM AND EVE AND PINOCCHIO
On Being and Becoming Human.
By Willard Gaylin.
292 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


DETAILS THAT MAKE THE DIFFERENCE
LEAD: To get a new look, it is no longer necessary to renovate a room totally.
Changing the NUTS AND BOLTS Can make all the difference.
Replacing a door knob and hinges, for example, can completely transform a door.
Similarly, adding architectural moldings to a blank wall can give a room texture, not to mention A TOUCH OF CLASS.


IN THE REGION: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bellport
$159,000
92 Maple Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old contemporary; dining room, basement, 125- by 100- foot lot; taxes $2,600.
Greenport
$98,000
549 Third Street
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 18- year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, attached 1-car garage; taxes $2,000.


William Levine and Susan Diker Wed
LEAD: Susan Helen Diker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bertram J. Diker of New York, and William Mark Levine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mervyn M. Levine of Winnipeg, Canada, were married last evening at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Rabbi David M. Posner officiated.


They Need Our Know-How, Not Our Bucks;   How About Africa?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Dolan Weds David DiCenso
LEAD: Mary K. Dolan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald F. Dolan of Crestwood, N.Y., was married there yesterday to David A. DiCenso, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. DiCenso of Hingham, Mass.
The Rev.
Terence Attridge officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Annunciation.


Spring Salads With Some Less-Common Greens
LEAD: THE salad options are more varied than ever.
Not long ago, all one could expect to find in the salad-greens department of a produce stand or supermarket was iceberg, Romaine and perhaps Boston lettuce.
Today there are at least a dozen choices and it seems as though more are added every season.


WHEN LEGAL TITANS CLASH
LEAD: YOU PEOPLE ARE NOT A RANDOM, TYPICAL sample of the U.S. population,'' deadpans the new dean of Harvard Law School to appreciative laughter.
After all, the hundred-odd students gathered to hear Robert C. Clark's talk on ''Laws, Markets and Morals'' are investing nearly $75,000 in their Juris Doctor degrees.


A JOURNEY AROUND THE RIM
LEAD:
PACIFIC DESTINY
Inside Asia Today.
By Robert Elegant.
533 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers.
$24.95.


A Balanchine Bouquet
LEAD: The highlight of the New York City Ballet's eight-week spring season, which opens Tuesday at the New York State Theater, will be a celebration of the dances of Jerome Robbins, so long a part of the company as both choreographer and a director.
Three sailors romp through shore leave in ''Fancy Free,'' the earliest of the 26 works in the Robbins festival, while at the opposite end of the spectrum are ''Watermill'' and ''Glass


Trade in Rumors About the Deficit
LEAD: Buy on the rumor and sell on the news, or so goes the old saw.
That is what happened last week with the dollar, leaving it surprisingly down against the yen.
The rumor was that the United States trade deficit for February would fall sharply, perhaps as low as $4 billion.
Traders liked the idea so much they brought dollars in advance, especially against the yen, which fell to 160 to the dollar.


Why Laura Dean Is Happy to Be A Major Minimalist Holdout
LEAD: ''I'm not a choreographer,'' Laura Dean insists. ''I'm a choreographer/composer - there's no word for it yet; it doesn't exist in the dictionary.''


The Executive Computer;   The Power Culture Elbows In at Macworld
LEAD: Tens of thousands of Apple Macintosh users visited the Macworld trade exposition here earlier this month, examining the hardware and software on offer.
But unlike the Macworld shows of a couple of years ago, when people in blue jeans and polo shirts came to look at Apple's small and relatively underpowered computer family, this year's show attracted what appeared to be an unusually high percentage of corporate users.


Susan Steinberg Is Married
LEAD: Susan Gail Steinberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Steinberg of New York, was married last evening to Paul Saltzman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ellis Saltzman of Brooklyn, at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
Rabbi Paul Siegel officiated.
Mrs.
Saltzman, 27 years old and a graduate of American University, is an account executive at the Image Bank photography archive in New York.


POSTINGS: Search for Identity;   Somers Center
LEAD: The Town of Somers was incorporated in 1788, spreads over 30 square miles of northern Westchester County and is generally regarded by its residents as a model of rural living.
But many also feel their town grew up without a central focus for community life.
In recent years there have been housing developments aplenty, a small cluster of shops near Route 202, the main throughfare, and another small shopping complex that opened last winter.


Calorie Counting
LEAD: To the Editor: Dr.
Benjamin B. Platt's article ''France on 1,500 Calories a Day'' (Travel, Feb. 25) makes good sense.


Review/Music;   Double Bill Of Rappers
LEAD: The show at Wetlands on Thursday night, a double bill of the rappers Lakim Shabazz and the group X-Clan, felt a bit like a closed rehearsal.
About 50 people showed up to hear mostly mediocre performances that had political intentions but seemed neither fully formed nor acute, and that had the audience cheering mildly, as if by rote.


How Rome Worked Its Way Back Into the Eastern Bloc
LEAD: FOR Pope John Paul II, born Karol Wojtyla in Wadowice, Poland, the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe has been a personal triumph.
He was, after all, an important supplier of moral firepower for the revolution.
Now, Vatican relations with formerly hostile countries have shifted, one after another, almost as fast as those societies themselves.


New York and Cable TV Concerns Still Disagree as Deadline Nears
LEAD: With a deadline for a decision less than a month away, representatives of New York City and a cable television operator have reached agreement on most points in the renewal of two cable television franchises in Manhattan.


SURVIVING HISTORY
LEAD: In her article ''Surviving History'' (March 25), Mary Gordon asserts that ''20th-century Italian literature is notably short on women.'' Nothing could be further from the truth.


A Family's History in Letters, Ledgers and Deeds
LEAD: AMONG Westchester's first families, the Hayses, who arrived from the Netherlands about three centuries ago, were unusual.
For one thing, they were Jewish, which was different enough in those days.
For another, they kept records. ''In each generation,'' said Richard Maass, a former county historian, ''there was a member of the family who felt the papers were important to keep.


Sally J. Reich Becomes the Bride of Donald Kress
LEAD: Sally J. Reich, a daughter of Maude Reich of Westport, Conn., and the late Samuel Reich, was married yesterday to Donald Kress, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Kress.
The Rev.
Raymond Kress, the bridegroom's twin brother, and the Rev.
Stephen Rozzelle officiated at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in Basking Ridge, N


BLACK STUDIES' NEW STAR
LEAD: Your article on Henry Louis Gates was an honor to that scholar and to other academics of color (''Black Studies' New Star,'' by Adam Begley, April 1).
However, it would be nice if The New York Times could keep its admiration of yuppie values in check long enough to admire scholars and thinkers for their ideas.


Miss Borthwick Weds S. M. Bass
LEAD: Pamela Chapman Borthwick was married to Shannon Melvin Bass yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York by the Rev.
J.
Seymour Flinn.


LITHUANIA CLOSES MOST INDUSTRIES
LEAD: Lithuania closed its factories today to conserve fuel and raw materials during an expanding Kremlin embargo.


Review/Music;   Pamela Frank, a Violinist, in New York Recital Debut
LEAD: Pamela Frank was noted as an exceptionally promising young violinist in 1986, when she was 18 years old and appeared as a concerto soloist with Alexander Schneider's Brandenburg Ensemble.
In 1988, she was awarded an Avery Fisher Career Grant.


On Tokyo Runways, Foreign Labels Still Rule
LEAD: While Japan's emergence as an economic power has been driven by exported electronics and industrial products, it has been paralleled by a growing obsession at home with fashionable goods that have foreign cachet: clothing and accessories.


TALKING: Meetings;   Putting Together A Quorum
LEAD: SPRINGTIME is likely to bring out ballots as well as blossoms in cooperatives, condominiums and homeowner associations.


Miss Barton Wed To Scott Cantini
LEAD: Brooks Barton, a daughter of Malcolm Brewster Barton of Bedford, N.Y., and the late Cynthia Towell Barton, was married yesterday to Gerald Scott Cantini, a son of Gerald Peter Cantini of Manchester, Vt., and Mrs.
Barry Hyde Chappel of Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
Clarke K. Oler, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony assisted by the Rev.


Time and Money
LEAD: Federal prosecutors bit off a lot more than they could prove in the case of Robert A. Freeman, one of three Wall Street stock speculators who were arrested three years ago on sweeping insider trading charges.
In a case that tarnished the reputation of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the United States Attorney who initiated the investigation, most of the charges against Mr.


Thirty Six Red Wins the Wood
LEAD: Thirty Six Red and Silver Ending won the last two major Triple Crown preps of the spring yesterday, but neither colt did enough to displace Mister Frisky and Summer Squall as the strong co-favorites for the Kentucky Derby on May 5.


Sorting the Garbage: How Well Is It Working?
LEAD: IN the two decades since the first Earth Day, county residents have learned a thing or two.
They are still planting trees and cleaning up local parks, but they are also sorting through their garbage.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is The M.V.P. In the N.B.A.?
LEAD: The New York Knicks have this year's m.v.p.
He leads the team in scoring and blocked shots, and is one of the best all-round players: Patrick Ewing.
Without Ewing, the Knicks would be at the bottom of the Eastern Division.
DAVID SHUSTERMAN
Upper Montclair, N.J.


A Scarsdale Student 'Ready For Prime Time'
LEAD: IN June, David Lascher will come back from Los Angeles to attend his Scarsdale High School graduation. ''It's going to be weird,'' he said.


Evening Hours;   Spring Whirl: Auctions, Dances, Honors, Awards
LEAD: A whirl of spring benefits has uncovered a new formula for raising money: shorter speeches, shorter evenings and shorter dresses.


Learning Russian At the Source
LEAD: I HAD two goals in mind last spring when I signed up for a three-week summer course to study Russian in Moscow.
First, I wanted the immersion that would advance me a level beyond what I had managed to pick up in six hours a week of classes since the fall.
Second, I wanted to stay in Moscow without paying the exorbitant price


A Profusion of Remedies
LEAD: For Earth Day, Nicholas Wade reviews a profusion of books prescribing remedies for the environment.


May Morgan Robinson, Community Leader, 85
LEAD: May Morgan Robinson, a leader in civil rights and in the Democratic Party in Westchester, died of cancer of the uterus on Thursday at her home in Yonkers.
She was 85 years old.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
The Unseen Self


Elisa A. Neary to Wed Dr. G. A. San Roman
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Neary of Merrick, L.I., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Elisa A. Neary and Dr.
Gustavo A. San Roman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Guillermo A. San Roman of Hempstead, L.I.


Beth Cherashore Wed To Eric Dean Schlager
LEAD: Beth Madeline Cherashore, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel S. Cherashore of Upper Montclair, N.J., was married last evening at the Plaza in New York to Eric Dean Schlager, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Lawrence Schlager of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Rabbi Steven Kushner officiated.


James Stewart's Talent: More Than Aw-Shucks
LEAD: Hollywood's most significant if accidental contribution to the performing arts has been the creation of - and the recognition it has given to - the great behavioral actors, exemplified by the lanky, long-boned, uncommonly graceful James Stewart, who will be honored here tomorrow night at Lincoln Center.


U.S. WILL ARM PERU TO FIGHT LEFTISTS IN NEW DRUG PUSH
LEAD: The United States and Peruvian Governments have agreed to send American military trainers to Peru as part of a new American campaign to help this country fight leftist guerrillas who are said to protect coca growers and traffickers.


STREETSCAPES: The New York State Pavilion;   A Windswept, Gaudy Ghost in Search of a New Role
LEAD: BY now the New York State Pavilion is just part of the landscape, passed by millions on the Grand Central Parkway in Flushing, Queens, a dim memory even for those who went to the 1964 World's Fair.
The gaudy, open building, one of the best works of architecture at the fair, narrowly escaped demolition.


Correction
LEAD: A recording review last Sunday about an album by Tommy Flanagan misstated the number of piano trio recordings he has made since 1975.
It is 15.


Parenting's Relationship With Time Warner
LEAD: To the Editor:


Remember Rootie Kazootie?
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New Day To Save the Earth
LEAD: I WAS a 1970 Earth Day participant.
But 20 years later, I feel that in many ways the earth movement has gone astray, and I am appalled at what the environmental activists are doing to many attempts to solve environmental problems.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
State's Best Friend


The Knicks Need Ewing in the Game
LEAD: In the early part of the season, winning for the Knicks was as easy as calling out Patrick Ewing's number and running a play for the 7-foot center.
But as the season progressed, opposing coaches surrounded Ewing with two and three players and dared the Knicks to beat them from the outside.


Later Picks May Be Crucial Ones for Jets
LEAD: The Jets' break with a hidebound tradition that brought little more than mediocrity in the 1980's could be symbolized by their actions in today's draft.


Style Makers;   John Cross, Whittler
LEAD: Over the years, John Cross has gotten used to people coming up to him on the street or in Central Park. ''That's because I literally do it all the time,'' said the 54-year-old advertising writer whose passion and hobby is the traditional art of whittling.


Elizabeth Lacovara to Marry in June
LEAD: June wedding plans for Elizabeth Marie Lacovara and Derek James Mills have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Philip A. Lacovara of New Canaan, Conn.
Mr.
Mills is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh J. Mills of Glasgow.


BEYOND THE LUNCH COUNTER
LEAD:
THE CIVIL RIGHTS ERA
Origins and Development of National Policy, 1960-1972.
By Hugh Davis Graham.
578 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press.
$29.95.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, page-number references are omitted from the Travel section today for the continuations of two articles.
The page 6 article about Guadeloupe continues on page 28; the page 8 article on Hawaiian leis continues on page 31.


Abigail Reardon, Lawyer, to Marry
LEAD: Roy L. Reardon of New York has announced the engagement of his daughter Abigail Teresa Reardon to Arthur Andrews Gosnell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. Gosnell of Rochester.
A June wedding is planned.


In Moscow, a Happy Ending For a Jewish Film Festival
LEAD: It took some enterprise to present a festival of films about Jewish themes in Moscow earlier this spring.
Two energetic American women, Deborah Kaufman and Janis Plotkin, directors of the annual Jewish Film Festival in San Francisco, presented critically acclaimed films on Jewish themes during one week last month.


51 Burros Slain in Arizona
LEAD: The carcasses of 51 wild burros have been found in the Black Mountain foothills and the authorities are looking for those who killed them.
Kelly Grissom, a wrangler for the Bureau of Land Management, said Friday that bullets removed from the carcasses indicate that more than one weapon was used.


THE NINE-YEAR ITCH
LEAD: A decorator's own home is perhaps the best barometer of his personal style.
It is also a laboratory of sorts, a place where ideas are tested and fantasies lived out.
That's not to say, however, that decorators redo their homes on a whim.
For nine years, the New York designer Mark Hampton and his wife, Duane, were happy with their all-chintz living room - ''until the chintz began to look a little down and dreary,'' Hampton says.


Township Struggles to Comprehend 1971 Murder of Family
LEAD: THE old Victorian mansion on Hillside Avenue is gone now: it burned to the ground the summer after John Emil List slew five members of his family in the confines of its 18-room fading elegance.
The police say that a group of teen-agers who were drinking beer during a candlelight gathering in the ballroom, where the bodies were discovered, set the house ablaze accidentally.


Frank Lausche, Ex-Ohio Senator And Governor for Five Terms, 94
LEAD: Frank J. Lausche, an independent-minded Democrat who had been , Mayor of Cleveland, Governor of Ohio, and a two-term United States Senator, died yesterday at the Slovene Home for the Aging in Cleveland.
He was 94 years old.


Police Shoot Suspect After Girl, 16, Is Slain
LEAD: A 16-year-old girl was shot to death and two men were seriously wounded in a Washington Heights apartment early yesterday, the police said.


Traditions in American Painted Furniture, From 1800
LEAD: HISTORIC HUDSON VALLEY is the organization that takes care of Sunnyside at Tarrytown, the recently opened Montgomery Place in Annandale-on-Hudson and three other estates in the area.
Its senior director of museum operations is Joseph T. Butler and its assistant curator is James A. Abbott.
Together they have, so to speak, gone on tour to the Scarsdale Historical Society, producing ''American Painted Furniture: 1800 to World War I.


New York Officials Are Especially Agitated
LEAD: IF the national rate of response to the census is low, New York City's is, as nearly everyone expected, lower.
As of last week only 52 percent of New York City households had mailed back their census forms, a dismal rate that now shifts the burden of counting to a door-to-door enumeration that starts Thursday.


The Bone-Marrow Transplant Twins
LEAD: They wear matching gold chains with the word ''twin,'' but that only adds to the confusion.
When they're apart, even those on the University of Arizona campus who know the Singleton brothers are never quite sure whether it's Chris or Kevin.
But when the 6-foot-3-inch identical twins are together now, it's easier to know who's who.


To Skeptics on Global Warming . . .
LEAD: When environmental and financial experts from around the world gathered in Washington this week for a White House-sponsored conference on global warming, they expected a serious discussion.
Instead, they were surprised and angered to hear President Bush wholeheartedly endorse delay and inaction.


The Doughboy Gets A Streamlined Look
LEAD: Four years ago, with the roof about to cave in on his head, Jay Morgan still could not get his bosses at the Pillsbury Company to act.
Mr.
Morgan, who oversees the buildings that house Pillsbury's research and development staff, evacuated a pair of converted livery stables in the complex after an engineer's report confirmed his fears that they were in danger of collapsing.


Miss Mengarelli Weds E. R. Neaher Jr.
LEAD: Francesca Mengarelli and Edward R. Neaher Jr. were married yesterday at the Santa Agnese in Agone Roman Catholic Church in Rome by the Rev.
James J. Foley.


The Joy of Five Characters All Talking at Once
LEAD: For years people told the novelist Jose Yglesias that he ought to write a play because his dialogue was so good.
He even thought like a dramatist: ideas would come to him in the voices and accents of well-defined characters.
This writer of Spanish and Cuban descent would find himself thinking, for example, in the voice of a snobbish New


Wall Street;   Everyone (Almost) Loves Food Lion Oil: Missing That Old, Cartel-Like Feeling
LEAD: In the past three months, a number of food-industry analysts have begun to rhapsodize over a homespun North Carolina grocery-store chain called Food Lion, whose shares trade over-the-counter.
The basis for Wall Street's enthusiasm is clear: the company's sales and profits have both grown at an average annual rate of more than 25 percent for the past decade, and its customers and shareholders display a loyalty that borders on the fanatical.


William A. Ernst and Karen Kazlau Wed on L.I.
LEAD: Karen A. Kazlau, the daughter of Joseph Kazlau of Coram, L.I., and Joan A. Kazlau of Port Jefferson, L.I., was married in Port Jefferson yesterday to William A. Ernst, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Ernst of Seaford, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert Scheckenback officiated at Infant Jesus Roman Catholic Church.


SCHUYLERVILLE STANDS STILL
LEAD: Mr.
Kunstler's portrait of Schuylerville is an all too common picture of rural life in the United States.
I think he is correct in suggesting that tourism and development are not the answer to rural poverty and despair.
The answer, as Mr.
Kunstler suggests, would seem to be found in traditional American ideals of self-reliance and local control - in small family farms and businesses that make the best use of natural resources because the people who run them care about their homes and community as no distant corporation can.


Robert L. Straus Wed To Ruth Clifton Wysor
LEAD: Ruth Clifton Wysor, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William G. Wysor Jr. of Chapel Hill, N.C., was married there yesterday to Robert Leonard Straus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Straus of Jersey City, by the Rev.
Diane Corlett at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Family.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is The M.V.P. In the N.B.A.?
LEAD: Michael Jordan should be the 1989-90 National Basketball Association's m.v.p.
Without Air, the Chicago Bulls might be a .500 team.
With him, they are nearly 30 games above that figure.


Grueling Days In Bootie Camp
LEAD: Why, in 1990, does the content of Jill Dion's essay, ''Maternity Leave Confession: Grueling Days in Bootie Camp'' (Opinion page, March 11), still merit space?
Are we really expected to believe, after suffering through the nights and days of Ms.
Dion, that she feels her ''heart rip'' as she returns to work?


SCHUYLERVILLE STANDS STILL
LEAD: I knew Schuylerville when I was a teen-ager, during the war years.
It was a mill town where everyone who wanted to could find work.
After the war, many people left Schuylerville for better jobs and pay.


A Legacy of Conflict
LEAD:
1947 - When British India is partitioned into India and Pakistan, a Muslim revolt backed by tribesmen from Pakistan flares up against the maharaja governing the state of Jammu and Kashmir, or simply Kashmir.
Indian forces are dispatched to suppress the uprising and Pakistan sends troops to back the rebels.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: A. &amp; S. Plaza;   Launching a 4-Deck Flagship for Children's Wear
LEAD: AS busy as the new A. &amp; S. Plaza on Greeley Square appears to be, the greatest amount of buying and selling that goes on around its vast atrium may eventually be invisible to the public.


Spring Salads With Some Less-Common Greens
LEAD: THE salad options are more varied than ever.
Not long ago, all one could expect to find in the salad-greens department of a produce stand or supermarket was iceberg, Romaine and perhaps Boston lettuce.
Today there are at least a dozen choices and it seems as though more are added every season.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: The United Nations General Assembly convenes a special session on promoting economic growth in developing nations.
Martin R. Shugrue is scheduled to discuss his plans as special trustee of Eastern Airlines.
TUESDAY: Automobile sales for April 11 to 20.
Durable goods orders for March.


CAPITAL IDEAS
LEAD: FOR MANY REMODELING veterans, Tom Hanks said it all in ''The Money Pit.'' ''Did you hear about that guy up in the Bronx?'' he asked in the film. ''Went crazy, thought he was a pigeon - they found him in the park throwing bread crumbs at himself.
And he was just putting in a guest bathroom.''


Capitals Square Series
LEAD: For the Rangers, the lapses, frequent and frightening during the first couple of weeks of the playoffs, had been lost in the bursts of offense that had almost invariably followed and the euphoria that had consequently reigned.


Review/Dance;   'Split Personality,' By Elisa Monte Troupe
LEAD: Dances should not be judged by their titles.
Nevertheless, a title is important, for it provides the audience with its first clue as to what a particular work may be like.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is The M.V.P. In the N.B.A.?
LEAD: Magic Johnson is the most valuable player in the N.B.A.
As of April 13, Johnson had 10 triple-doubles, the Lakers have the best record in the N.B.A., and after their victory of April 15, the Lakers have won their ninth straight division title.
Magic Johnson is simply the best.
MAUREEN A. DONNELLY $


Reds Go To 9-0 for Club Mark
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds got a helping hand today from the club that set the record the Reds are trying to break: the longest unbeaten start in the National League.
The Reds set a club record with their ninth consecutive victory to start the season, taking advantage of four Atlanta errors to beat the Braves, 8-1.


INSIDE THE GLITTER MACHINE
LEAD:
HYPE AND GLORY
By William Goldman.
Illustrated. 306 pp. New York:
Villard Books. $19.95.


Walesa Again Chosen Chairman of Solidarity
LEAD: Lech Walesa was easily re-elected chairman of Solidarity today, and he pledged to continue the union movement's sometimes-conflicting roles as workers' advocate and supporter of Poland's new democratic Government.


FARMHOUSE FACE-OFF
LEAD: MY UNCLE LEFT me his country house in New Marlborough, Mass., when he died in 1985.
The Farmhouse, as it is called by all who know it.
It quickly became clear to me that I had spent more than 40 years of my life with a mildly spoiled city/suburban kid's idea of what a house actually was.
I thought a house was a house.


A CLEAN SWEEP
LEAD: Maid's rooms and butler's pantries were common in prewar Manhattan apartment buildings, but they seem anachronistic today.
Often, these spaces are converted into children's rooms or offices.
Another option is to combine them with the kitchen to create an extra-large space - which is what the designer Paloma Picasso decided to do in her New York apartment.


Dayton Students Protest Use of Resume Balloons


Rose Case: Players Beware
LEAD: With Pete Rose now awaiting sentencing for failing to report money he earned from the sale of memorabilia and autographs, it might seem unneccessary to remind baseball players of the dangers of ignoring income-tax laws.
But officials in both management and the players' union say they will strive to see that major leaguers fully understand the rules that the Federal Government is obviously prepared to enforce.


Does Carter Expect More From Israel and Less From the Arabs?;   Bush Push
LEAD: To the Editor:


REBORN UNREAL
LEAD:
DREAM SCIENCE
By Thomas Palmer.
308 pp. New York:
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


Correction
LEAD: The Stamps column on April 1 referred incorrectly to the historic boundaries of the kingdom of Lithuania.
At its greatest, in 1560, the kingdom stretched from the Baltic Sea to the Black Sea, and included today's Byelorussia and the Ukraine; it did not reach the Ural mountains, which are 1,000 miles further east.


Miss Dudley Wed To Anthony Coles
LEAD: The marriage of Elizabeth Margaret Dudley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall Dudley of Guilford, Conn., to Anthony Paul Coles, a son of Dr.
Roberta Goldring Coles of New York and the late Dr.
Robert S. Coles, took place yesterday at the Pine Orchard Union Chapel in Branford, Conn.
Rabbi Charles Davidson and the Rev.


Miss Lavine Engaged To Gregory Warwick
LEAD: June wedding plans for Nancy Kopp Lavine and Gregory Lawerance Warwick have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Leroy S. Lavine of Boston.


Czech President Calls Pope's Visit 'a Miracle'


Campus Life: Texas;   8 Weeks in France Give Students Insights Into War
LEAD: Although Tina LeBlanc had taken two history courses at the University of Texas, she had little knowledge of World War II.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: If earliest daffodils and tulips are fading, snap off flowers to prevent seed pod formation; the thrust of foliage ripening goes toward the bulb and new flowers for next spring.
Prune and reshape early-flowering shrubs such as forsythia.
Last call to apply pre-emergent herbicides to control seeds of pesky lawn and border weeds.


Hers;   Contributing to The Cause
LEAD: I'M NEVER SURE HOW I get roped into it but several times a year, I find myself engaged in what Gloria Steinem calls the world's second oldest profession: fund raising.


Miss Dorsey Wed In Binghamton
LEAD: Adrienne Celeste Dorsey and Derek Chandler Wheeler were married yesterday at Trinity Memorial Episcopal Church in Binghamton, N.Y., by the Rev.
H.
Arthur Doersam.
The bride is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Beverly R. Dorsey of Binghamton.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Wheeler of Hempstead, L


POSTINGS: Outlet for Jamaica;   From Farm To Market
LEAD: For more than a century, Jamaica, Queens, has been a farm-to-market hub, and even before the Dutch arrived in the 17th century the area was a major trading center for the Canarsie Indians.
Now that tradition is being reinforced with the creation of a permanent greenmarket at 160th Street and 90th Avenue.


Earth Day at 20: How Green the Globe? - A special report:   Guarding Environment: A World of Challenges
LEAD: Twenty years after the first Earth Day, the Cuyahoga River no longer catches fire on its way through Cleveland, and bald eagles, once threatened by DDT, have increased nearly sevenfold in the continental United States, enough for Government biologists to consider promoting the population to ''threatened'' from ''endangered.


Why the U.S. Has a Case of The Mumbles On Lithuania
LEAD: THE situation in Lithuania has become a test of whether the cold war is really over.
The way President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev handle the explosive questions raised by Lithuania's drive for independence will demonstrate whether they are truly willing to treat one another more as allies than adversaries.


RESPONSES TO OPINION: HOW BEST TO HEAL PSYCHIC WOUNDS?
LEAD: At the risk of sounding like the defender of the sacred text, I have to disagree with Howard Schneider.
In our decidedly complex world of signs, seemingly without referents, some look backward to the traditional folk wisdom of the past.


Outdoors;   Proposal Offered On Striped Bass
LEAD: New York State's proposal to allow resumption of commercial fishing for striped bass in its marine waters is a neat balancing act.


Products Respond to the Earth's Plight
LEAD: TODAY is Earth Day, and it may bethe beginning of what will be considered the Environmental Decade.
During the next 10 years, concerned citizens hope that there will be heightened awareness of the earth's plight.
And many suggestions will be put forth to make the planet a better place for future generations.


Senior Golfers Are Stealing the Thunder
LEAD: While driving to a local golf course last weekend, I wondered which of the two professional golf matches being televised that afternoon would occupy the large-screen television in the clubhouse.
The usual crew of kibitzers would be forced to select between a regular PGA Tour event with Greg Norman and the two-time Masters champion Nick Faldo in contention, and a Senior PGA Tour contest matching Jack Nicklaus against Lee Trevino and Gary


EDUCATORS CHEER ENROLLMENT GAINS
LEAD: Education experts say they are heartened by Census Bureau statistics indicating that the percentage of high school graduates who go on to college jumped almost 10 points in the past decade.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 50-year-old house has a brick chimney that goes up through the attic, and the bricks are exposed inside the attic.
There are four flues inside the chimney, and the bricks in the attic have developed a white, flaky material that my husband calls bloom.
There is also a white powder on top of some items stored next to the chimney.


A State Budget Plan That Breaks the Rules
LEAD: POLITICIANS who think about the long-term interests of their constituents have a choice, according to today's cynics.
They can commit political suicide by proposing complicated solutions to hard problems.
Or they can go for short-term, superficial fixes that don't really do the job.


All About/Women's Swimwear;   Fabric, Fit and a Rose-Tinted Mirror
LEAD: In the coming weeks, millions of American women will face an ordeal they dread: shopping for a swimsuit.
Sixty percent of the swimwear sold in this country is purchased in May, June and July.


6 Arab Guerrillas Reported Killed in Israeli Attack in Lebanon
LEAD: Israeli soldiers killed six Arab guerrillas of the pro-Iranian Party of God militia in an overnight attack on the group's training headquarters in southeast Lebanon, the army said today.


Homework in a Place That's Not Home
LEAD: THREE afternoons a week, about 25 children living temporarily at the Coachman Hotel in White Plains, come to its Homework Center after school.
Five years ago, the Coachman was an ordinary hotel, but now the people who live there aren't ordinary guests.


Fashion: On The Street;   Hemlines Rise, Saluting Spring and Couture
LEAD: For those who ponder the question of hemlines, the short answer appears to be the best one.
At this very minute, in the more fashionable quarters of this fashion-conscious city, above-the-knee skirts are de rigueur.


Leninist Zeal Is Overtaken By the Blahs
LEAD: Workers of the world, relax.


When or Whether to Retire: New Ways to Handle Strain
LEAD: It has been three years since Steven August, now 61 years old, lost his job as associate creative director at a New York advertising agency, and although he has patched together some freelance work and teaches two continuing education courses, a terrible sense of displacement is still with him.


THE UNIVERSITIES UNDER ATTACK ...
LEAD:
TENURED RADICALS
How Politics Has Corrupted Our
Higher Education.
By Roger Kimball.
204 pp. New York: Harper &amp; Row. $18.95.


Off-Season Travel
LEAD: To the Editor: My father and I recently returned from a 10-day trip to Italy.
Though I had spent summers in Europe, this was my first time there in the winter.
Even before we left the United States, it was apparent that there were advantages to traveling in the off-season.
Aided by a wily travel agent, my father booked passage for us three days before our departure on British Airways, taking advantage of two separate specials.


HOROWITZ'S PARTING GIFT: CHARMING NOVELTIES
LEAD: ''Horowitz: The Last Recording.'' How sad.
It sends a pang through you.
It is the end of a recording career that started in 1928, with 78-rpm disks, went on to LP, stereo and then CD.
When Vladimir Horowitz died last November, he still had a few things in the ''icebox,'' and here they are (Sony/CBS 45818; all three formats).


BUSINESS DIARY: April 15-20
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Milken Settlement Reported
The Milken criminal case might be near a conclusion.
Michael R. Milken reached an agreement in principle on Friday to plead guilty to six felony charges and pay $600 million in fines, according to people who had been briefed on the settlement.


Lester Young and Uncle Sam
LEAD: To the Editor:


SHE FELL FOR A PHOTO
LEAD:
REACHING TIN RIVER
By Thea Astley.
223 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


400 YEARS OF STAGE DESIGN, ON PAPER
LEAD: This critic has been a member almost since infancy of one of the more harmless among secret societies.
It has no dues, no meetings, no coded signs of recognition, no oath of loyalty and no meetings.
Its membership consists, worldwide, of men and women who would be delighted, any time, any place, to be locked up all day in a theater museum.


Who Was Who
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cubs and Mets Offering a Lesson in the Importance of Defense
LEAD: When Mitch Williams joined the Chicago Cubs last year, he received one bit of advice. ''If the ball is hit up the middle,'' he was told, ''don't be diving for it.
Just let it go.'' The Cubs' pitchers don't have to dive off the mound for balls because they have a large safety net behind them.
The net begins at Ryne Sandberg between first and second and extends to Shawon


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
EARTH DAY


Kennedy Airport
LEAD: To the Editor: My experience of arriving at the International Arrivals Building at Kennedy International Airport on Feb. 25 indicated to me a serious crisis in this aging and overcrowded facility.


Croatian Republic Voting Today In a Test of Yugoslav Communism
LEAD: The wave of political change sweeping Yugoslavia will wash over Croatia on Sunday as the republic begins its first free multiparty parliamentary elections in more than 50 years.
But in Yugoslavia's southern republics, uncertainty remains about when free elections will take place, despite official promises of political change.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
THEY ALWAYS CALL US LADIES: Stories From Prison, by Jean Harris. (Zebra, $4.95.) In her second book, the straitlaced schoolmistress who was convicted of murdering Dr.
Herman Tarnower writes about life in prison.
Last year our reviewer, Gloria Jacobs, said, ''This book is more tightly written, more impassioned, and, in its commitment to look at the lives of others instead of dwelling so intensely on the author herself, it is both better writing and better history.


Susan Babits, a Banker In New Jersey, Marries
LEAD: Susan Noreen Babits, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven L. Babits of Cranford, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dean Mathew Vogel, the son of Adelene Hall Vogel of Cranford and Harold A. Vogel Jr. of Bedminster, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard J. Regan officiated at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
Canadian Trains Drop Fare Scale Based on Distance


Are You Your Planet's Keeper?
LEAD:
DESIGN FOR A LIVABLE PLANET
By Jon Nair
FIGHTING TOXICS
Edited by Gary Cohen and John O'Connor.
CLEARER, CLEANER, SAFER, GREENER
By Gary Null
SAVING THE EARTH
By Will Steger and Jon Bowermaster.
EARTHRIGHT
By H. Patricia Hynes.
THE GREEN LIFESTYLE HANDBOOK
Edited by Jeremy Rifkin.


Review/Rock;   The Chills of New Zealand, Steeped in Sound of the 60's
LEAD: Martin Phillipps is nearly torn apart in the songs he writes for the Chills, who performed Tuesday night at Woody's.
Part of him wants to withdraw, either alone or with a loved one, to ruminate over fantasies and bittersweet memories.
And part of him compresses those ruminations into terse pop songs, making private reveries public, aggressive and catchy.


Beth E. Dobrin Is Wed To Dr. Mark Seckler
LEAD: Beth Ellen Dobrin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold E. Dobrin of Elberon, N.J., was married there last evening at Temple Beth Miriam to Dr.
Mark Michael Seckler, a son of Clare Seckler of Harrison, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Stanley G. Seckler.
Rabbi Joseph Goldman officiated.


DUKAKIS SAYS RACE WAS HARMED BY TV
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis says he made a major mistake in the 1988 Presidential race by underestimating the power of negative campaigning and the growing importance of the television ''sound bite.''


As Shaw Sees It, Love Conquers All
LEAD: ''GETTING MARRIED,'' now through next Sunday at Long Island Stage in Rockville Centre, is the sparkling centerpiece of this weekend's symposium on the lasting impact of George Bernard Shaw on Western culture.


Campus Life: Southern California;   Security System? Students See It As More of a Game
LEAD: Commended by their peers as troubleshooters and condemned by administrators as copycat vandals, students at the University of Southern California have found creative ways to bypass an elaborate security system.


FUTURE TRADING: DOES CHICAGO RUN WALL STREET?
LEAD: AS IF FRANTICALLY TRYING TO PLACE A BET ON THE outcome of a cockfight, Thomas M. Hunter Jr. signals wildly with his hands and arms from the top tier of a small amphitheater at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
He is 40 years old, a husky, bearded 6-footer.
His nickname, Turk, abbreviated for identification purposes to T


They Need Our Know-How, Not Our Bucks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dirty Pictures
LEAD: Slumped in the subway seat is a young man with vacant eyes, a fatigue jacket, and a copy of ''Catcher in the Rye,'' the familiar red cover curled in his hand.
Maybe his mind is the psychological equivalent of a Salvador Dali painting.
Maybe he's just a college student facing a long day's journey into a Modern American Lit exam.


Points of View On Wearing Furs
LEAD: I was appalled at a statement in the Opinion Page piece by Marlene Fanta Shyer entitled ''Changing Thoughts on Furs'' on Feb. 18.


TAKE IT FROM THE TOP
LEAD:
ON THE LINE
The Creation of ''A Chorus Line.''
By Robert Viagas, Baayork Lee and Thommie Walsh, with the entire original cast.
Illustrated. 366 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $21.95.


In a Fire Labeled Suspicious, 500 Evacuate Grand Central
LEAD: A suspicious trash fire broke out yesterday under a track platform at Grand Central Terminal, sending smoke billowing into the main concourse and causing the evacuation of about 500 people, most of them passengers on four trains, the authorities said.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is The M.V.P. In the N.B.A.?
LEAD: Akeem Olajuwon gets the prize because of his individual performance and how he helps his team.
Just check the output of each player (add all categories of scoring, rebounds, etc.) against the team's total output and you will see that Olajuwon is way ahead of Michael Jordan.
It is truly amazing that on a team of such mediocre players Olajuwon could be so productive.


London's Turn
LEAD: Having two major marathons on the same day may seem perverse, but for leading runners, the resulting bidding war to attract top talent can mean a bonanza.


Capitals Yearn to Play in May
LEAD: It is the time of year again for Rod Langway and other players with long tenure as members of the Capitals to explain why Washington's spring blossoms fade so quickly.


Anni Dupre and Charles N. Santry Are Married
LEAD: Annette Alice Dupre, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Dupre of Champion, Pa., was married yesterday in Latrobe, Pa., to Charles Nelson Santry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Santry Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
James C. McSwigan, an uncle of the bride, officiated at the Roman Catholic Basilica of St.


Social Events
LEAD:
A Special School


Ethel S. Masland to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
William Stafford Masland of Tucson have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Ethel Stafford Masland and Peter Wolcott, the son of Mr and Mrs.
Calvin Wolcott of San Rafael, Calif.
Miss Masland, 29 years ols, graduated from Yale University and received a Master's degree in management information services from the University of Arizona, where her fiance, 28, is a candidate for a doctorate in the same field.


June Wedding For Ms. Reger
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Reger of Rumson, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Patricia Reger, head of Reger Designs, an interior design firm in New York, and Howard Crash, the president of Rinfret Crash Securities, an investment banking firm in New York.


'89 Choices Leave Giants Well Set Up
LEAD: The Giants' first-round choice in today's National Football League draft will probably be a running back.
Or a quarterback.
Or a pass-rushing defensive end or a pass-rushing outside linebacker.


Review/Theater;   'Beyond Belief,' Comical Time Warp
LEAD: The world holds few surprises more disconcerting than those faced by Dr.
Jeremy Peregrine Calthorpe (Jerry Perry to his disrespectful friends), a philosopher, and Jake, an apprentice stand-up comic, who find themselves suddenly transported to an alien dimension in ''Beyond Belief,'' a delightfully zany fantasy.


Fashion;   For a Subtle Change, Try a Jacket
LEAD: It all starts with a jacket.
Whatever the season, the jacket is the basis of a woman's wardrobe.
One new jacket can update all last year's clothes because every season there are subtle differences.
That doesn't mean last year's styles are passe.
It just means there's always a new look to add to one's closet.


Nancy C. Hoguet, an Editor, Marries G. H. Tilghman Jr., Portfolio Manager
LEAD: Nancy Clarice Hoguet, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Roland Hoguet of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to George Hammond Tilghman Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tilghman of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
Stephen Price and the Rev.
Henry Tilghman, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at St.


LOVE AND RESENTMENT
LEAD: It sounds to me as if Barbara Bick and her daughter Kathy have not worked out the problems that fuel Kathy's illness (Hers: ''Two Weeks of Love and Resentment,'' March 25).
I believe that both women could do much better.
I would say to them, don't give up, go to another doctor, find the right medication and continue to work on the illness together.


Katri Backman Weds H. William Koster 3d
LEAD: Katri Backman, a vice president of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, and H. William Koster 3d, an associate at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The Rev.
Stanley Mosely, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated, assisted by the Rev.


Remembering the Maestro of Broadway
LEAD: When the newly named Richard Rodgers Theater on West 46th Street opens Thursday night with ''Accomplice'' (see box at right) a permanent exhibition in the theater lobby, the Richard Rodgers Gallery, will also be inaugurated.
It includes 60 vintage photographs and reproductions of scores by the composer of more than 40 Broadway musicals.


Vote for Openness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Public Enemy Makes Waves - and Compelling Music
LEAD: Ever since Public Enemy first hit the stage in 1987, dressed in fatigues and surrounded by bodyguards armed with fake Uzi's, they've kicked up a fuss.
The group - Chuck D (Charles Ridenhour), Flavor-Flav (William Drayton) and Terminator X (Norman Rogers) - all from Roosevelt, L.I., came on with bursts of black nationalist political rhetoric that hadn't been heard since the movement fizzled in the early 1970's.


Elise M. Chapin, Teacher, Marries
LEAD: Elise Merrill Chapin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Merrill Chapin 3d of Oldwick, N.J., and Dr.
Andrea Arnone, a son of Mrs.
Paola B. Arnone of Florence and the late Mario Arnone, were married yesterday.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Alfred M. Niese Jr., an Episcopal priest, assisted by the Rev.


Fashion;   Inside Out, Sleek or Frilly
LEAD: This spring, underwear is often outer wear.
But forget the aggressively sexy brassieres and bustiers Madonna made famous.
The new lingerie is subdued.
Demure camisoles, bustiers and bodysuits are available in styles, fabrics and trims appropriate for either casual or more formal settings.


Jane Kirby and George Gager Married
LEAD: Jane Crocker Kirby a daughter of Gerard L. Kirby of Boston and the late Gertrude M. Duffy, and George Webb Gager, a son of Alice G. Goodrich of New London, Conn., and the late Dr.
John Jay Gager, were married yesterday at the Harkness Chapel at Connecticut College in New London by the Rev.
James Helton, a priest of the Anglican


Earth Day Isn't Getting Any Easier
LEAD: The 20th anniversary of Earth Day is being marked around the world.
Here are four views on its significance.
Peter D. Moore
Mr.
Moore is managing partner in Inferential Focus, a market research and forecasting firm in New York.


Political Memo;   For Women, Better Climate Is Seen
LEAD: From the rise of the abortion issue to the new emphasis on other domestic concerns like education, the political climate is shifting in ways that could make the 1990's increasingly hospitable to women in politics, many analysts in both parties say.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:
Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
THE ABYSS - ''A gigantic sea monster of a film about marriage, death, nuclear war and alien life forms can be described in these words: E.T.
Underwater.'' (Caryn James) 1989.
CBS/fox. $89.98.
LD, $49.98. 2:20.
CC.
PG-13.
THE BIG PICTURE - Christopher Guest's Hollywood sendup about the adventures of a film student is ''consistently genial'' and ''intermittently funny.


The Rage for Remodeling
LEAD: For some, the need to remodel one ugly-duckling house after another is an incurable bug.
For others, it's a necessity: In today's precarious real estate market, it is safer, and often cheaper, to stay put and make do.
Whatever the reason, everyone's doing it, or so it seems.
According to The National Association of the Remodeling


Cleaning Fireplace Chimneys
LEAD: FIREPLACE chimneys should be cleaned at least once a year.
This prevents the buildup of creosote and other sooty deposits inside that can cause a fire and hinder performance.


Home Sites
LEAD: To the Editor:


Products Respond to the Earth's Plight
LEAD: TODAY is Earth Day, and it may bethe beginning of what will be considered the Environmental Decade.
During the next 10 years, concerned citizens hope that there will be heightened awareness of the earth's plight.
And many suggestions will be put forth to make the planet a better place for future generations.


East Bloc's Admirers in Africa Draw Line at Multiparty Politics
LEAD: African leaders who long admired Eastern Europe, accepted its aid and copied its political structures are vigorously resisting suggestions that multiparty democracy of the kind taking root in places like Poland and Hungary has any application at home.


SCHUYLERVILLE STANDS STILL
LEAD: James Kunstler failed, for the most part, to record any of the good things about Schuylerville.
He didn't mention the purchase of a piano for the high school from public donations, to honor a beloved teacher.
He failed to mention the financial and emotional support given a budding Olympian en route to Calgary.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


John Perris Wed To Miss Doherty,
LEAD: Catharine Hereford Doherty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Doherty of Kennebunkport, Me., was married yesterday to John David Perris, a son of Eleanor H. Perris of Brooklyn and John R. Perris of Tucson, Ariz.
The Rev.
F.
Goldthwaite Sherrill 2d and the Rev.
David B. Hoopes officiated at Grace Episcopal Church in Brooklyn


Asian Cuisines Blend at New Restaurant
LEAD: CALLING a restaurant Bal does not necessarily make it Indonesian.
True, there are several Indonesian dishes on the menu of a handsome new restaurant in Greenwich by that name; among them is a prix-fixe rijsttafel dinner at $30 each for a minimum of two people.
And true, the chef is said to be Chinese-Indonesian.


Man Halted Appeal, Is Executed
LEAD: A convicted killer who demanded that his lawyers halt efforts to stop his execution was put to death early today for the slaying of a Houston taxi driver.


Wine;   AND THE WINNER IS . . .
LEAD: YOU KNOW THE SCENE: DIRTY HARRY , alias Clint Eastwood, has just dispatched the villain with an unerring shot.
Reholstering his .357 Magnum, he mutters: ''A man's got to know his limitations.''


The Editorial Notebook;   Armenia, Remembered
LEAD: After 50 years, Moscow admits that Stalin ordered the killing of thousands of Polish officers in Katyn.
After 40 years, a new Government in East Germany joins West Germany in acknowledging accountability for Hitler's crimes against the Jews.
But after 75 years, Turkey insists that charges of mass killings of


In Deal With U.S., Milken Won't Be Forced to Testify
LEAD: Michael R. Milken, the financier who agreed Friday to plead guilty to six felony charges and pay $600 million in penalties, is not required to provide evidence of further wrongdoing to the Government as part of the settlement, people who have been briefed on the deal said yesterday.





Data Bank: April 22, 1990
LEAD:
$
Housing Starts
March
Feb.
Year Ago
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,320
1,460
1,400
Industrial Production Index
March
Feb.
Jan.
Monthly percentage change
0.7
0.8
-1.2
Consumer Price Index
March
Feb.
Year Ago
1982-84-100
128.7
128.0
122.3
Capacity Utilization
March
Feb.


BEST SELLERS: April 22, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St.
Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
world encounter their often unexpected destinies
during a get-together in a small Scottish town.


IT'S NOT TOO LATE, IF WE'RE NOT TOO CRAZY
LEAD:
DEAD HEAT
The Race Against the Greenhouse Effect.
By Michael Oppenheimer and Robert H. Boyle.
268 pp. New York:
A New Republic Book/Basic Books. $19.95.
MAKING PEACE WITH THE PLANET
By Barry Commoner.
292 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books. $19.95.


String Quartet
LEAD: The Composers String Quartet is to play Benjamin Britten's String Quartet No. 1 and Mario Davidovsky's String Quartet No. 4 at 3 P.M. today at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street.
The program also includes the Schubert Octet, in which the ensemble will be joined by Allen Blustine, clarinetist; Julius Levine, bassist; Morris Newman, bassoonist, and David Wakefield, hornist.


An Elmont Seamstress Is the Betsy Ross of Horse Racing
LEAD: WHEN the gate clangs open for the first race of the new Belmont season on May 9 and the horses explode down the track, no one will be straining harder to see the colors and patterns worn by the jockeys than Antoinette Brocklebank.


A Tireless Collector's Gift to Vermont
LEAD: IN the middle of 45 verdant acres in Vermont, a stolid lighthouse keeps watch over an old paddle wheeler moored on a sea of grass.
The only water in sight fills a small pond excavated to give a splash of plausibility to the covered bridge that spans it.
How did this 220-foot-long, 900-ton steamboat get beached like an abashed whale two miles from its former home on Lake Champlain?


Veeck's Genius As Entrepreneur
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


THE LAST AGE OF HEROES
LEAD:
PIVOTAL DECADES
The United States 1900-1920.
By John Milton Cooper Jr.
Illustrated. 408 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $21.95.


HAITIANS' OUTRAGE BRINGS SOLIDARITY
LEAD: As more than 50,000 marchers, mostly Haitians, massed in lower Manhattan on Friday, they caught a city by surprise, stunning the police and transportation officials and even their own organizers with the size and order of the protest.


Pennsylvania's Message to Investors
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
Sex, Lies and Videotape
1989. RCA/Columbia, $89.95. Laser disk, $34.95. 1 hour 40 minutes. Closed captioned. R
Steven Soderbergh's ''astonishing'' first film is a ''Liaisons Dangereuses'' for the video age.
Graham (James Spader) uses his video camera to record women's accounts of their sexual experiences and tastes, notably those of Ann Millaney (Andie McDowell), the wife of Graham's friend John (Peter Gallagher), and Ann's sister, Cynthia (Laura Giacomo).


RESPONSES TO OPINION: HOW BEST TO HEAL PSYCHIC WOUNDS
LEAD: Accolades, accolades and more accolades to Howard Schneider for his sensitive and thought-provoking article.
My only regret when reading his article was that he limited himself to the mental health field.
Just as this ''cottage industry of mental health specialists descended on the passengers who were injured in the


A LUBBER IN THE ROPES
LEAD:
TUNING THE RIG
A Journey to the Arctic.
By Harvey Oxenhorn.
281 pp. New York: Harper &amp; Row. $22.95.


In Brazil: Miners vs. Indians
LEAD: Symbolic of the economic and environmental problems confronting Brazil, the airstrip shown at left is among the 100 or so clandestine landing strips in the northern state of Roraima ordered destroyed late last month by the newly inaugurated President, Fernando Collor de Mello.
The strips, constructed by miners, provide access to remote Amazon regions that have yielded an estimated $1 billion worth of gold since 1987.


Mehtaville Awaits Masur's Leadership
LEAD: Though Zubin Mehta's tenure still has a year to run, it is not too soon to ponder Kurt Masur's chances for success as the New York Philharmonic's next music director.
Was his engagement the wisest move possible at a time of major-conductor scarcity or a panicky action taken out of fear of being left at the post in the maestro sweepstakes?


Mike Milken And Market Perversity
LEAD: Ah, the perversity of Wall Street.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Should Athletes Accept Money for Autographs?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


A Message For Al Arbour
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Travel Advisory column on April 1 misstated the date of the next total eclipse of the sun.
It is July 22.


Keeping Students From Smoking
LEAD: The ''mixed messages'' students receive about smoking do tend to be related to policies that are not comprehensive enough.
Comprehensive policies include posted 'no smoking' signs on and near school grounds, a closed campus policy and a formal health education plan for smoking prevention programming.


The Census, in One Not-So-Easy Lesson
LEAD: WHAT if they gave a census and nobody came?
Like the Netherlands in 1970 and West Germany in the early 1980's, the United States in 1990 is coming face to face with the prospect of being unable to determine - or determine exactly - who and where the people are.


POSTINGS: Called by Cuomo;   Parley's Agenda: Low-Cost Housing
LEAD: Innovative strategies to produce more low-cost housing will be discussed by 350 New York State leaders, including Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, at a daylong conference Thursday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan.


SAVING GRACE
LEAD: JOHN STAIR REMEMBERS the day that a very proper-looking woman, about 60 years old, brought him a badly broken Regency chair. ''The piece was so smashed that I asked her if the damage had occurred during a move,'' says Stair, who is the director of Sotheby's Restoration, a Manhattan- and Claverack, N.Y.-based division of the auction house.


Neutrality Has Its Dangers in the Blood Feuds of a South African Province
LEAD: Lillian Gebashe rummaged through the few possessions salvaged from her fire-gutted home in the black township of Imbali and lovingly held up a charred china cup given her by a son of the white family she had served as a maid.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of Earth Day celebrations, Broadway will be closed today from 43d to 45th Streets from 1 A.M. to 6 P.M. and the Avenue of the Americas will be closed from 42d to 59th Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Because of the Stuyvesant Park


Spring Salads With Some Less-Common Greens
LEAD: THE salad options are more varied than ever.
Not long ago, all one could expect to find in the salad-greens department of a produce stand or supermarket was iceberg, Romaine and perhaps Boston lettuce.
Today there are at least a dozen choices and it seems as though more are added every season.


Managing;   Asking Workers What They Think
LEAD: The Libbey-Owens-Ford Company wanted to reduce health-care costs.


India and Pakistan Make the Most of Hard Feelings
LEAD: HEIRS of a shared ancient history, products of the same colonial administration and home to similar peoples and languages, Pakistan and India might be expected to understand and communicate with each other in times of crisis.
Yet more than 40 years after their simultaneous creation, their differences have them once again polishing the words and weapons of war.


Cleaning Fireplace Chimneys
LEAD: FIREPLACE chimneys should be cleaned at least once a year.
This prevents the buildup of creosote and other sooty deposits inside that can cause a fire and hinder performance.


Sterling Forest: Doing It the Right Way
LEAD: OBJECTIONS have recently been raised to development in the northern portion of the Passaic River Basin and, in particular, to further development of the Sterling Forest Corporation's lands in New York.
Arguments made against development include the worsening of flooding, degradation of water quality and the need for massive public expenditures to correct these problems.


Pilot, Accused, Balks at Flying
LEAD: A Northwest Airlines flight from Detroit to Atlanta was delayed for nearly four hours after a pilot refused to fly the plane because a passenger had accused him of being drunk, the airline said.


Bucs Sign Anderson
LEAD: Completing a trade with the San Diego Chargers made two days earlier, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers signed the running back Gary Anderson to a four-year, $3.6 million contract yesterday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Today we stand before the ruins of one of the many towers of Babel in human history.''
- Pope John Paul II
in Prague.
[10:3.]


Remarkably, Din of Civil War Is Growing Louder
LEAD: Overlooking the national cemetery on the famous battlefield where General Grant's army doomed the Confederacy in 1863 by splitting it in half is a simple plaque.
It reads:
The neighing troop, the flashing blade
The bugle's stirring blast,
The charge, the dreadful cannonade,
The din and shout are past.


Recent Sales
LEAD:
Howell
$168,900
41 Markwood Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace, w/w carpeting, c/a; taxes $2,392.
Livingston
$273,500
1 Bunyan Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old split level; c/a, 1-car garage, den; taxes $3,683.


Elizabeth Marks to Wed Harry Ostrer
LEAD: June wedding plans for Elizabeth Marks and Dr.
Harry Ostrer have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Marks of Bridgewater, Conn.


Sex, Lies And Now Videotape
LEAD: ''The film's intimate scale translates very well on tape,'' says the director Steven Soderbergh of his highly acclaimed ''Sex, Lies and Videotape,'' which will be released on Wednesday by RCA/Columbia (see review at left).
But does he think his movie will be as successful on videotape as it was on film in theaters?


Mara Moradoff, Lawyer, Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ivan Moradoff of New York have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Mara Moradoff and Dr.
Craig Wilkenfeld, the son of Hannah Wilkenfeld of Brooklyn and the late Rudolph Wilkenfeld.


NOTES FROM MY BED OF GLOOM: OR, WHY THE JOKING HAD TO STOP
LEAD: For whatever reason, American humorists or satirists or whatever you want to call them, those who choose to laugh rather than weep about demoralizing information, become intolerably unfunny pessimists if they live past a certain age.
If Lloyds of London offered policies promising to compensate comical writers for losses of senses of humor, its actuaries could count on such a loss occurring, on average, at age 63 for men, and for women at 29, say.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Where Stoops Offer a Great Skyline
LEAD: In this waterfront city across the Hudson from lower Manhattan, residents convene on stoops to while away weekend afternoons.
Often people join the conversations from above, hanging over the rails of the many furbelowed wrought-iron fire escapes precariously fastened to house fronts.


O'BRIEN AND SHERIFF TAKE TREVIRA TWOSOME
LEAD: She didn't break her American-best time for the 10-mile run, but 22-year-old Cathy O'Brien of Durham, N.H., set a women's course record of 52 minutes 35 seconds yesterday in rain-soaked Central Park.
She and her partner, Brian Sheriff of Zimbabwe, won all three categories in the Trevira Twosome road race.


Have Women Surrendered In MTV's Battle of the Sexes?
LEAD: Paula Abdul is the hottest material girl of the moment.
Her video ''It's Just the Way That You Love Me'' gives a perfect double message.
The poor, uneducated beauty is in love with a rich, classy executive type - gray suit and horn-rimmed glasses - who lavishes upon her all the status brand names America has to offer.


Review/Music;   A Mixture Of Cultures And Sounds
LEAD: The stage setting at Merkin Concert Hall on Thursday evening was jarring, evoking disparate historical epochs as well as cultures: To the right, sitting on a raised platform covered by a rug, was the Indian drummer Trichy Sankaran, in traditional garb of his country, legs folded and feet bare.
To the left, on a chair behind an imposing array of computer and electronic equipment, was the American composer and performer David Rosenboom, informally dressed.


Style Makers;   Eli Noyes and Kit Laybourne, Children's Broadcasters
LEAD: It is not easy for Eli Noyes and Kit Laybourne, the director and the producer of ''Eureeka's Castle,'' a new cable television show for children, to escape the influence of Jim Henson, the originator of the Muppets.


Lucy Reich Married to Bruce W. Hurd
LEAD: Lucy Elizabeth Reich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert M. Reich of Savannah, Ga., was married yesterday in New Canaan, Conn., to Bruce Ward Hurd, a son of Isabel W. Hertz of Red Bank, N.J., and the late Richard M. Hurd 3d.
The Rev.
Charles Crawford Smith performed the ceremony at the Congregational


Congressional Help For Cable TV Fight
LEAD: WHEN a delegation of angry Long Island cable-television subscribers came to Capitol Hill earlier this month, they sought to send a message to lawmakers that consumers were not taking their disappointment with rising cable rates and unpopular programming decisions sitting down.


Services for Abernathy
LEAD: The funeral of the Rev.
Ralph David Abernathy, the pioneer leader in the civil rights struggle, will take place at noon tomorrow at the West Hunter Street Baptist Church in Atlanta.


Auto Insurance 'Reform' Really Isn't
LEAD: Re: ''New Law on Auto Insurance Draws Fire,'' March 18:


Public Gets Up-Close Look at $42.6 Million F-117A Stealth Fighter


Foree McCauley Is Wed to Jack Biddle
LEAD: Foree Pendleton McCauley and Albert George Wilkinson Biddle 3d were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church at Lafayette Square in Washington.
The Rev.
Dr.
John C. Harper performed the ceremony.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Golf
Coody and Douglass Lead: Charles Coody and Dale Douglass played the last five holes in six under par yesterday to stretch their lead to eight strokes after three rounds of the Legends of Golf tournament in Austin, Tex.
Coody and Douglass, the leaders all the way, combined for a 10-under-par 62 and tied a record in the 13-year-old better-ball tournament.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Political Climate Changing


HOME ON THE RANCH
LEAD: This was an ugly duckling of a house - a 1950's ''ranchburger,'' as these ranch-style houses are called in Los Angeles, with an asphalt shingled roof and an exterior of ''cottage-cheese'' stucco, brick and wood.
The current owners, William Berry, a screenwriter, and his wife, Marisa Arango, admit they bought the house more for its location than its esthetics.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 50-year-old house has a brick chimney that goes up through the attic, and the bricks are exposed inside the attic.
There are four flues inside the chimney, and the bricks in the attic have developed a white, flaky material that my husband calls bloom.
There is also a white powder on top of some items stored next to the chimney.


CALIFORNIA: COASTING ALONG
LEAD: Pork medallions snuggled next to creamy, garlicky potatoes.
Prime rib rubbed with olive paste.
Chocolate-stuffed croissants soaked with creme anglaise.
This is California cuisine - a far cry from the raw baby vegetables, edible flowers and pizzas that put the state on the culinary map.
And while pork, potatoes and bread pudding may seem at odds with the trim, tanned population, restaurants that serve robust food are experiencing a mini-revival.


Correction
LEAD: A report on the Headliners page last Sunday about historians' views of Charles de Gaulle misstated the year of de Gaulle's resignation as President of France.
It was 1969, not 1968.


Auto Insurance 'Reform' Really Isn't
LEAD: The present New Jersey auto insurance reform act demonstrates the inherent weakness of political solutions to economic issues.
Such solutions are based on lack of experience in the field and on emotion.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is The M.V.P. In the N.B.A.?
LEAD: This year, more than any in memory, the award should be m.v.p.'s: most valuable players.
Barkley, Jordan, Johnson, Ewing and Malone.
Each deserves a piece.
Now, that is a dream m.v.t.: most valuable team.
CHERYL MILLERTTON
New York


Woman Finds Grandson, 10, Shot to Death in the Bronx
LEAD: A 10-year-old boy was pronounced dead at Lincoln Hospital yesterday after his grandmother found him in their Bronx apartment with a bullet wound in his side, the police said.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:
TO EARTH


Builders Feel Pinch of New S &amp; L Act
LEAD: FOR more than 20 years, the Cardinal Federal Savings and Loan bank in Owensboro, Ky., financed the land acquisition and construction costs of Tommy Thompson's house-building business, and Mr.
Thompson hardly expected that relationship to change when he recently took an option on another piece of developable land.


Ms. Wiltshire Weds G. W. Schomaker
LEAD: Leslie deBenneville Wiltshire and George Warren Schomaker were married yesterday at the Kennebunkport (Me.) Inn by Frederick W. Griffin Jr., the inn's owner and a justice of the peace in Kennebunkport.
The bride is a daughter of Mary E. Miller of Kennebunkport and the late Leslie Q. Miller.
The bridegroom is a son of the late Mr.


Responses to Opinion: How Best to Heal Psychic Wounds?
LEAD: Howard Schneider's article expressing disdain for the post-catastrophe healer (Opinion: ''For Psychic Wounds, Time Still Heals Best,'' March 18), with his assertion that time is the best healer, fails to consider the benefits of professional crisis intervention.
A crisis brought on by a disaster in the life of an individual can disturb equilibrium, impair judgment and tax an individual's ability to function.


Murky History?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lori Blodnick to Wed in May
LEAD: A May wedding is planned by Lori S. Blodnick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward K. Blodnick of Great Neck, L.I., and Robert J. Krakow, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Krakow of Princeton, N.J.
Ms.
Blodknick, 28 years old, graduated from George Washington University, where her fiance received a law degree.


DATA UPDATE: April, 22, 1990
LEAD:
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS/N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Mar.
Feb.
Mar. 89
Rents
156.2
0.8
3.9
Homeowner's costs
162.2
2.2
8.1
Fuel and utilities
101.9
0.0
6.8
*4*Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex,
*4*Somerset and Passaic.


The Duet's Multiple Choices
LEAD: Two dancers moving side by side may not be dancing together at all.
Imaginative choreography can suggest that they are miles apart or, though they are both obviously physical entities, that one is only an apparition.
On other occasions, a choreographer can demonstrate that no matter how physically distant two people may be, they are still emotionally close.


Jean M. Tuomey Weds John Cleary
LEAD: Jean Marie Tuomey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh B. Tuomey of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to John Charles Cleary, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Cleary of Binghamton, N.Y.
The Rev.
Peter J. Vaghi officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Gabriel the Archangel in Saddle River, N.J.


Lisa Ayse Kizilay Weds Ralph Gilbert Mallory 3d
LEAD: Lisa Ayse Kizilay, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dogan Kizilay of South Orange, N.J., and Ralph Gilbert Mallory 3d, a son of Marjorie Garvey of Natick, Mass., and Mr.
Mallory Jr. of Belmont, Mass., were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church, Old Town, in Alexandria, Va., by the Rev.
Marie Eddy.


Pope, on Sweep Through Prague, Sees a United Europe
LEAD: The first Slavic Pope, John Paul II, swept joyfully through the streets of the Czechoslovak capital today, proclaiming that a unified Europe was at hand and that Communism had crumbled like the tower of Babel.


Garbo: Illusion Was All
LEAD: It began as a temporary retirement from the screen in 1941 after the critical and box-office failure of ''Two Faced Woman.'' As the years went on, and as Greta Garbo continued to turn down roles, the temporary retirement gradually eased into something permanent, though it could never be called permanent with certainty.


A Monumental Day
LEAD: On Earth Day 1970, Americans rose up against what they had done to foul the environment.
That wave of dismay drove Congress to decree a substantial cleanup of air and water.
Twenty years later, on Earth Day 1990, public concern about the environment is again at a peak.
And this time the wave washes far beyond American shores.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Spinach, a Pleasing Bed for Salmon
LEAD: The idea of putting salmon on a bed of spinach comes from one of James Beard's many cookbooks.
His recipe called for baking the salmon on the spinach bed; this one grills the fish and places it on the spinach, which has been cooked separately.
If you take care not to cook the spinach too long, it makes a pretty picture.


Lifestyle;   Three Steps Right, Three Steps Left: Sliding Into the Hot New Dance
LEAD: The lambada is fine if you like being locked into a Latin frenzy on the dance floor.
But if you prefer your dancing to be smooth rather than frenetic, think ''electric slide'' - the newest dance craze.


KEEPING IT IN-HOUSE
LEAD: STEPHEN MANES'S office has all of the information-age fire power of a modern corporate environment.
On his desk are a high-performance computer and monitor, a modem, laser printer, multiline telephone and a fax machine.


They Need Our Know-How, Not Our Bucks;   Making a Start
LEAD: To the Editor:


PRIVATE PLACES
LEAD: When a man lives alone, his dressing room is as important as any room in the house,'' says the fashion designer Bill Blass. ''And it's especially nice to have everything out in the open, so you can see all your clothes at once.'' Blass's home was originally two apartments: The present dressing room had been a small guest bedroom; the revamped bath, a kitchen and bathroom.


Rev. Thaddeus Horgan, Franciscan, Dies at 54
LEAD: The Rev.
Thaddeus Horgan, associate director of the Secretariat for Ecumenical and Interreligious Affairs of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, died on Thursday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Waterbury, Conn., after suffering a heart attack.
He was 54 years old and lived in Washington.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is The M.V.P. In the N.B.A.?
LEAD: This guard makes Karl Malone the player and scorer he is.
So if Malone is the Mailman, John Stockton is the Post Office.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


2 Councilmen Won't Join South Africa Tour
LEAD: After a day and half of controversy and pressure from their constituents and anti-apartheid groups, two New York City Council members said yesterday that they would not participate in a tour of South Africa sponsored by the Johannesburg City Council.


Pickfair Torn Down
LEAD: Pickfair, the legendary estate of the Hollywood film stars Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks, has been razed by Pia Zadora, the actress and singer, and her husband, the industrialist Meshulam Riklis.
They plan to build a Venetian-style palazzo on the site.


Holocaust Tales, Set To Music, Will Open
LEAD: WHEN ''Hasidic Tales of the Holocaust'' was published in 1982, its author, Yaffa Eliach, a professor of Judaic studies at Brooklyn College and herself a Holocaust survivor, said that the 89 tales told in her book - all of them true - found in the harrowing experiences of victims ''a glimmer of hope, a hint of laughter.


Campus Life: Washington;   R.O.T.C. Wins Some Battles, But Foes Fight On
LEAD: The Reserve Officer Training Corps at Washington University has won the most recent fight over its enlistment policies, which exclude homosexuals, as well as a battle over its own existence.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: There was some perceptible paranoia in the early stages of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship final played in Fort Worth three weeks ago.
In the first 32 deals the computer served up 15 hands in the slam zone, an extraordinarily high frequency, and a bunch a weird distributions.


900 Protest Officer's Fatal Shooting of a 16-Year-Old in Teaneck
LEAD: Chanting ''Teaneck, Teaneck, have you heard?
This is not Johannesburg!'' 900 demonstrators marched a mile and a half to the Teaneck, N.J., Police Headquarters yesterday to protest the fatal shooting of a black 16-year-old by a white police officer 11 days ago.


Spring Salads With Some Less-Common Greens
LEAD: THE salad options are more varied than ever.
Not long ago, all one could expect to find in the salad-greens department of a produce stand or supermarket was iceberg, Romaine and perhaps Boston lettuce.
Today there are at least a dozen choices and it seems as though more are added every season.


Hungarians in Romania Meet Amid Tensions
LEAD: The police patrolled this Transylvanian town amid ethnic tensions today as an opposition party promoting the rights of the Hungarian minority opened a two-day congress.


Shari Bunks Is Engaged
LEAD: The May wedding plans of Shari Lynn Bunks and Dr.
Jay D. Geller, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Geller of Morristown, N.J., have been announced by Miss Bunks's mother, Rae Bunks of Cherry Hill, N.J.
Ms.
Bunks, 27 years old, is also a daughter of the late Frank Bunks.
She is an associate in the law firm of Katzenbach, Gildea &amp; Rudner in Lawrenceville, N.J.


At $250,000, It Flushes Up and It Could Save Money
LEAD: In the dispatchers' office at the Chambers Street station on the IRT, workers are putting the finishing touches on $250,000 worth of equipment that is expected to save the Transit Authority $50,000 a year and make the lives of transit workers a lot easier.


DAFT DIGNITY
LEAD:
REBUILDING COVENTRY: A Tale of Two Cities.
By Sue Townsend. (Grove Weidenfeld, $16.95.) Sue Townsend's brittle, brilliant farce begins when Coventry Dakin, a beautiful middle-aged British housewife, seizes an Action Man doll and brains a slobbering, philandering neighbor who is about to strangle his wife.


David Graham Is Wed To Carol M. Manning
LEAD: The Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Carol Meredith Manning, a daughter of Shirle K. Manning of West Palm Beach, Fla., and Jack R. Manning of New York, to David Alan Graham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Joseph Graham of Ridgefield, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth O.


World Markets;   The Glut in Europe; a Stir in Japan
LEAD: In the first quarter of this year, country funds traded in the United States raised more than $2 billion to invest in stock markets outside the country - a record and almost four times the amount raised in any previous year.


When a Spouse Makes a Career Move
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESPONSES TO OPINION: HOW BEST TO HEAL PSYCHIC WOUNDS?
LEAD: It was with great dismay that I and many of my colleagues and clients read Howard Schneider's article, which distorted description of those professional mental health workers dedicated to working with (not on, as he stated) victims and survivors of traumatic events.
Anyone the least familiar with trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder knows that the earlier the therapeutic intervention, the less likely the development of subsequent chronic psychological difficulties.


On Language;   The Bloopie Awards
LEAD: I CAN UNDERSTAND A liquor company not using the word drunk in an ad,'' writes Ernest M. Lorimer of Stamford, Conn., ''but this sentence clanks and should have been rewritten.''


Chemical Is Proving the Rumors Wrong
LEAD: The past few months have been turbulent for the Chemical Banking Corporation.
Amid rumors that losses from bad loans were mounting and that Chemical was having trouble finding buyers for its commercial paper, speculators were selling its stock en masse and some analysts were describing the bank as the weakest of the large New


CART Puts an Outsider at the Wheel
LEAD: Championship Auto Racing Teams, the INDY-car sanctioning group, went outside the racing community to find its new chairman of the board, A. William Stokkan.
And if CART's board of directors was looking to shake up the way racing does business, Stokkan seems ready to help.


Eau Dear!
LEAD: When the Government asked who put the bubbles in Perrier, Mother Nature said, ''Not me.'' Until incidents of contamination forced Source Perrier to take its water off the market in February - traces of the toxic chemical benzene were found in some bottles - its claim that its water was ''naturally sparkling'' went unchallenged.


Renamed Museum Weighs Anchor as It Looks Out to Sea
LEAD: THE Museum of Art, Science and Industry in Bridgeport has been born again as the Discovery Museum, Connecticut's Adventure in Art and Science.
The new name should not discourage the art public from checking out the show that coincides with its announcement.
The show, ''Sounding the Depths: 150 Years of American Seascape,'' was organized for the American Federation of the Arts by Harold B.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
THE PRINCESS IN THE PIGPEN
By Jane Resh Thomas.
130 pp. New York:
Clarion Books. $13.95.
(Ages 8 to 12)


SCHUYLERVILLE STANDS STILL
LEAD: It is not that what James Howard Kunstler says about Schuylerville, N.Y., is untrue; rather, it is incomplete (''Schuylerville Stands Still,'' March 25).
What he seems to miss is that Schuylerville's very strength is its maintenance of a sense of community amid what he calls ''rot and disrepair.'' He writes as if Walt Disney World was the mean for an American community - new sidewalks, every storefront brimming with goods, shiny-faced children holding mommy's and daddy's hands, etc.


Evicted By an Act of Congress
LEAD: IN the five-room ranch house in Fairfield dotted with braided rugs and quilted pillows, Janet O'Donnell stands over the stove, turning pork chops, while her 3-year-old son, Patrick, curls up on the couch with his puppy.
The plaque above the pantry door says, ''Home Sweet Home.'' Mrs.
O'Donnell and her family moved into the house just three months ago, and now they are being evicted.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is The M.V.P. In the N.B.A.?
LEAD: Charles Barkley.
The Round Mound has proved that he is no longer simply a rebounding machine.
While he is currently third in the league on the boards (and first on the offensive end of the court), Charles is also sixth in scoring, second in field goal percentage, and 13th in steals.
More importantly, Charles's havoc and leadership have made the 76ers serious contenders for the N.B.A.


After Struggle, Musical on Dr. King Is Opening
LEAD: Last Thursday, just four nights before the opening here of ''King,'' a new musical about the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., the show's producers were trying to put a bright face on all the adversity they had experienced in bringing their musical to the London stage.


Report on New York Deplores Slowness of Environmental Reviews
LEAD: Lengthy and unpredictable environmental reviews in New York City are hampering the development of new homes, schools and businesses, a prominent business group says.


Furor Over British Poll Tax Imperils Thatcher Ideology
LEAD: The last time a British Government imposed a uniform poll tax on its citizens - in 1381 - a mob invaded the Tower of London, where the King's ministers had taken refuge, and beheaded the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Rioters protesting


This Is Where I Came in
LEAD: The more things change, the French say, the more they stay the same.
Now that Bush Administration officials have disclosed plans to spend $35 million to train the Peruvian Army to fight the Shining Path guerrillas, Americans can sing, ''It seems to me I've heard that song before.''


People Day
LEAD: The word of the day was not dissent, as it was for the original Earth Day 20 years ago, but descent.
There was barely any dissent at all; have a million people, more or less, ever been more agreeable than they were yesterday, jammed in and around the Great Lawn of New York's Central Park?


30,000 Indians Celebrate Their Culture
LEAD: Thirty thousand Indians from all over North America were here this weekend for a celebration of pride and culture.


With Boycott and Ads, A Battle Over Selling
LEAD: In Empire, Calif., some 400 copies of ''Little Red Ridinghood'' are locked away in a storage room of the public school district because the classic Grimm's fairy tale recounts that the little girl took a bottle of wine to her grandmother.


Rockets Land A Berth
LEAD: The Houston Rockets won the final Western Conference playoff berth tonight in their last game of the season as they beat the Utah Jazz by 100-88.


Lyons Festival to Focus On U.S. Dance Troupes
LEAD: Seventeen American dance companies will perform in An American Story: A Century of Dance in the United States, the three-week Lyons Biennial festival that begins on Sept. 13 in Lyons, France.
The Biennial, announced last week at the Cultural Services of the French Embassy, will include classics and new works of modern dance, as well as ballet, tap and folk dance.


Comments by the Hostage
LEAD: Following is an excerpt of a videotaped interview held yesterday with Robert Polhill, the American hostage, by a Syrian television correspondent on a car trip between Beirut and Damascus.
The videotape of the interview, which was conducted in English, was made available to Cable News Network.


G.O.P. Fears It Is Losing Points on Environment
LEAD: Rising public concern about the environment looms like smog across the Republican Party's political horizon.


Lillian H. Planer, 86, Writer of Radio Series
LEAD: Lillian H. Planer, a radio and screen writer in the 1940's, died after a long illness on Friday at her home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
She was 86 years old.


Johnny Beazley; Ex-Pitcher, 71
LEAD: Johnny Beazley, who won two games in the 1942 World Series as a rookie to help the St.
Louis Cardinals beat the New York Yankees, died Saturday after having suffered from cancer.
He was 71 years old.


A Warning to Would-Be Federal Judges
LEAD: Imagine you are a lawyer looking to join a private club in your community, one known to be a good place to expand your business and professional opportunities.
You meet all the necessary qualifications for membership except one: You are a woman and the club bars women.


How a Conductor Brought Harmony To East Germany's Peaceful Revolt
LEAD: To New Yorkers he is the future music director of the New York Philharmonic, but to the people of East Germany, especially those of Leipzig, Kurt Masur is a hero of the revolution that overthrew Communist rule and the man who might have been President.


Discovery Awaits Launching To Orbit Powerful Telescope
LEAD: Five astronauts prepared today for a second attempt to launch the shuttle Discovery with the space agency's most valuable and celebrated payload, the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope.


Army Command Seen as Tough Test for Chamorro
LEAD: With just three days left before she is to take office, President-elect Violeta Barrios de Chamorro is under increasing pressure to make important decisions about Nicaragua's future military leadership, in what her supporters and opponents alike believe will be a crucial test of her authority.


New Police Chiefs Put New Ideas on the Force
LEAD: When Robert Wadman became Police Chief in Aurora, Ill., last October, the first thing he did was summon a maintenance man.
Mr.
Wadman had him remove the door to the chief's office and store it in the basement.


Turkish Dam Drowning History of the Kurds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nigeria Reports It Foiled a Coup By Army Rebels
LEAD: Nigeria announced today that troops loyal to the military Government of Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida had thwarted an attempted coup, forcing rebel officers to surrender after 11 hours of fighting.


Court Clears Bid for Utility
LEAD: A bankruptcy reorganization plan for the Public Service Company of New Hampshire was cleared on Friday in Federal court, two years after the state's largest utility filed for bankruptcy protection.


Georgia Gulf Stake Sold
LEAD: A spokesman for Harold C. Simmons said Friday that the Texas investor had sold his 2.3 million shares of the Georgia Gulf Corporation, a day after the chemical company said its shareholders had approved a recapitalization plan.


Rising Costs Fuel a Partisan Senate Debate on Campaign Spending
LEAD: Amid the most insistent calls since Watergate to revamp the way political campaigns are paid for and run, the Senate is expected to begin debate on a campaign financing bill this week, tackling an issue seen as critical to each member's political survival.


Skeptics And a Slide Test Pistons
LEAD: AFTER spending years climbing the ladder toward basketball's pinnacle, the Detroit Pistons finally reached it last season.
They won the National Basketball Association championship, they exorcised years of frustration, and they dominated the league with a tough, unapologetic style that was loved by their fans and loathed by their critics.


No 'Horrible Design Flaw' in the Space Station;   Mission of Settlement
LEAD: To the Editor:


Heavy Dues
LEAD: FOR the corporate executive who has everything, there is something new he doesn't have.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
Durable Goods ... March
Wednesday
None
Thursday
None
Friday
G.N.P. ... 1st Qtr.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Calvin Klein Tops Ad Poll
LEAD: Once again, Calvin Klein can take credit for the top print campaign of the year, said Commercial Break, the newsletter of Video Storyboard Tests, an advertising research organization based in New York.


First Boston's New Offering
LEAD: A new financing wrinkle in the burgeoning asset-backed securities market was introduced last week by investment bankers at the First Boston Corporation.


C. M. Levy Wed To Miss Acevedo
LEAD: Nalda Acevedo, a pediatric nutritionist at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, and Dr.
Clifford Marc Levy, a resident in orthopedic surgery at Mount Sinai, were married yesterday at the Inn at Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Rabbi David Posner officiated.


Lantern Lights the Way for Less
LEAD: rrThe traditional outdoor lantern has been redesigned to burn unleaded gasoline instead of more costly products such as white gas, propane and butane.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I am sorry I kept you waiting so long. Thirty-nine months is a long time.''
-Robert Polhill. [A1:6.]


Runners Feel Buoyed By Pool Training
LEAD: A NEW training approach that improves running speed with almost no risk of injury is causing more and more performance-minded runners to get their feet wet.


As 6th Cabby Is Slain in Bronx, More Police Action Is Ordered
LEAD: A gypsy-cab driver was found shot dead yesterday in the Bronx, the sixth cabdriver slain in the borough in less than seven weeks, the police said.


Cavaliers Beat Knicks, 115-99
LEAD: The Knicks' regular season, which began in November with great expectations, ended here today in defeat and disappointment.


Yugoslavia Hopes for Free Vote in '90
LEAD: After voting in the first parliamentary elections to be held in Croatia in more than five decades, Prime Minister Ante Markovic said today that the Yugoslav Government intends to conduct free, multiparty national elections before the end of this year.


Millions Join Battle for a Beloved Planet
LEAD: Two decades after the birth of the modern environmental movement, millions of people around the nation and the world renewed the call to arms for an endangered planet yesterday with an exuberant and bittersweet celebration of Earth Day 1990.


Philip Amram, 90; Led U.S. Delegation To World Law Talks
LEAD: Philip Werner Amram, an expert on international private law and chairman of the United States delegation to the 1972 Hague Conference on International Private Law, died on Friday at the Allendale Nursing Home in Allendale, N.J. after a long illness.
He was 90 years old and had lived in Washington more than 40 years.


POPE WILL SUMMON BISHOPS TO ASSESS COMMUNISM'S FALL
LEAD: As he crossed this country carrying a message of European unity and liberty, Pope John Paul II said today that he would call a special synod of Europe's Roman Catholic bishops to consider the religious and social implications of Communism's collapse.


World to Vilnius: Suffer
LEAD: When an individual becomes a dissident, he or she is seen by the outside world as a hero: a Sakharov or Mandela stirs the conscience of the world.
But when a captive nation becomes a dissident, its resistance to oppression becomes an inconvenience to mankind; it is accused of being an impediment to the Big Picture, a threat to worshipers of the idol of


Review/Television;   A Subtly Guided Tour Of a Park and Its People
LEAD: No doubt there are goings-on that Frederick Wiseman missed in ''Central Park,'' his latest television essay on an American phenomenon, but not many.
The three-hour tour, at 8 tonight on Channel 13, delivers flora, fauna and, mostly, the folks Mr.
Wiseman encountered during five weeks in May and June 1988.


Polish Police Accused in a Fatal Fire
LEAD: A fire today swept through the apartment of an investigative journalist who has exposed abuses by the secret police, killing his wife, and the incident was immediately seized upon by critics who contend the Solidarity-led Government is moving too slowly in destroying the remnants of the Communist security apparatus.


Sports of The Times;   Steinberg Spurns 'Dee-fense'
LEAD: ONLY time will tell.
But the Jets' future could turn on Dick Steinberg's first personnel decision as the team's new general manager.
Turn up toward the Super Bowl or turn down to another treadmill.


Time for Reconciliation Of German-Polish Strife
LEAD: To the Editor:


Israel Says It Helped Finance Settlers in Christian Quarter
LEAD: The Israeli Government acknowledged tonight that it had secretly provided almost $2 million to help establish a new Jewish settlement in the Christian quarter of Jerusalem's Old City 10 days ago.


Conde Nast's Gamble: Creating Yet Another Image for Self
LEAD: After 11 years of proclaiming the importance of self-renewal to women, Self magazine is renewing itself.
Again.
But this time it's different, insists Alexandra Penney, Self's fourth editor in chief since 1979.
It involves a complete remake of the monthly magazine.
A new cover look.
An explosion of graphics throughout the magazine.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: COUNT PAOLO MARZOTTO, a philanthropist who heads a new preservation group in Italy, will be honored by the World Monuments Fund at a lunch Thursday at the Mayfair Regent.
The Comitato Italiano, which wants to raise $1 million a year for the preservation of Italian art and architecture, has adopted three projects which will be supported with matching grants from American sponsors.


The 17 Westerners Left Behind in Captivity
LEAD: With the release yesterday of Robert Polhill, 17 Westerners, including 7 Americans, are missing in Lebanon and believed held by kidnappers.
The Americans
Terry A. Anderson, 42 years old, chief Middle East correspondent of The Associated Press, kidnapped March 16, 1985.
Thomas M. Sutherland, 58, acting dean of agriculture at the American University of Beirut, abducted June 9, 1985.


Raymond Cantwell, 73 Engineering Executive
LEAD: Raymond J. Cantwell, chief financial officer of the Babcock &amp; Wilcox engineering company, died of cancer on Saturday at Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 73 years old and lived in Bronxville, N.Y.


Metro Matters;   Now It's the Law, But New Charter Still Riles Koch
LEAD: When Mayor David N. Dinkins named the final seven members of a politically crucial commission last week, the panel closely reflected New York City's population: seven whites, four blacks, three Hispanic members and one Asian-American.


Books of The Times;   Peering Into a Family's Haunted Past
LEAD:
The Music Room
By Dennis McFarland
275 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.


Newborn Twin's Heart Transplanted to Sister
LEAD: Doctors have saved the life of a baby girl born with a fatal heart defect by giving her the heart of her brain-dead twin brother.


In Hong Kong, a Deepening Sense of Despair and Betrayal
LEAD: The feeling of betrayal is heavy in the Hong Kong air, but when people here dissect the territory's crisis, they sometimes speak most bitterly not of hard-liners in Beijing but of Government officials in London.


AIDS WAR SHUNNED BY MANY DOCTORS
LEAD: Nine years into the AIDS epidemic, most of the nation's physicians are still failing to take part in the fight to treat and control the deadly disease, many health experts say.


Floods Ravage Australia
LEAD: Australia's worst floods in a century cut off outback towns and forced hundreds of people to take refuge on the roofs of their submerged homes today in the eastern states of Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria.
The authorities say many people have been reported missing but only one death was reported.


Iran Reportedly Gave Weapons To Obtain U.S. Hostage Release
LEAD: The Iranian Government gave Muslim fundamentalists in Lebanon weapons and financial assistance to persuade them to release American hostages, according to security officials here.


The Move to Modular Software
LEAD: A vast transformation is beginning in the way computer programs are designed.
The change promises to allow software to be produced more quickly and to make computers easier to use.


Bridge
LEAD: Very few deals are suitable for the old challenge: ''Would you like to play or defend?'' The diagramed layout is one of that select minority.
How do you fancy your chances in five diamonds redoubled after the lead of the heart ace?


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Economy


Candy Maker Dealt Blow on Sugar Quotas
LEAD: A Chicago candy maker's request to buy sugar at world prices instead of at the sharply higher domestic United States price has been rejected by a Commerce Department examiner, Congressional aides and industry officials say.


When Plant Shuts Down, Retraining Laid-Off Workers Is Toughest Job Yet
LEAD: Spread over miles of fissured asphalt and chain-link fences, blocks beyond the western edge of Chicago, lie the carcasses of once mighty factories.


Seoul Seeks Link in North
LEAD: South Korea will seek joint oil exploration with North Korea as part of efforts to make the economies of the two countries interdependent, Government officials said Friday.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Abbott Laboratories Inc., Abbott Park, Ill., named Gary Coughlan senior vice president and chief financial officer.


In Europe, the Intentions Outpace Real Progress
LEAD: Western Europeans observed Earth Day by staging demonstrations, climbing mountains and planting trees today, but these events served to make clear that growing public support for environmental protection has brought little change in the way the nations deal with nature.


Rate Rise Is Expected To Persist
LEAD: Credit market analysts say the recent surge in long-term interest rates, which have moved to their highest levels in nearly a year, is not over yet.


Soviet Party Official Denies Plans for Total Blockade of Lithuania
LEAD: A senior Soviet Communist Party official denied today that the Kremlin was planning a total blockade of Lithuania.


Barbara Tobias Is Wed To John Daniel Russell
LEAD: Barbara Louise Tobias, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Tobias of New York, was married yesterday at Alger House in New York to John Daniel Russell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John O. Russell of Birmingham, Ala.
Cantor David Benedict officiated.


Telling Erin's Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yanks' 10-4 Loss Puts Skid at Five
LEAD: At the end of the day, Bucky Dent sat on one corner of the manager's desk and shook his head.
If he was trying to rid himself of the memory of losing five games in succession, it probably did not work.


Jets' Big Surprise: Unsurprising Pick
LEAD: Surprise. The Jets shocked no one with their first pick in the draft today.


Days Inns Plan in India
LEAD: Days Inns of the United States and an Indian corporation plan to collaborate on a chain of hotels in India aimed at travelers on modest budgets.


Johanna Lief Wed To John Socolow
LEAD: Johanna Lief and John Miller Socolow were married yesterday at the Harmonie Club in New York by Rabbi Gary Bretton-Granatoor.


Seizure by U.S. In California
LEAD: Federal regulators seized First Network Savings Bank, a small savings and loan institution on Friday, and said they had referred the matter to the Justice Department for a possible criminal fraud investigation.


Sea Containers Buyback
LEAD: Sea Containers Ltd., a marine cargo company based in Bermuda, said last week that it had set the final proration factor for its $70-a-share tender offer for seven million of its common shares and would buy back 61.1 percent of the shares tendered by each holder.
It said it had received 11.5 million shares under the bid.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Shift at The National
LEAD: The National, a daily sports newspaper started in January, has reorganized its marketing department into an advertising sales development department.
The job of marketing director, which had been held by Emmett Green, was eliminated.
Peter A. Spina, the paper's advertising sales director, said his department needed the marketing team to provide it with research and promotional work.


Property Taxes Should Be Passed Along to Regulated Rents Too;   Unfair Valuation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tough Going
LEAD: THE last time anyone tried to run an auto rally through South America, the organizers went broke before the race ever began.
But it took more than that to stop the intrepid drivers in the Trans-Amazon Rally of 1988.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: One of the largest AIDS research laboratories in the world is to open in New York next October, thanks primarily to IRENE L. DIAMOND, who gave the city $8 million to establish the research center.
Next week, MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS will present her with the 1990 Lambda Liberty Award from the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund.


At Lincoln Center, It's Regilding Time
LEAD: Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, preparing for the onset of the outdoor season and eager to make new friends, is treating itself to a multimillion-dollar shoeshine.
Part of the tab, $17.7 million, is being picked up by the city.


Louisiana Prison Editor Waits Governor's Word
LEAD: For Wilbert Rideau, who became a journalist while serving a life sentence in the Louisiana State Penitentiary at Angola, 15 minutes of fame have stretched to 14 years.


Three in Teaneck Will Talk Only to a State Grand Jury
LEAD: Three women, all neighbors on the street where a teen-ager was shot and killed by a police officer earlier this month and considered witnesses in the case, announced today that they would testify before a state grand jury investigating the shooting but would not speak with the local authorities.


Unions Oppose Icahn
LEAD: Forty-six union presidents representing 18,000 employees of the USX Corporation said they opposed Carl C. Icahn's proposal to split the company's steel and energy assets.
Mr.
Icahn, USX's largest shareholder, has proposed spinning off the company's steel business, saying two companies will be worth more than one.


Penn Varsity Wins in Sprint
LEAD: Pennsylvania's heavyweight crew staged a searing sprint finish today to defeat Brown and capture the featured varsity championship at the Redwood Shores-Stanford Crew classic.


Lincoln Cites 2 U.S. Memos
LEAD: Lawyers for Charles H. Keating Jr. last week disclosed two internal Government memos that had warned Federal officials to be on the lookout for former employees of Lincoln Savings and Loan Association seeking new jobs in the savings industry.


Argentina Tries to Sell Its Shaky Phone System
LEAD: Every morning, at telephone offices in cities and towns across Argentina, people line up to tell horror stories about telephones that do not work, telephones they cannot get or bills that seem outrageous.


Texas High Court Cuts Into Secrecy in Civil Suits
LEAD: The Texas Supreme Court has adopted rules sharply restricting the practice of sealing court records after civil suits are settled.
The decision could allow much greater access to material that parties to a lawsuit would rather keep secret.


Business Scene;   Difficult Switch For Arms Makers
LEAD: AS military spending shrinks, the big names in American weapons manufacturing - companies like Raytheon, Grumman, General Dynamics and Boeing Helicopter - should be making plans to switch to civilian products.
They are not.
Naturally, these companies are reluctant to give up steady, profitable military work.


Lawyer Aims to Shift Blame To a Bensonhurst Witness
LEAD: In the Bensonhurst murder case, Stephen G. Murphy, a defense lawyer, has a simple argument. ''She's the one who is really responsible for this whole thing,'' he says repeatedly.


Almodovar Appeals X Given to His New Film
LEAD: The Spanish film director Pedro Almodovar has appealed a decision by the Motion Picture Association of America to award his latest film, ''Tie Me Up!
Tie Me Down!,'' an X rating.
The rating restricts the film to audiences aged 17 and over and could threaten Mr.
Almodovar's chances of matching the commercial success of his film ''Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown,'' which was nominated for an Academy


No 'Horrible Design Flaw' in the Space Station
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pamela Duke Is Wed
LEAD: Pamela Myra Duke and Laurent Guy were married yesterday by Cantor Mark Lipson at the Manchester, Conn., home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Duke.
Mrs.
Guy, 27 years old, graduated from Swarthmore College and is a third-year medical student at the University of Connecticut.
Mr.
Guy, 30, a son of Alain Georges Guy and Anne Schofield Guy, both of Paris, is a strategic service manager at Andersen Consulting in Hartford.


Poland's Jobless Rising
LEAD: Continuing its steep upward climb, unemployment in Poland reached nearly one-third of a million in mid-April, a Labor Ministry official said Friday.
He said the number of people out of work had risen to 318,000, up from 266,572 at the end of March.


Oilers Take 3-0 Series Lead
LEAD: Craig Simpson scored twice and launched Edmonton's comeback from a two-goal deficit as the Oilers beat the Los Angeles Kings, 5-4, tonight to take a lead of 3 games to 0 in their Smythe Division final series.


Question Box
LEAD:
Oldest N.B.A. Arena


Newspaper Advertising Continues To Weaken
LEAD: With advertising soft and profits down at many dailies, the annual convention of the nation's newspaper publishers, which starts here on Monday, is not expected to be a particularly happy affair.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Bill Croasdale, director of national broadcast media and program development, and Jerry Bonsaing, group director of spot broadcast, have been named executive vice presidents at Backer Spielvogel Bates.


National League;   Braves Stop Reds' Streak
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds figured they would stay unbeaten until they ran into a hot pitcher.
And Tom Glavine of the Atlanta Braves proved them right.


Fernandez Shuts Out Expos On 2 Hits
LEAD: After 13 games, the Mets, a team that is so talented and has been so touted, achieved some milestones at Shea Stadium yesterday that seemed a bit overdue.


Shaping Up for Slopes When Snow Is Gone
LEAD: IN the spring, most skiers forget about skiing until November, when snow will be on the ground again.
But a growing number of people are finding alternative ways to improve skills, correct bad habits and strengthen muscles used in skiing.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Magazines Sold
LEAD: Capital Cities/ABC has agreed to sell the magazines Compute!, Compute's Gazette, Compute's PC and Compute's Amiga Resource to General Media International, whose other titles include Omni and Penthouse.
Terms were not disclosed.
General Media said it would reduce the frequency of Compute!, a monthly, and would ''evaluate'' the other three computer magazines.


Schuster Backs Away From Grove Deal
LEAD: Simon &amp; Schuster, which had been expected to buy Grove Weidenfeld, has abruptly withdrawn its bid, executives in the publishing industry said yesterday.


The News Was Not What She Hoped For


Chairman of Horsham Adding Chief's Post
LEAD: Peter Munk, a Canadian entrepreneur and chairman of the Horsham Corporation, has been named chief executive as well.
His longtime associate, Jerry Garbutt, will be president and chief operating officer.


Microsoft Set To Add to Staff
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporaton said today that it plans to add at least 1,000 employees this year, increasing its worldwide employment by about 20 percent.


And Then There Were Seven
LEAD: Washington always had two ways of gaining the release of American hostages held captive in Lebanon.
One was high-risk military operations against Syria, Iran or Shiite terrorists in Lebanon.
The second was to wait quietly, depreciate the hostage currency and hope that the leaders in Teheran and Damascus would find reasons to solve the problem themselves.


Arson Burns Buildings In Hasidic Community
LEAD: A fire apparently caused by arson destroyed a commercial building under construction and damaged a shopping plaza in this Hasidic Jewish community, the police said today.


Bush Denies Any Deal With Iran for Release
LEAD: Administration officials said today that the release of the American hostage Robert Polhill was the result of months of messages to the Iranians that if they wanted better relations with Washington, they would have to unconditionally release all hostages.


Lorenzo Says He Is Proud of Job Done at Eastern
LEAD: Frank Lorenzo, characterized by organized labor as a high priest of corporate greed in the 1980's, has come in for some virulent abuse in his years as the chairman of the Texas Air Corporation.


Defense Rules Field In Draft
LEAD: Jeff George said he preferred playing for his hometown Indianapolis Colts, but could have been happy anywhere.
He said there was no added burden he could not bear playing professionally so close to his backyard, and no, he was not all surprised that the week preceding the National Football League's 55th annual draft yesterday offered the unusual events that made his becoming a


Reds Find Relief With 'Nasty' Bunch On and Off Mound
LEAD: THEY are known collectively as the Nasty Boys.
No label would seem more appropriate for Randy Myers, Rod Dibble, Norm Charlton, Tim Birtsas and Tim Layana, otherwise known as the Cincinnati Reds' relief corps.


Review/Theater;   The Life and Rhythms Of Mahalia Jackson
LEAD: In the liveliest scene of the new gospel musical ''Truly Blessed: A Musical Celebration of Mahalia Jackson,'' Queen Esther Marrow, who portrays the legendary gospel singer, endures interrogation by a team of musicologists at a New England symposium.


Report Cites Higher Danger Of Crime That Blacks Face
LEAD: Blacks are more likely than whites to be victims of rape or aggravated assault and are more than twice as likely to be victims of robberies, the Justice Department reported today.


Two-Year Notes to Be Sold This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of new two-year notes on Wednesday.


One Family Is Relieved; 2 Must Wait
LEAD: It was a day of joy for one family that had not been expecting it and a disappointment for two that had held out hope.


Review/Dance;   The Washington Ballet As It Changes Directions
LEAD: The founder and artistic director of the Washington Ballet is Mary Day, who is also one of the country's best teachers of classical ballet.


FOCUS ON HUMANS, CARDINAL CAUTIONS
LEAD: Amid all the Earth Day hoopla, John Cardinal O'Connor of New York added a note of caution yesterday. ''The earth exists for the human person and not vice versa,'' he said in his homily at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.


NEW YORK RALLY BACKS LITHUANIA
LEAD: More than 1,000 demonstrators waving Lithuanian flags rallied outside the Soviet Mission to the United Nations yesterday to protest economic measures taken against Lithuania by the Soviet Government and to call on the United States to recognize the Baltic republic's independence.


Norton Hints Of New Bid
LEAD: A third party may be interested in paying more for the Norton Company than BTR P.L.C. has offered, Norton said Friday in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Norton did not disclose the identity of the interested party or state what the purchase price might be.


Critic's Notebook;   On Coughs, Beeps and Wrappers, The Bane of a Performer's Life
LEAD: Pity the performer.
No amount of planning, rehearsal or mental preparation can insure a musician against intrusions from the natural or urban environment or from the audience: the rare earthquake, the occasional siren outside the hall or the commonplace crinkle of candy wrappers.


Phnom Penh Journal;   Come to the Land of Angkor, War and Profiteers
LEAD: In that hazy period more than 20 years ago, before Cambodia became a scene of genocide, and notables like Jacqueline Kennedy were visiting the temples of Angkor, some 60,000 tourists a year came to Cambodia and 200,000 visited Thailand.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Israel Underwrites Settlers
The Israeli Government admitted that it secretly provided almost $2 million for a new Jewish settlement in the Christian quarter of Jerusalem's Old City.
Page A3.
East German Hero
He is the future musical director of the New York Philharmonic, but in East Germany, Kurt Masur is a hero of the revolution.


The Editorial Notebook;   Old at Home
LEAD: The setting: Manhattan's wealthy Upper East Side.
The time: a cold, rainy afternoon in late March.
The characters: a young woman from the Visiting Nurse Service of New York and three patients, for whom she represents the difference between living at home and living in a home for the aged.


American League;   Jackson Clouts One as Royals Win, 7-1
LEAD: Bo Jackson hit his first home run of the season and Tom Gordon allowed five hits in seven innings today to lead the Kansas City Royals over the Toronto Blue Jays, 7-1.


Music and, Oh Yes, Earth Day in Park
LEAD: So many people converged on Central Park for Earth Day yesterday that Beth Cramer, sitting on the park's Great Lawn, could not see many of the speakers denouncing the degradation of the environment on the dais in front of her.


Washington Talk;   Selling Congress New Taxes On Flying
LEAD: Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner likens promoting the Administration's new aviation program in Congress to selling I.B.M. computers, his job in the 1960's.
Both are good products, he says, but this one is a harder sell.


Philip Morris Cigarette Vote
LEAD: If a Catholic priest from New York has his way, the Philip Morris Companies will stop making and selling cigarettes by the year 2000.


Beijing Reports 22 Deaths In Revolt in Western Region
LEAD: China said today that 22 people were killed and at least 13 wounded in an armed rebellion in its far-western region of Xinjiang this month.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of April 22, 1990:
MONDAY
Airborne Fght Corp
Howell Corp
Lubrizol Corp
Philadelphia Elec Co
Springs Inds Inc
United Technologies Corp
TUESDAY
American Brands Inc
Amoco Corp
Ball Corp
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc
Black Hills Corp
Carpenter Tech Corp
Cilcorp Inc
Cincinnati Milacron Inc
Con Ed Co N Y Inc
Cooper Inds Inc
Crawford &amp; Co
EDO Corp
Fedders Corp
Glenfed Inc
Great Westn Finl Corp
K Mart Corp
Kerr Glass Mfg Corp
Legg Mason Inc
Noble Affiliates Inc
Norfolk Southn


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
American Safety Razor Co., to Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, with a budget of $4 million.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing;   The World Is Often Too Much to Grasp
LEAD: AS big publishing houses have gone on an international buying spree, ''globalization'' has become the buzzword of the industry.
But now, some people are wondering whether there are really that many advantages in being a worldwide book business.


Property Taxes Should Be Passed Along to Regulated Rents Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Syracuse Wall Salutes 35 Students Killed on Jet
LEAD: The memory of the 35 students killed when terrorists bombed Pan Am Flight 103 will endure as long as Syracuse University stands, Chancellor Melvin Eggers said today as the school dedicated a memorial to the students.


Services for Abernathy
LEAD: In the church where he preached for 30 years, the Rev.
Ralph David Abernathy was mourned today by civil rights leaders and citizens as a man ''high up on the honor roll'' of the battle for racial equality.


Ceausescu Wept as He Faced Firing Squad, Footage Shows
LEAD: Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu begged for mercy as soldiers prepared the Romanian dictator and his wife for the firing squad, according to footage of the execution broadcast here today.


Linda Sheer Wed To Colin L. Jones
LEAD: Linda G. Sheer and Colin L. Jones were married yesterday at the Bronxville (N.Y.) Field Club by the Rev.
Ralph Ciampa, a Methodist minister.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred W. Sheer of Bronxville.
Mr.
Jones is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Jones of Manotick, Ontario.


Crum &amp; Forster Shift
LEAD: Crum &amp; Forster Inc., a unit of the Xerox Corporation, said last week that it would withdraw from standard personal insurance to concentrate on commercial insurance, specialty coverages and reinsurance.
Crum &amp; Forster will immediately begin to close Crum &amp; Forster Personal Insurance, whose share of the standard insurance market is less than 1 percent and represents about 11 percent of Crum &amp; Forster's business.


Outdoors and In, Lincoln Center Is Getting a Face Lift


Giants Do Better Than Expected
LEAD: As the National Football League draft started yesterday, the Giants were looking for a running back, a quarterback and a pass rusher.
On four of the day's five rounds, they got there by taking a highly rated running back, two pass-rushing defensive linemen and an obscure quarterback.


Review/Opera;   'Gotterdammerung' Ends Met 'Ring'
LEAD: ''Gotterdammerung,'' which received its first performance of the Metropolitan Opera season on Saturday afternoon, is the longest, perhaps musically richest, most muddled opera in ''Der Ring des Nibelungen.'' Its libretto, which Wagner wrote before the other ''Ring'' texts, is the most conventionally operatic, and its use of magic potions adds a disconcerting element of psychological inconsistency: in


Tektronix Head Ousted; Poor Earnings Are Cited
LEAD: Three years after his surprise promotion to president and chief executive of Tektronix Inc. over higher-ranking colleagues, David P. Friedly resigned on Friday at the request of the company's board.
Tektronix said a search for a new president and chief executive had begun.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Golf
Elkington a Winner: Steve Elkington came from seven shots off the pace yesterday with a 31 on the back nine to finish with a six-under-par 66 and then watched his challengers fade away as he won the Greater Greensboro Open in North Carolina by two shots.
The victory, on a total of 282, was his first in three years on the PGA Tour.


Who Puts Back the Cash in the Cash Machines' Caches?
LEAD: In a world of workerless robot-controlled assembly lines, guideless recorded guided tours, chefless microwaveable fast food and tellerless night-and-day banks, there are consumers out there who always seem to run short and wonder why cash machines hardly ever do.


U.S. Team Loses To Colombia, 1-0
LEAD: It was more of the usual for the United States soccer team today: little offense, a defensive mixup and another loss.


James Stewart Nods at Lady Luck For His Golden Age Film Career
LEAD: A director who worked with him just after he arrived in Hollywood in 1935 once described him as ''unusually usual.'' Even with a pair of Oscars on his mantel and after a distinguished career of more than 70 films in which he played everything from idealistic young swains to ruthless bounty hunters, James


No Overflow Field Expected for Derby
LEAD: Of the 30 Triple Crown nominees who raced in major prep races Saturday, fewer than 10 are likely to run in the Kentucky Derby on May 5, a race that is looking more and more interesting and less and less likely to attract an overflow field.


U.S. Mergers Firm Is Forming British Link
LEAD: In a sign of Europe's increasing importance in the merger business, the Blackstone Group, a New York merchant banking concern, is forming an alliance with a British mergers firm.


Slow Death for Drexel in Japan
LEAD: The improbably sudden collapse of the Drexel Burnham Lambert Group shocked Wall Street in February, as did the United States Government's willingness to stand aside as the firm crumbled to financial rubble.
But one of those caught most off guard was Masahiko Yamamoto, manager of Drexel's Tokyo branch.


Rangers Wonder if Ciccarelli Will Play
LEAD: zris King, who searched his memory without success when asked to recall his collision with Dino Ciccarelli in the immediate aftermath of a 6-3 loss Saturday night to the Washington Capitals, stood in front of the videotape machine this afternoon and conducted a more productive search with the remote control.


TEXAS CANDIDATE ADMITS BUYING SEX
LEAD: Clayton Williams, the Republican candidate for Governor, acknowledged in an interview published today that he had patronized prostitutes as a young man.


Paying for Politics: New York's Model
LEAD: The early success of New York City's new campaign financing system offers a healthy example to the country.
Ably administered by an independent Campaign Finance Board led by the Rev.
Joseph O'Hare, president of Fordham University, the system has replaced a regime that featured huge gifts from favor-seeking fat cats.


Colombian Cocaine: Tracking Down Dealers - A special report.;   A Covert and Major Victory Is Reported in the Drug War
LEAD: For Richard T. Garcia, the turning point came when three customers, whom he knew to be Colombian cocaine dealers, began discussing whether they were being recorded.
One of them, Javier Mendez, pointed to a wall in Mr.
Garcia's small electronics shop here and said, ''If they record your voice, you can always say it's not you, but when they put you on video, then they've caught you.


Market Place;   The Mystery Of the Gold Selloff
LEAD: NEARLY a month after investors in gold suffered their biggest losses in seven years, precious metals analysts are still trying to find out who or what caused the March 26 selloff, and why.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-11
An American hostage was released into the custody of Syrian Army officers in Beirut.
The hostage, Robert Polhill, was seized more than three years ago by pro-Iranian kidnappers.
Page A1


Wall Street's Latest Racquet
LEAD: IT is hardly surprising that squash, a game long associated with the leisure class, supposedly got its 19th-century start among the most leisured class of all, debtors confined to London's Fleet Prison.


Nets Lose and Set Some Sorry Marks
LEAD: It was fitting that the Nets ended their season tonight by losing to an expansion team, the Orlando Magic, 110-102.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   An Unusual New Shop In Detroit
LEAD: THERE is not much variety in the resumes of most advertising agency chairmen; their forte is either creating ads or running a business.
Not so with the leaders of Cognos Advertising Inc., an unconventional new agency in Detroit.
It's co-chairmen are black Baptist preachers, who have enlisted in their cause a white Southerner who co-founded


Victims' Rights Are Supported At a Memorial
LEAD: Several hundred people, many of whose relatives or friends had been murdered or assaulted, gathered at a church in Manhattan yesterday to remember the victims of violent crime.


BEIRUT KIDNAPPERS FREE AMERICAN, 55, A HOSTAGE 3 YEARS
LEAD: Robert Polhill, a 55-year-old American taken hostage more than three years ago in Beirut by pro-Iranian kidnappers, was released into the custody of Syrian Army officers on Sunday.


Ministers in Poor Areas Arming Against Crime
LEAD: Ministers in poor neighborhoods are arming themselves with bats, knives and guns to fend off criminals who threaten their property and their lives.


Big Manhattan Rally For Armenian Victims
LEAD: Thousands of Armenian-Americans gathered in Times Square yesterday afternoon to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the mass killing of Armenian civilians during World War I by the Ottoman Empire.


Police Plan Offers Treatment For Drug Dealers Who Ask
LEAD: When the knock at the door comes at the homes of suspected drug dealers in New Haven this week, the police officers outside the door may be offering help.


General Kinetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Kinetics Inc.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
5,173,669
3,375,207
Net inc
b256,619
c282,193
Share earns
.30
-
9mo sales
13,020,427
7,702,629
Net inc
b573,895
c945,243
Share earns
.66
-
b-After extraordinary tax benefits from tax loss carryforwards of $87,251 for the quarter and $210,572 for the 9 months.


Avon Net Doubles in Period
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. reported yesterday that its profit more than doubled in the first quarter from the period a year earlier, but that sales were virtually unchanged.


Banks of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banks of Iowa (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
5,179,400
5,633,214
Per share
1.30
1.44


Seacoast Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seacoast Banking Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,178,000
1,238,000
Per share
.34
.35


Kelley Oil Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kelley Oil Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
35,815,000
19,270,000
Net inc
192,000
b505,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
11,561,275
10,900,000
b-Net loss


G.M. Plans Production Change-Over
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it would close a Pontiac, Mich., truck plant and retool its Linden, N.J., car assembly plant for truck production.


Bakeries Are Bombed and Police See Link
LEAD: Windows of a bakery in Little Italy and a bakery in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn were shattered by pipe bombs early yesterday, the police said.


Penn Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Central Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
486,600,000
343,100,000
Net inc
25,000,000
b92,700,000
Share earns
.38
1.31
b-Included a gain of $74.7 million on sale of foreign units.


For the Elderly Overseas, Grass Is No Greener;   Staying at Home
LEAD: To the Editor:


Protesters on the Environment Tie Up Wall Street
LEAD: Hundreds of demonstrators - chanting ''Corporate greed has got to go!'' and ''People before profit!'' - gathered near the New York Stock Exchange early yesterday morning to protest what they called corporate destruction of the environment and disrespect for human rights.


Independent Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,010,000
2,354,000
Per share
.20
.46
The company said the latest quarter's earnings included a $1,840,000 provision for loan losses, bringing the reserve for loan losses to $7,791,000 as of March 31.


Columbia Savings Move
LEAD: The Columbia Savings and Loan Association said today that its chief financial officer, David A. Sachs, had resigned effective May 11 to pursue other opportunities.
Edward G. Harshfield, Columbia's chief executive, will serve as acting chief financial officer until a successor is named.
Mr.
Sachs took on the position in January after serving as executive vice president.


U.S. Fears Iraq Is Seeking Long-Range Missile Site
LEAD: Bush Administration officials are concerned that Iraq is trying to develop a test site outside of its territory for firing new long-range missiles.


Oregon Metallurgical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oregon Metallurgical (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
25,822,000
26,201,000
Net inc
2,649,000
b14,944,000
Share earns
.25
1.61
Shares outst
10,420,000
9,303,000
b-Included earnings from operations of $2,717,000, or 30 cents a share, plus a gain of $11,070,000, or $1.19 a share, from interest earned on a tax refund.


Paolo Ajroldi, Advertising Executive, 57
LEAD: Paolo Ajroldi, an international advertising executive, died of a heart attack Friday at his home in Chantilly, France.
He was 57 years old.


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
315,958,000
281,543,000
Net inc
b14,166,000
c4,701,000
Share earns
.16
.05
Shares outst
83,804,000
88,638,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $2,341,000.


Making German Twain Meet Is Difficult
LEAD: Whenever people in one country do business with people in another, they have to exchange their currencies.
When Americans shop in Italy, for example, there must be a rate of exchange that tells them how many lire they will get for each of their dollars.


American Television &amp; Comunications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Television &amp; Comunications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
266,447,000
232,734,000
Net inc
26,802,000
20,484,000
Share earns
.25
.19
American Television &amp; Communications Corp. is an 82 percent-owned subsidiary of Time Warner Inc.


Time Warner reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Time Warner (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,741,000,000
1,136,000,000
Net loss
51,000,000
b50,000,000
Share earns
-
.88
Shares outst
57,500,000
56,600,000
b-Net income
The company accounted for its acquisition of a 59.3 percent common stock interest in Warner Communications Inc.


Bankeast Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankeast Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
3,063,000
b932,000
Per share
-
.08
Shares outst
11,891,000
11,908,000
b-Net income


District Pays Its Way
LEAD: To the Editor:


Good Guys Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Good Guys Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
62,495,000
42,166,000
Net inc
1,122,000
571,000
Share earns
.25
.13
Shares outst
4,497,000
4,407,000
6mo sales
149,844,000
100,979,000
Net inc
4,743,000
2,753,000
Share earns
1.06
.63
Shares outst
4,481,000
4,396,000


Stock Retreat Continues as Dow Falls 29.28
LEAD: Stock prices slumped yesterday for the fourth straight session, giving ground to rising interest rates, disappointing earnings and persistent selling programs.


National City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,124,000
b4,476,000
Per share
.27
1.08
b-Included an after-tax gain of $3,093,000 from the sale of a subsidiary.


Detroit Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detroit Edison Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
815,561,000
790,121,000
Net inc
136,548,000
102,748,000
Share earns
.87
.64
Shares outst
146,863,516
146,785,349
The company said net income included accretion income of $8,138,000, or 6 cents a share, for the 1990 quarter, compared with $8,631,000, or 6 cents a share, a year-ago.


St. Joseph Light &amp; Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Joseph Light &amp; Power (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
19,400,000
20,100,000
Net inc
2,000,000
2,700,000
Share earns
.48
.62


New England Electric System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Electric System (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
480,650,000
427,587,000
Net inc
49,387,000
40,963,000
Share earns
.78
.71
Shares outst
63,271,482
57,928,290


Eurotunnel Cost Estimate Up Again
LEAD: Eurotunnel, the British-French company, today raised its estimate again for the cost of completing the channel tunnel and predicted that the rail line linking France and England would cost as much as $:7.5 billion, or about $12.27 billion.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Friday about the costume designer Helene Pons misidentified the designer of the slip worn by Barbara Bel Geddes in the original 1955 production of ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof.'' It was Lucinda Ballard, not Mrs.
Pons.


Hold People Power
LEAD: A few months ago, when the Eastern atmosphere was more euphoric, Vitaly Korotich, editor of the Soviet magazine Ogonyok, said that ''We the people are the new superpower.''


Lance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lance Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Revenue
102,954,000
96,967,000
Net inc
10,835,000
8,436,000
Share earns
.34
.27


Shuttle Ready to Carry Telescope Aloft Today
LEAD: After a two-week delay costing more than half a million dollars, the space shuttle Discovery was declared ready today for a second launching attempt on Tuesday morning to carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit.


Eerie Quiet on Wall St. As Business Tumbles
LEAD: For years, Robert M. Bradley's workday seemed an endless stream of activity, leaving him exhausted by the day's end.
But now the 50-year-old broker on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange says he spends much of his day just waiting for the phone to ring.


Eaton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eaton Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
941,600,000
957,700,000
Net inc
b53,700,000
b67,200,000
Share earns
1.48
1.81
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $3,500,000, or 10 cents a share, for the latest quarter and $3,900,000, or 10 cents a share, for year-earlier period.


Beckman Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beckman Instruments Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
185,500,000
199,000,000
Net inc
8,000,000
10,700,000
Share earns
.28
.38
Shares outst
28,650,000
28,500,000
The company said currency effects reduced latest year's first quarter sales by $1.2 million.


Airborne Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airborne Freight Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
272,029,000
218,411,000
Net inc
6,343,000
2,660,000
Share earns
.72
.38
Shares outst
8,199,000
7,099,000
The company said that on April 1, Airborne Express Japan Inc.


2 Inmates Set Fire to Cell
LEAD: Two inmates set fire to their cell today at the Manson Youth Institution, the second day in a row of problems at the prison, correction officials said.
The inmates were put in segregation, a spokesman for the officials, Michael Donahue, said.
They were not hurt.
On Sunday, a brawl broke out as 30 inmates returned from recreation.


A Purple Staple of Britain's Vistas Declines as Agriculture Expands
LEAD: ROBERT Bunce, head land use researcher at the Merlewood Research Station, stood on a hill here on northwest coast of England near the Lake District.
The left side was greenish brown, covered with bracken and scrub.
The right, enclosed by a wire fence, was dotted with the soft, springy heather bushes with lavender blooms that once filled acres of hills, heaths and moors throughout


Financial Corp. of Santa Barara reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Financial Corp. of Santa Barara (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b37,701,000
c5,283,000
Share earns
1.71
.86
b-After an extraordinary gain on early extinguishment of debt of $36,534,000, or $1.66 a share.


Susquehanna Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Susquehanna Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,698,000
5,006,000
Per share
.59
.63
Shares outst
7,960,682
7,949,158


Giant Surprise in Draft


Paying for Murder
LEAD: It is an old question, but it will not go away.
When will the United States Government get serious about stopping the murderous behavior of the armed forces we train and finance in El Salvador?
Over the last 10 years, the U.S. has spent nearly $5 billion on El Salvador, $1 billion of it for military aid.


E-L Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-L Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
180,767,000
162,122,000
Net loss
b617,000
cd2,591,000
Share earns
-
.68
b-After an extraordinary credit of $689,000, or 18 cents a share, which included security gains of $2,766,000 and a charge of $2,077,000 for goodwill from an acquisition.


Meritor Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meritor Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
b29,197,000
c12,188,000
Per share
-
.35
b-After an extraordinary gain of $64,000 related to early extinguishment of debt.
c-Net income and after extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $1,671,000, or 5 cents a share.


Underclassmen Pursuing Golden Opportunity Gave Draft Glitter
LEAD: Junior Seau was elated.
He had called the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on Saturday night and told them his heart was in San Diego.
He wanted to play near his hometown, Oceanside, Calif., and his wish was granted Sunday when Tampa Bay, picking at No. 4 in the first round, obliged him and left him to the San Diego Chargers at No.


Evolution in Europe;   East Germany Aiding Survivors of Holocaust
LEAD: East Germany is giving money for the first time to support Holocaust survivors, the official press agency, A.D.N., reported today.


Gallagher (Arthur J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gallagher (Arthur J.) (N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
45,652,000
41,774,000
Net inc
2,926,000
4,560,000
Share earns
.24
.38
The 1989 quarter restated for pooling of interests.


Laclede Steel Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laclede Steel Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
76,280,000
81,130,000
Net inc
657,000
2,790,000
Share earns
.16
.69


INSIDE
LEAD:
Reversal of Blood Ban Set
The Food and Drug Administration plans to end its policy of banning blood donations from all people from Haiti, agency officials say.
Science Times, page C11.
Christian Protest in Israel
Christians said they would briefly close shrines to protest Israel's aid to a Jewish settlement in the Christian part of the Old City.


For the Captors, Less in Common Now With Iran?
LEAD: The seven American hostages still being held in Lebanon are in the hands of a variety of different pro-Iranian groups - each of which has its own political agenda, its own leadership and its own demands.


Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage Investors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage Investors (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
21,918,000
34,120,000
Net loss
35,014,000
b6,310,000
Share earns
-
.54
9mo rev
76,834,000
97,052,000
Net loss
26,834,000
b20,542,000
Share earns
-
1.76


Evolution in Europe;   Polish Free-Market Planner Comes Under Solidarity Fire
LEAD: The chief architect of Poland's transition to a free-market economy was questioned sharply today by a skeptical audience of Solidarity members, and he emphatically rejected calls for Government intervention to ease the hardships caused by his plan.


Landmark Graphics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Graphics Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
12,923,000
12,025,000
Net inc
890,000
1,421,000
Share earns
.10
.18
Shares outst
8,969,000
7,696,000
9mo rev
38,350,000
31,420,000
Net inc
4,022,000
b4,035,000
Share earns
.46
.57
Shares outst
8,748,000
7,057,000


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption with the Evening Hours column on Sunday misidentified Michael I. Sovern.
He is the president of Columbia University, not of Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.


Cummins Engine reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cummins Engine (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
861,400,000
920,800,000
Net inc
8,900,000
19,500,000
Share earns
.41
1.61


Business and Health;   Pressure Builds To Curb Medigap
LEAD: PRODDED by advocates for consumers and the elderly, state regulators are scrambling to tighten controls on private ''medigap'' insurance.
They hope to stave off proposals in Congress that would increase Federal supervision of $16 billion in annual medigap premiums.


Slouching in Jerusalem
LEAD: David Levy, Israel's Housing Minister, financed a new Jewish settlement in the Christian quarter of Old Jerusalem.
That probably broke Israeli law.


U.S. Agents in Mexico, Listed, Are on Alert
LEAD: Mexico-based agents of the Drug Enforcement Administration are on alert after a Mexican news magazine published a list of American drug agents operating in the country, Bush Administration officials said today.


Corrections
LEAD: The Metro Matters column yesterday, about the composition of New York City's Planning Commission under the revised City Charter, referred incorrectly to the Mayor's role in its makeup.
The Mayor appoints 7 of the 13 members.


Zions Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zions Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,012,000
b1,873,000
Per share
1.01
.32
b-After an extraordinary credit of $16,000, or 1 cent a share, from tax loss carryforwards.


Review/Concert;   Kiri Te Kanawa Sings Puccini And Mozart
LEAD: Armed with the correct expectations, one greets Kiri Te Kanawa in concert enthusiastically.
Never has the soprano from New Zealand sounded so well.
Sharing her Sunday evening at Avery Fisher Hall with Julius Rudel and the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, Miss Te Kanawa glided from one aria to the next, liquid and luxurious, producing a flowing opacity that covered both words and emotion with an impenetrable, yet highly agreeable, coating of beauty.


W.W. Williams Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* W.W. Williams Co.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,088,000
17,022,000
Net inc
350,000
299,000
Share earns
.35
.31


Smith's Food &amp; Drug reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith's Food &amp; Drug (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales e
487,745,000
399,241,000
Net inc
8,139,000
5,678,000
Share earns
.32
.29
Shares outst
25,272,000
19,361,000


Maxxam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxxam Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
572,300,000
572,200,000
Net inc
33,800,000
7,000,000
Share earns
3.55
.82


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Alexander &amp; Alexander of New York Inc., a unit of Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc., New York, an insurance brokerage, named Laurent M. Lassus executive vice president.


Comshare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comshare Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
25,336,500
21,765,100
Net inc
1,328,800
1,162,500
Share earns
.48
.43
Shares outst
2,740,300
2,703,300
9mo rev
74,813,000
64,739,400
Net inc
5,206,800
b3,282,400
Share earns
1.90
1.21
Shares outst
2,746,200
2,707,100


Forschner Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forschner Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
10,208,000
8,933,000
Net inc
355,000
292,000
Share earns
.09
.07
The 1989 first quarter restated to reflect change to the LIFO method of accounting for inventories that resulted in a reduction of $103,000 in income before income taxes and 2 cents in net income a share from that previously reported for the quarter ended March 31, 1989, under the FIFO method.


Lubrizol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lubrizol Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
357,170,000
345,181,000
Net inc
29,135,000
30,700,000
Share earns
.80
.82


Prospects Look Bleak For the Ailing Kings
LEAD: The night, the series and the season seemed to be summed up in a single scene late in the first period of the third game of the playoff series between the Los Angeles Kings and the Edmonton Oilers.


International Shipholding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Shipholding (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
72,647,000
43,550,000
Net inc
b3,412,000
2,897,000
Share earns
.58
.57
Shares outst
5,197,704
4,284,151
b-Included gain on sale of ownership interest in a vessel of about $1.3 million, or 25 cents a share.


Foster (L.B.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foster (L.B.) (O)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
56,343,000
53,450,000
Net inc
951,000
544,000
Share earns
.10
.06


Philadelphia Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philadelphia Electric Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
953,548,000
890,371,000
Net loss
b60,005,000
c143,310,000
Share earns
-
.57
Shares outst
212,171,092
206,762,855
b-Included a one-time charge of about $250 million associated with the various disallowances made by the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission in the Limerick 2 rate order last week; and a charge of 4 cents a share to reflect a previously announced settlement with the P.U.C.


Treasuries Post 7th Straight Drop
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities inched lower again yesterday for the seventh straight session.


New Competitors in Farm Loans
LEAD: The competition to lend to farmers has expanded this spring as agricultural supply companies tussle with banks to offer loans and financing on everything from flax seeds to harvest combines.


Milken Plea Is Said to Be Set for Today
LEAD: Michael R. Milken, who created the high-yield ''junk bond'' market that financed many of the big corporate takeovers in the 1980's, will plead guilty today to violating a series of regulations governing securities transactions, people who have been briefed about the plea agreement said.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Making Honey
Q. How do bees make honey?
A.
Honey bees collect the nectar secreted by flowers to attract pollinating insects and convert it to honey through two chemical changes and one physical change, said Roger Morse, chairman of the department of entomology at Cornell University, Ithaca, N


Another Departure at First Boston in Japan
LEAD: CS First Boston's Asian operations today lost its second top executive in the last three weeks, just as the troubled international investment banking firm begins to put a new strategy in place.


POLICY SHIFT URGED TO END DEADLOCK OVER OFFSHORE OIL
LEAD: The Interior Department has proposed a shift in oil leasing policy to open the way for increased exploration and drilling in coastal waters.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-15


Clouds Are Yielding Clues to Changes in Climate
LEAD: FRAGILE and fleeting, impossible to grasp, clouds have long eluded efforts to understand the powerful role they play in regulating the Earth's climate.
More than any other single factor, their mysteries have kept scientists from making confident forecasts about global warming and the climatic changes that are expected to accompany it.


Evolution in Europe;   Soviet Experts Say Their Economy Is Worse Than U.S. Has Estimated
LEAD: Several senior Soviet economists said here today that the United States had consistently overestimated the size of the Soviet economy and understated Soviet military spending.


Varian Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varian Associates (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
331,500,000
358,600,000
Net inc
7,800,000
12,000,000
Share earns
.40
.58
6mo sales
649,200,000
646,000,000
Net inc
15,400,000
21,400,000
Share earns
.79
1.02


Preston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preston Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
161,017,020
152,429,090
Net loss
215,240
b1,077,355
Share earns
-
.19
Shares outst
5,758,701
5,820,579
b-Net income


Evolution in Europe;   Chinese Prime Minister Is in Moscow for Talks
LEAD: Prime Minister Li Peng of China arrived in Moscow today for talks expected to focus on expanded trade and troop cuts along the Soviet-Chinese border.


Tyson Fight in Doubt
LEAD: Renaldo Snipes may not be Mike Tyson's next opponent.
Snipes was scheduled to fight Tyson June 16 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.
But according to Seth Abraham of Home Box Office, which has the live television rights to the bout, negotiations have hit a snag over money.


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
150,969,000
158,769,000
Net inc
6,439,000
7,508,000
Share earns
.61
.70
6mo rev
290,332,000
305,436,000
Net inc
12,650,000
14,614,000
Share earns
1.18
1.36


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBB Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,667,000
3,759,000
Per share
.29
.40
Shares outst
9,138,895
9,407,429


Worry and Optimism on 'Private Placement' Move
LEAD: Wall Street is watching - and so are some members of Congress - to see what will happen now that the regulations for ''private placement'' securities have been changed to make them even more private.


Alameda Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alameda Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,066,000
1,064,000
Per share
.37
.37
Shares outst
2,884,000
2,873,000


Arbitration Case Settlement
LEAD: The adversaries in the court case that prompted a landmark ruling on the way customers' complaints against brokers must be decided have quietly reached a settlement, it was confirmed yesterday.


Jets Decide It's Better to Go for Best
LEAD: The worst pass rush in pro football received no apparent help in the draft.
But should the Jets have felt compelled to take a pass rusher?


Next Vesuvius Blast
LEAD: An analysis of evidence about ancient volcanic eruptions has led some scientists to suggest that the next major outburst of Mount Vesuvius, the volcano that destroyed ancient Pompeii, may be much nearer than had been supposed.


HBO &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HBO &amp; Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
38,904,000
44,682,000
Net loss
1,305,000
b1,454,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
14,351,000
15,909,000
b-Net income


Bruins Closing In On Sweep
LEAD: The Boston Bruins moved within one game of their first playoff sweep of Montreal in 61 years as John Carter scored twice to lead a 6-3 victory tonight over the Canadiens in Game 3 of the Adams Division final.


2 Men Start Jail Terms In Howard Beach Case
LEAD: In a scene of intense emotion and bitter recrimination, two young white men surrendered yesterday to start serving manslaughter sentences for chasing a black man to his death in the 1986 racial attack in Howard Beach, Queens.


Federal Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Signal Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
107,120,000
96,503,000
Net inc
5,360,000
4,805,000
Share earns
.35
.31


United National Bancorp-N.J.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United National Bancorp-N.J.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,137,000
1,257,000
Per share
.53
.58


View of Milky Way's Center
LEAD: A ROBOT spacecraft that is scanning distant skies for signs of the beginning of the universe has produced a bonus: the first clear picture of the center of the Milky Way, the galaxy containing the solar system.


Knape &amp; Vogt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knape &amp; Vogt Manufacturing (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
33,269,240
31,201,762
Net inc
1,625,777
1,620,026
Share earns
.41
.39
Shares outst
3,918,461
4,107,147
9mo sales
91,141,819
84,360,035
Net inc
3,768,334
3,883,803
Share earns
.96
.94
Shares outst
3,918,289
4,130,236


First Union Real Estate reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Union Real Estate
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,941,000
18,990,000
Net inc
5,147,000
5,093,000
Share earns
.30
.29


Excel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Excel Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
209,000
2,119,000
Per share
.04
.34
Shares outst
5,537,587
6,213,852


Ennis Business Forms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ennis Business Forms Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
32,037,000
32,673,000
Net inc
6,197,000
5,630,000
Share earns
.47
.41
Yr sales
129,606,000
128,170,000
Net inc
21,027,000
18,839,000
Share earns
1.58
1.38


Cultures in Conflict: M.D.'s and Ph.D.'s
LEAD: KENNETH Culver, M.D., and Richard Mulligan, Ph.D., both work at the vanguard of human gene therapy, the grand new scientific enterprise to treat patients afflicted with genetic diseases by inserting foreign genes into their cells.


President Signs Law for Study Of Hate Crimes
LEAD: Appearing before an audience that included liberal Democrats, conservative Republicans and the first homosexual rights advocates invited to a White House ceremony, President Bush today signed a law ordering a detailed study of crimes motivated by racial, ethnic or sexual prejudice.


Economic Invest Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Economic Invest Trust
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,082,582
758,980
Net inc
986,557
691,178
Share earns
.57
.39
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Safeco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeco Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
778,038,000
705,273,000
Net inc
b56,292,000
b65,594,000
Share earns
.89
1.04
b-Included realized loss of $4,919,000, after taxes, from investments in latest first quarter and realized gain of $9,742,000, after taxes, from investments in year-ago first quarter.


Foothill Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foothill Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
23,575,000
24,318,000
Net inc
2,101,000
3,408,000
Share earns
.21
.34
The company said its first quarter results included a provision for credit losses of $1,015,000, compared with $693,000 for year-ago period.


Review/Television;   10 Years of Koppel and 'Nightline'
LEAD: All right, ''The Best of Nightline With Ted Koppel, 1980 1990'' is not without its promotional aspect, but the program that began 10 years ago with the taking of American hostages deserves some back patting.
As Ted Koppel reminds viewers at 10 tonight on ABC, he has tried to ''bring people together who are worlds apart.


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deluxe Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
344,986,986
316,926,087
Net inc
36,050,846
30,494,910
Share earns
.42
.36


Bemis Co.  Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bemis Co.  Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
271,779,000
265,098,000
Net inc
9,367,000
7,809,000
Share earns
.36
.30
Shares outst
25,721,000
25,994,000


Aircoa Hotel Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aircoa Hotel Partners (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,518,000
11,802,000
Net loss
1,172,000
2,409,000
Yr rev
55,165,000
55,614,000
Net inc
b27,760,000
c3,199,000
Share earns
3.72
-
Shares outst
2,520,219
2,347,392


CB&amp;T Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CB&amp;T Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,336,000
1,072,000
Per share
.37
.30


In Versace Shop, Theater Lives
LEAD: Gianni Versace has a hands-on approach to his work.
Not only does he know how to drape a dress, but he actually designs that way.
So when it came to readying his new shop at 817 Madison Avenue for its opening today, he worked for 24 hours straight making sure each mannequin was positioned properly.


Gorman-Rupp Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gorman-Rupp Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
29,310,000
27,206,000
Net inc
2,098,000
1,917,000
Share earns
.55
.50


USBancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USBancorp Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,051,000
1,474,000
Per share
.69
.47


Supreme Court Roundup;   Justices Reject Minnesota Exemption of Amish From Road Law
LEAD: The Supreme Court, examining conflict between individual religious practice and state laws, today set aside a Minnesota Supreme Court decision that exempted an Amish group from complying with a highway safety law.


Noble Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noble Affiliates (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
66,408,000
50,443,000
Net inc
10,411,000
b14,956,000
Share earns
.24
.34
Shares outst
43,905,000
43,716,000
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $8,825,000, or 20 cents a share.


Central Illinois P.S. Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Illinois P.S. Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
142,284,000
160,470,000
Net inc
8,232,000
3,198,000
Share earns
.20
.05


Review/Dance;   Ballet Chicago in New York Debut
LEAD: Where there is a will there is gumption and a sure sense of how to direct a new ballet company, as Daniel Duell proved when his Ballet Chicago made a sparkling New York City debut this weekend at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: With the world's attention centered on Eastern Europe over the past year, American University in Washington has landed as its commencement speaker one of the most notable players in that drama.
He speaks no English, but when ALEXANDER DUBCEK rises to accept a degree on May 13 at a joint commencment of the university's School of International Service and College of Arts and


DECISION IS URGED ON SOCIAL SECURITY
LEAD: Four months after Senator Daniel P. Moynihan of New York lobbed a political grenade into the Congressional budget process by suggesting a cut in Social Security taxes, his Democratic colleagues are being prodded to take a stand.


At the Funeral For Abernathy, Anger Is Eased
LEAD: In a ceremony that brought together his defenders and his critics, the Rev.
Ralph David Abernathy was eulogized today as one of the co-founders of the civil rights movement, not merely an aide to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Nearly 2,000 people gathered for the funeral in the West Hunter Street Baptist Church, where Mr.


Assailing a System That Beat Them
LEAD: It was the rarest of sights on Capitol Hill today: losers.


For the Elderly Overseas, Grass Is No Greener;   German Youth Corps
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beverly Hills Journal;   Celebration for the Earth Draws Most of the Stars
LEAD: The sun had just set over the Pacific Sunday night when the stars came out for Earth Day.


Great Lakes Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Group
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
26,900,000
25,200,000
Share earns
.53
.50
Results are in Canadian funds.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Banque Francaise du Commerce Exterieur, which holds a 13.3 percent stake in Global Marine Inc., Houston, an offshore drilling company, said it might sell its 13.46 million common shares.


Guru's Bomb Shelter Hits Legal Snag
LEAD: On the day when she had predicted the likely outbreak of nuclear war, Elizabeth Clare Prophet, a guru who says she speaks for God, was besieged by the concerns of a secular world alarmed at what she has brought to Paradise Valley.


Armstrong World Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armstrong World Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
640,400,000
618,700,000
Net inc
b65,200,000
c37,400,000
Share earns
1.45
.81
Shares outst
41,600,000
46,300,000
b-Included a gain of $8,000,000, or 19 cents a share.


Amity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amity Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
61,557
467,914
Per share
.04
.45
Shares outst
994,409
943,361


Tellabs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tellabs Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
49,270,000
40,405,000
Net inc
2,542,000
2,468,000
Share earns
.20
.20


SFFed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SFFed Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,633,000
1,327,000
Per share
.59
.17


Preseason N.I.T. Lists Pairings
LEAD: Vanderbilt, this year's National Invitation Tournament champion, will play Arkansas, a National Collegiate Athletic Association Final Four team, in the opening round of the 1990 preseason N.I.T.


American Medical
LEAD: The parent of American Medical International Inc. said it had agreed to sell its Swiss operations to Klinik Hirslanden A.G. for 250 million Swiss francs, or about $168 million.
American Medical Holdings Inc., which is selling foreign assets to pay down debt, owns four acute-care hospitals in Switzerland.


Asarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Asarco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
521,200,000
618,200,000
Net inc
35,800,000
68,600,000
Share earns
.86
1.63


Our Towns;   Testing Professor: A Big Developer Sues a Consultant
LEAD: Robert W. Lake, a professor at Rutgers, is nationally known for conducting research surveys. ''If money were my goal, I could do focus groups for J. Walter Thompson,'' he said. ''I could do survey groups about cat food or toilet tissue and get paid tons.
I could do social-impact statements for big developers.


Bottom Falls Out in Rangers' Loss to Capitals
LEAD: Mike Richter, his pads on his legs, his gloves on his hands, his mask over his head, took the ice tonight with all the appropriate equipment - just not the piece he required most.


Books of The Times;   A Canadian Dynasty, Lively and Unpleasant
LEAD:
Solomon Gursky Was Here
By Mordecai Richler
413 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Jones Plumbing Systems reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jones Plumbing Systems (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
38,734,000
33,614,000
Net inc
1,810,000
2,147,000
Share earns
.33
.44


First Fincl Caribbean Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fincl Caribbean Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,343,000
8,483,000
Net inc
804,000
702,000
Share earns
.32
.30
Shares outst
2,519,046
2,348,230


State Budget Delay May Cost New York City Extra Millions
LEAD: New York State's failure to adopt a budget so far could heap about $10 million in additional expenses on New York City, city officials said yesterday.


Dollar Is Generally Higher While the Mark Declines
LEAD: The dollar strengthened against most major currencies yesterday, benefiting from weakness in the West German mark.


Robinson Named Coach At North Carolina State
LEAD: Les Robinson, the basketball coach and athletic director at East Tennessee State and a former North Carolina State player, was named yesterday to succeed Jim Valvano as the Wolfpack coach.


Surgery for Howell
LEAD: The Los Angeles Dodgers' Jay Howell, who set a club record with 28 saves last season, will undergo surgery today for a partial tear in the cartilage in his left knee and was placed on the 21-day disabled list.(AP)


Avon Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avon Products Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
703,800,000
704,900,000
Net inc
15,200,000
6,200,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
56,570,000
53,880,000
Year-ago quarter had no share earnings because preferred dividends exceeded net income.


Real Estate Venture Set
LEAD: Cushman &amp; Wakefield, the national real estate firm, announced yesterday that it was forming a joint venture with Healey &amp; Baker, a London-based firm specializing in commercial real estate in Britain and Europe, to provide its clients with access to European markets.


East Germany, Coke in Deal
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company, the world's largest soft drink maker, announced a $140 million investment program to bottle and distribute Coca-Cola in East Germany.


Evolution in Europe;   Kremlin Orders Special Flights For Mecca Trips
LEAD: After decades of severely restricting the number of Muslims allowed to visit Mecca, the Soviet Union announced today that it would charter special direct flights to Saudi Arabia for the pilgrimage this year.
Muslim leaders said thousands of people had applied to go.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, whose administration has seemed alarmed by the revival of Islam in the country's southern republics, ''has instructed the Ministry of Civil Aviation to organize special Aeroflot flights during this period'' from Moscow and other cities with large Muslim populations, Mr.


Exxon's Net Declines; Amoco Posts Rise of 1.7%
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation, the world's largest oil company, and Amoco Inc. said today that troubles in their chemical operations had offset sharp first-quarter profit gains from their exploration and production units, which benefited from higher oil prices.


After the Meltdown, Lessons From a Cleanup
LEAD: AFTER the most arduous cleanup effort in nuclear history, workers at the Three Mile Island nuclear plant last week finished shipping 150 tons of radioactive wreckage from the damaged reactor vessel.
They are now preparing, 11 years after the accident, to begin monitoring the plant over the long term.


Norton Resisting Acquisition Offers
LEAD: Despite the interest of outside parties in acquiring it, the Norton Company reiterated in documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it would try to remain independent.
Advisers to Norton, which is resisting a takeover bid of $75 a share, or $1.64 billion, from BTR P.L.C., a British conglomerate, said the company was still holding talks with third parties interested in taking minority positions.


Clinton Gas Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clinton Gas Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,476,120
11,166,148
Net inc
181,773
b3,364
Share earns
.03
-
Yr rev
45,962,807
42,713,708
Net inc
75,666
83,258
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
6,130,335
6,133,767


Aspen Ribbons Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aspen Ribbons Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,022,879
5,537,711
Net inc
156,214
415,617
Share earns
.04
.11
9mo rev
14,691,356
14,366,260
Net inc
642,571
b1,091,084
Share earns
.17
.29


Several Dead as Police and the Nepalese Do Battle
LEAD: Several people were reportedly killed here today when angry crowds, frustrated by what they regarded as the slow pace of change, attacked several men in police uniform while officers rained blows on a Cabinet minister's car and shot at rioters.


Vicor Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vicor Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,351,000
7,284,000
Net inc
752,000
606,000
Share earns
.08
.06


Ashland Oil Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Oil Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,107,109,000
1,908,640,000
Net inc
913,000
c13,776,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
4,282,466,000
4,052,694,000
Net inc
b22,925,000
d82,103,000
Share earns
.41
1.48


Housing for Homeless Approved
LEAD: The Westchester County Executive today approved construction of a long-debated housing project for 108 homeless families in Greenburgh, the largest such venture in the county's three-year effort to ease its homeless problem.


President Signs a Law To Study Hate Crimes
LEAD: Appearing before liberal Democrats, conservative Republicans and the first homosexual rights advocates invited to a White House ceremony, President Bush signed a law ordering a study of crimes motivated by racial, ethnic or sexual prejudice.


83 Hurt as Amtrak Cars Run Off Tracks in Iowa
LEAD: More than 80 people were injured today when several cars of an Amtrak train carrying 394 passengers and a crew of 20 derailed in southeastern Iowa.


It's Denim, not Cute
LEAD: Like the luminous paper fans sold everywhere here, the streets unfold a shifting panorama of fashion.


Market Place;   Why MCI Stock Acts So Wildly
LEAD: VERY heavy trading in shares of the MCI Communications Corporation in the last two weeks reflects investors' continued emphasis on the company's quarterly earnings reports.


Abitibi-Price Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abitibi-Price Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
784,800,000
810,100,000
Net loss
b11,300,000
c26,300,000
Share earns
-
.35
b-Included a pre-tax charge of $13.7 million, mostly from the write-off of the Jaffe office products business, which is being liquidated.


Careers;   Veterinary Technicians In Demand
LEAD: ''VET TECHS'' - trained assistants for veterinarians - are in short supply.
Dr.
Franklin M. Loew, dean of the Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine, thinks older people living on retirement income, especially those with a science background, may help to fill the gap.


Vulcan Materials Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vulcan Materials Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
232,020,000
217,510,000
Net inc
18,677,000
b17,176,000
Share earns
.47
.42
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $1,490,000, or 4 cents a share.


Candela Laser reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Candela Laser
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,675,000
5,592,000
Net inc
b1,094,000
c682,000
Share earns
.22
-
Shares outst
4,806,164
4,094,143
9mo rev
22,559,000
11,401,000
Net inc
b3,142,000
c4,259,000
Share earns
.66
-
Shares outst
4,757,640
3,564,663


Western Federal Savings Bank (Puerto Rico) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Federal Savings Bank (Puerto Rico)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,212,742
b2,009,464
Per share
.79
1.26
b-Reflected non-recurring gain of $632,000 realized on the sale of the bank's holdings of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., or Freddie Mac, preferred stock.


Hostage on Way Home After Lebanon Ordeal Ends


New England Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
348,000
b2,201,000
Per share
-
.30
b-Net income
The loss for the latest first quarter included a $1,575,000 provision for loan losses, resulting in a total reserve for loan losses of $8,291,000 as of March 31.


Officer Charged in Death Of Suspect in Brooklyn
LEAD: A Brooklyn police officer was charged yesterday with criminally negligent homicide involving a man who died in police custody after being arrested on an assault complaint.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Times Magazine on Sunday about Harvard Law School referred incorrectly to a $1 million gift received for public-service fellowships at the school.
It was given by Walter H. Annenberg in honor of Judge Irving R. Kaufman; the judge was not the donor.


Material Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Material Sciences (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
34,886,000
43,077,000
Net loss
29,487,000
b1,897,000
Share earns
-
.38
Yr sales
152,747,000
172,393,000
Net loss
30,417,000
b7,874,000
Share earns
-
1.58


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Courier Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Courier Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
26,949,000
21,896,000
Net loss
b1,922,000
c1,144,000
Share earns
-
.62
6mo sales
49,858,000
45,798,000
Net loss
b1,840,000
c3,830,000
Share earns
-
2.08


Calmat Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calmat Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
148,130,000
152,618,000
Net inc
b10,398,000
b13,220,000
Share earns
.35
.43
b-Included net gains from disposal of real estate assets held for sale of $5,085,000, or 17 cents a share, in 1990, and $211,000, or 1 cent a share, in 1989.


Fletcher Challenge Cda reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fletcher Challenge Cda
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
282,200,000
335,600,000
Net inc
15,700,000
36,100,000
Share earns
.26
.60
Results are in Canadian funds.
The company is listed on the Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver stock exchanges.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the murder of a gypsy-cab driver in the Bronx misidentified a police lieutenant, Donald F. Stephenson.
He is commander of the 44th Precinct detective squad, not of the precinct.


Crane Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crane Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
352,152,000
348,149,000
Net inc
13,517,000
10,695,000
Share earns
.42
.33
Shares outst
32,300,000
32,910,000


Savings and Loans Were Always a Scandal
LEAD: To the Editor:


100 Are Arrested in Chicago Protesting Handling of AIDS
LEAD: About 100 demonstrators were arrested today in an AIDS protest march through downtown Chicago after they blocked traffic, the police said.


Ex-Treasury Official To New England Bank
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation, the troubled banking company operating under Government supervision while it tries to regain profitability, yesterday announced the appointment of R. T. McNamar, a former Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, as vice chairman.


Winfield Revitalized On Yankee Road Trip
LEAD: It was still morning in Texas, still quietly empty in the visitors' clubhouse at Arlington Stadium.
There were hours to go before the game would be played that day, but Dave Winfield was already dressed, and he was in a contemplative mood.


Wesbanco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wesbanco Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,224,000
2,220,000
Per share
.93
.93


Time Warner Reports Loss Of $187 Million in Quarter
LEAD: Time Warner Inc. yesterday reported a net loss of $187 million for the first quarter of 1990, but said its core operating businesses were generally doing well.


Isomedix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Isomedix Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,923,863
4,874,866
Net inc
968,997
714,361
Share earns
.15
.14
Shares outst
6,667,768
5,168,164


New York City's Schools See Crime Rising in Lower Grades
LEAD: Crimes against teachers are rising sharply this year in New York City's public schools, and some are being committed by ever younger students, new statistics show.


Premark Buying Tile Manufacturer
LEAD: Premark International Inc., a multinational consumer products company, agreed to acquire the Sikes Corporation, a ceramic tile maker, for about $201 million.
Premark will offer $16.40 a share for Sikes's class A shares and $26.78 a share for all class B shares.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Svensson Advances
Jonas Svensson of Sweden beat 10th-seeded Carl Uwe-Steeb, 7-6, 6-3, and Ronald Agenor of Haiti, ranked 45th in the world, eliminated 15th-seeded Magnus Gustafsson, 6-2, 6-2, in the opening round of the $1 million Monte Carlo Open.
In other matches, Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet Union beat Goran Prpic of Yugoslavia, 7-5, 6-3, and Sergio Bruguera of Spain topped Jean-Philippe Fleurian of France, 6-4, 6-4.(AP)


First National Bank-Michigan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Bank-Michigan
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
704,000
680,000
Per share
.58
.56


Vons Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vons Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 25
1990
1989
Sales
1,211,700,000
1,181,400,000
Net inc
b15,200,000
c13,400,000
Share earns
.39
-
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $7,000,000, or 18 cents a share.
c-Net loss


Exam Is Ordered for Harry Helmsley Despite Pleas
LEAD: A judge ruled yesterday in Manhattan that Harry Helmsley has to be examined on his competency to stand trial on state charges of tax fraud, despite his lawyers' contention that an examination might threaten his life.


Sudan Reports Blocking a Coup And Arresting Over 30 Officers
LEAD: The Sudan's military rulers foiled a coup attempt today without firing a shot and arrested more than 30 officers, a spokesman for the armed forces said.


Peoples Westchester reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Westchester (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,680,000
3,314,000
Per share
.32
.62


University President Quit Under Pressure, Chief Trustee Says
LEAD: The trustees of American University disclosed today that they had forced the resignation the resignation two weeks ago of the school's president, Richard Berendzen, who had built up the college's reputation, enrollment and endowment in his 10-year tenure.


For the Elderly Overseas, Grass Is No Greener;   Long-Term Insurance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Volunteer Capital reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Volunteer Capital (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
8,597,000
23,947,000
Net inc
b349,000
c2,313,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $504,000, or 13 cents a share, due to the repurchase of about $1.1 million face amount of the company's 8 1/4 percent convertible subordinated debentures at a discount.


Pilgrim's Pride reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pilgrim's Pride (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
177,968,000
158,002,000
Net inc
4,792,000
1,600,000
Share earns
.21
.07
6mo sales
340,636,000
307,904,000
Net inc
5,001,000
2,467,000
Share earns
.22
.11


Blue Jays Set Back Indians
LEAD: Tony Fernandez capped a comeback from an early seven-run deficit tonight with a two-run single in the sixth inning, and Fred McGriff and Kelly Gruber later hit home runs as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Cleveland Indians, 12-9.


Imported Sweaters Face Duty
LEAD: In an action that could lead to higher prices for sweaters in the United States and increase trade tensions with nations in the Far East, the Commerce Department ruled today that Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan were dumping sweaters on the American market and that importers should pay penalty duties.


Geotek Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geotek Industries
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,881,000
11,434,000
Net loss
b3,028,000
b2,372,000
Shares outst
1,838,000
1,545,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $476,000 for the latest year and $1,286,000 for 1988.


An Electronic Blackboard for Math
LEAD: APRIL is the cruelest month, so it is fitting that it has been designated Math Month.
Math was the cruelest subject for many students, this one included.
It now seems less intimidating, thanks to a program called Mathcad.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
West Germany offered a generous exchange rate for East German marks.
The move appears to be a major advance for German reunification, although it is still subject to formal East German approval. [Page A1.]  Many factors influence exchange rates, which in turn influence international business.


Northwest Illinois Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwest Illinois Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
736,231
413,884
Per share
.42
.38
Regarding the 1989 quarter the company said all figures reflected the acquisition of First National Bank of Galena on Oct.


Bridge
LEAD: One of the great veterans of the game led his squad to a comfortable victory in the Swiss Teams, which concluded the Long Island Regional Championships in Hempstead on Sunday.
Victor Mitchell of Manhattan, whose international credits include a silver medal in the 1964 World Team Olympiad, was teamed with Seymour Reich and Michael Radin, also of Manhattan, Michael Kopera of Brooklyn and Howard Hertzberg of Alpine, N.J.


Japanese in Offer For Aquascutum
LEAD: Aquascutum Group P.L.C., the British clothing retailer, has accepted a friendly offer valued at $:73.8 million, or $120 million, from a Japanese clothing company.
Renown Inc. offered 200 pence, or $3.26, for each of Aquascutum's 27.3 million special A shares, the companies said.
In addition, Renown offered 550 pence, or $8.97, for each of the company's 3.5 million ordinary shares.


Mosinee Paper Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mosinee Paper Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
56,354,000
58,780,000
Net inc
2,882,000
b8,646,000
Share earns
.41
1.18
Shares outst
7,025,530
7,327,868
b-After a gain of $5 million, or 68 cents a share, from a change in accounting.


Polish Debt Hurts the Zloty
LEAD: Poland's Deputy Finance Minister, Marck Dabrowski, said today that he thought Poland's currency, the zloty, could be made fully convertible within three years if the country can ease its debts.


DMI Furniture reports earnings for 13wks to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DMI Furniture (OTC)
13wks to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
10,253,000
10,967,000
Net inc
25,000
432,000
Share earns
-
.07
26wk sales
22,854,000
23,828,000
Net inc
717,000
1,603,000
Share earns
.13
.26


Anger Over Racism Is Seen as a Cause of Blacks' High Blood Pressure
LEAD: ''HE was on the faculty at Harvard, but when he went to Harvard Square to get a cab, no one would pick him up - because he was black,'' said Dr.
Dean Ornish, a physician who was treating the man for hypertension.


Steinbrenner Stays Calm
LEAD: Even though his team is stuck in a losing streak, George Steinbrenner remains hopeful about the Yankees.
Perhaps more important, the team's principal owner says he hasn't yet decided to put pressure on his manager, Bucky Dent.


Museum Director Wins Support From His Peers
LEAD: The board of trustees of the Association of Art Museum Directors, after a special meeting at the Contemporary Arts Center in Cincinnati announced yesterday that it was issuing a resolution supporting the center's director, Dennis Barrie, and established a fund to pay any fines that may be imposed if Mr.


Charter One Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter One Financial (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,584,000
4,244,000
Per share
.50
.61
Charter said net income included net gains from the sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. stock of $1 million in 1990 and $1.4 million in 1989.


Iran Indicates It Will Seek Release Of More Hostages if U.S. Responds
LEAD: Iran and its Lebanese Shiite Muslim allies signaled their willingness today to keep pushing for the release of more American hostages if the United States responds to their effort with reciprocal moves.


Provident Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
654,000
1,863,000
Per share
.11
.30
Shares outst
6,000,806
6,182,922


Evolution in Europe;   SOLE OIL REFINERY IN LITHUANIA SHUT BY SOVIET EMBARGO
LEAD: Lithuania's only oil refinery shut down tonight, its reserves exhausted by a five-day fuel embargo imposed by the Kremlin in the hope of weakening the republic's spirit of independence.


Commonwealth Energy Sysem reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Energy Sysem (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
243,117,000
229,280,000
Net inc
15,327,000
20,733,000
Share earns
1.53
2.11


Inter-Tel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter-Tel Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
16,819,000
15,110,000
Net inc
331,000
90,000
Share earns
.04
.01


Illinois Central reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Central
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
148,300,000
148,500,000
Net inc
13,800,000
b300,000
Share earns
.60
-
Shares outst
18,900,000
-
b-Net loss


Holtzman Criticizes Payment Of Delayed Project Contracts
LEAD: City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman said yesterday that New York City unnecessarily approved payment of about $30 million in delayed construction contracts last year, a procedure that could have cost millions.


Intertan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intertan Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
193,872,000
180,808,000
Net inc
b7,008,000
c14,015,000
Share earns
.79
1.60
9mo rev
545,742,000
521,795,000
Net inc
b28,175,000
c35,525,000
Share earns
3.18
4.01


Imperial Oil reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Oil (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,626,000,000
1,978,000,000
Net inc
b150,000,000
113,000,000
Share earns
.79
.68
b-Included a gain on the sale of oil and gas properties of $91 million.


United Missouri Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Missouri Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
10,281,000
b11,043,000
Per share
.82
.83
b-After a gain of $2,462,000, or 19 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premark International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
620,100,000
603,000,000
Net inc
13,200,000
22,400,000
Share earns
.39
.64


Westmark International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westmark International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
117,971,000
101,449,000
Net inc
b5,503,000
b3,460,000
Share earns
.52
.34
b-Included extraordinary credits of $385,000, or 4 cents a share, and $207,000, or 2 cents a share, for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively, representing realized benefit of international operating loss carryforward.


Doubt Over Champagneforashley
LEAD: Champagneforashley lost for the first time when he finished third in the Wood Memorial on Saturday, but his outstanding effort in defeat might have primed him for a winning race in the Kentucky Derby on May 5.
Unfortunately, the colt may never have the chance to prove it one way or the other.


Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
72,578,000
70,791,000
Net inc
583,000
1,190,000
Share earns
.09
.19
Yr sales
245,543,000
238,143,000
Net inc
b117,000
2,358,000
Share earns
.02
.38


Sandata Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandata Inc.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
3,058,335
3,262,190
Net inc
137,657
112,825
Share earns
.06
.05
9mo rev
8,831,519
8,534,487
Net inc
318,404
272,478
Share earns
.13
.11


Johnny Beazley, Ex-Pitcher, 71
LEAD: Johnny Beazley, who won two games in the 1942 World Series as a rookie to help the St.
Louis Cardinals beat the Yankees, died Saturday after having suffered from cancer.
He was 71 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ''I don't like the administration, and what is worse, I don't trust them,'' said Kate Fansler, campus sleuth in the 1989 mystery novel ''A Trap for Fools'' (Dutton, $16.95).
Ms.
Fansler, ''without children, unmarried, unconstrained by the opinions of others, rich and beautiful,'' is the creation of Amanda Cross.


Lima Journal;   New Racial Politics: Incas, Latins and a Rising Son
LEAD: ''No Japanese will govern Peru,'' said an inscription defiantly scrawled on a Peruvian flag brandished by demonstrators outside the house of Mario Vargas Llosa, the presidential candidate.


Beau Canada Expl reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beau Canada Expl
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
603,658
70,584
Net inc
152,417
52,888
Share earns
.01
-
Year-ago figures reflects results for Sept. 1 through Dec. 31, 1988 only.
The company had no revenues before Sept.


In Your Face And Other Niceties
LEAD: It is called, these days, ''talkin' trash,'' or ''woofin','' or ''in your face.''


Myers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Myers Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
45,250,507
43,244,896
Net inc
1,944,617
1,606,032
Share earns
.30
.24
Shares outst
6,639,252
6,612,899


Castle &amp; Cooke Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Castle &amp; Cooke Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Revenue
657,960,000
563,072,000
Net inc
18,075,000
12,485,000
Share earns
.30
.21


Middletown Has Changed Since the 50's, Mostly for the Better
LEAD: To the Editor:


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,129,000,000
6,521,000,000
Net inc
466,000,000
b458,000,000
Share earns
.91
.89
Shares outst
510,190,000
517,052,000
b-Included $57 million charge for consolidation in exploration and production.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: GRETA GARBO, who died April 15 at the age of 84, may have been a woman of mystery, but there is no mystery about her estate, according to THEODORE A. KURZ, the head of the trusts and estates department at the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.


Move to Ease Labor Strife At Eastern
LEAD: Martin R. Shugrue, the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to run Eastern Airlines, has moved quickly to address the long labor conflict that has made many travelers skittish about flying the airline.


Triton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triton Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
6,200,000
9,200,000
Net inc
198
417,000
Share earns
-
.04
Figures are in Canadian funds.


BONN OFFERS EAST A GENEROUS RATE IN UNIFYING MONEY
LEAD: Bowing to East German demands and domestic political pressures, the West German Government today offered to exchange West German marks for the East German currency at a rate that is very generous to East German workers and households.


Review Is Urged for Plan to Redo Part of West Side Highway
LEAD: In hopes of creating more open space along the Hudson River, Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan called yesterday for an environmental review of plans to rebuild part of the West Side Highway.


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
641,557,000
604,001,000
Net inc
115,865,000
104,083,000
Share earns
1.25
1.19
Shares outst
86,680,000
80,368,000


Washington Trust Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Trust Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,259,314
1,496,081
Per share
.69
.82


Acme-Cleveland Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme-Cleveland Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
52,361,836
48,253,295
Net inc
b1,850,122
c2,297,283
Share earns
.28
.36
6mo sales
99,693,264
92,113,111
Net inc
b3,533,393
c3,198,679
Share earns
.54
.49


Rebels Say Ethiopian Planes Killed 50 in Port Bombings
LEAD: Ethiopian rebels said today that Government warplanes had dropped cluster bombs in two raids on the guerrilla-held Red Sea port of Massawa, killing 50 civilians and wounding 110.


Fourth Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fourth Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
8,632,000
8,380,000
Per share
.49
.49


Genisco Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genisco Technology (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,354,797
9,258,619
Net inc
b270,178
c94,301
Share earns
.10
.04
Shares outst
2,769,358
2,674,041
6mo rev
15,986,081
17,426,618
Net inc
b388,227
c213,043
Share earns
.14
.08
Shares outst
2,762,360
2,673,946


Southwest National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest National Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,217,000
1,191,000
Per share
.45
.44


Lloyd I. Miller, Industrialist, 66
LEAD: Lloyd I. Miller, an industrialist and horseman who was a former United States Ambassador to Trinidad and Tobago, died on Sunday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 66 years old.
Mr.
Miller was ambassador to Trinidad and Tobago from 1973 to 1975.
He was a former chairman of Vulcan International, whose Vulcan


Fisher Business Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fisher Business Systems
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,518,263
636,653
Net loss
671,093
503,746


Thousand Flee Air Tainted by Plant Mishap
LEAD: A mechanical malfunction at a chemical factory late Sunday night sent hydrochloric acid fumes drifting over two trailer parks, forcing the evacuation of 1,000 people for four hours and sending at least 46 people to hospitals for treatment of exposure to the fumes.


G.O.P. Group Formed to Support Abortion Rights
LEAD: A group of centrist and conservative Republicans says it is mounting a three-year drive to change the party's platform and its firm opposition to abortion rights.


Kysor Industrial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kysor Industrial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
59,387,000
58,058,000
Net inc
1,653,000
634,000
Share earns
.24
.08
Shares outst
5,714,000
6,589,000


A Rookie Quarterback Impresses the Giants
LEAD: Last year, the man who may be the Giants' quarterback of the future completed 185 of 286 passes for 2,398 yards, 25 touchdowns and had only 3 interceptions.


Jefferies Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferies Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
33,192,000
34,203,000
Net inc
785,000
2,219,000
Share earns
.13
.34
Shares outst
6,126,000
6,565,000


Mark Twain Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark Twain Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,127,000
3,692,000
Per share
.39
.47


Tyson Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyson Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
931,887,000
534,854,000
Net inc
26,305,000
21,675,000
Share earns
.40
.34
Shares outst
65,617,944
63,910,781
6mo sales
1,832,704,000
1,037,268,000
Net inc
49,316,000
41,535,000
Share earns
.75
.65
Shares outst
65,607,887
63,890,067


Howard Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howard Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
17,490,000
b8,520,000
Per share
-
.59
b-Net income


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.18
9.88
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.73
7.70
8.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.87
7.81
8.65
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.95
8.93
9.20
30-YR.


Nigeria Reports 4 Are Dead And 160 Held in Failed Coup
LEAD: Nigeria's military leaders said today that four people had been killed in the coup attempt by junior officers over the weekend.


Stelco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stelco Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
636,979,000
739,368,000
Net loss
13,345,000
b32,747,000
Share earns
-
.83
b-Net income


Corporate Foods reports earnings for Qtr to March 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corporate Foods
Qtr to March 24
1990
1989
Sales
46,582,000
42,742,000
Net inc
2,723,000
2,205,000
Share earns
.14
.12
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Evolution in Europe;   LITHUANIA ACTION BY BUSH EXPECTED
LEAD: After meeting with members of Congress on Tuesday, President Bush is expected to announce some limited American actions in response to the Soviet Union's economic crackdown in Lithuania, Administration officials said tonight.


DSP Technology Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DSP Technology Inc.
Year to Jan 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,078,000
6,535,000
Net inc
384,000
418,000
Share earns
.19
.21


Reports of Harassment Will Be Investigated
LEAD: The State Attorney General ordered an investigation today into reports that three black women who are to testify in the shooting of a black 16-year-old had received harassing and threatening telephone calls.


Sabre Player Banned
LEAD: Uwe Krupp of the Buffalo Sabres has been banned from international competition for 18 months following tests that showed he had ingested phentermine, a performance-boosting stimulant, before playing with the West German team in the world championships at Bern, Switzerland.


Notebook;   Knicks Put Oakley on the Roster for Playoff Run
LEAD: The Knicks restored Charles Oakley to their 12-man roster yesterday, indicating that the forward, one of the National Basketball Association's best rebounders, will be in the lineup Thursday night at Boston Garden for the opening game of New York's three-of-five-game playoff series with the Celtics.


Khazem el-Khalil, 89; A Lebanese Politician
LEAD: Khazem el-Khalil, a Lebanese Muslim legislator and former Cabinet minister, died of a heart attack on Sunday during a visit here, family members said.
He was 89 years old.


Inter-Regional Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter-Regional Financial Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
78,417,000
70,167,000
Net inc
b149,000
c814,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-After an extraordinary gain of $67,000, or 1 cent a share, from purchase of subordinated debt.


For Farmers, Wetlands Mean a Legal Quagmire
LEAD: To the casual visitor, Rick McGown's farm looks like prime cropland.
And it does what good farmland should do, yielding more than 150 bushels of corn an acre last year.


Evelyn K. Hill, 88; Had Souvenir Shop At Statue of Liberty
LEAD: Evelyn K. Hill, who operated souvenir and food concessions at the Statue of Liberty for more than half a century, died of cardiac arrest yesterday at St.
Joseph's Medical Center in Yonkers.
She was 88 years old and lived in the Bronx.


Shareware: Getting The Best
LEAD: IT is possible to assemble a collection of powerful software without mortgaging the children by mining the rich lode of shareware out there.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Jan.-Mar.
Change
1990
From '89
Amerada Hess Corp.
$ 39,700,000
-82.0
American TV &amp; Commun.
26,800,000
+30.7
Amoco Corp.
466,000,000
+1.7
Armstrong World Industries
65,200,000
+74.3
Asarco Inc.


Evolution in Europe;   Russians Denied Refuge in Own Land
LEAD: Tens of thousands of domestic refugees are crowded so miserably into this city's depot crannies and outlying shacks that the funeral of one of their own, Dmitri Chikolenkov, proved to be an occasion of black comic relief.


Review/Television;   A Financier's Victims Scheming to Break Even
LEAD: Like most other broadcasting organizations throughout the world, the British Broadcasting Corporation has been coping with money problems as programming costs continue to increase.
The obvious solution of co-productions gives rise to rumors that the BBC might have to sacrifice quality for the sake of bottom-line compromises with outsiders.


York Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* York Financial Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,602,000
1,277,000
Per share
.54
.44
9mo net inc
5,869,000
6,110,000
Per share
1.98
2.10


Meredith Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31 Morgan Products Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meredith Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
199,108,000
196,721,000
Net inc
b4,775,000
c4,713,000
Share earns
.26
.25
9mo rev
606,746,000
583,079,000
Net inc
b23,543,000
c25,759,000
Share earns
1.27
1.35


Laserscope reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laserscope (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,820,000
3,858,000
Net inc
1,038,000
321,000
Share earns
.16
.07
Shares outst
6,685,000
4,882,000


United Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Federal Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,602,000
1,465,000
Per share
.31
-
Shares outst
5,157,428
-
Year-ago per share information unavailable as the company converted from mutual to stock ownership on Feb.


F&amp;M Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F&amp;M Financial Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,002,000
805,000
Per share
.34
.30
The latest first quarter included acquisition of St.
Francis State Bank in December 1989.
Per share earnings adjusted for a 5-for-4 stock split payable May 2.


Home Unity Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Unity Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b37,000
c409,000
Per share
.02
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $6,000.
c-Net loss


KLA Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLA Instruments Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
41,629,000
42,059,000
Net inc
2,160,000
2,920,000
Share earns
.12
.16
9mo sales
124,994,000
122,927,000
Net inc
7,217,000
8,517,000
Share earns
.40
.48


NS Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NS Group Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
62,225,000
56,979,000
Net inc
3,392,000
4,327,000
Share earns
.26
.32
6mo sales
118,889,000
101,763,000
Net inc
6,383,000
5,128,000
Share earns
.48
.38


For the Elderly Overseas, Grass Is No Greener
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pulawski Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pulawski Savings
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
702,000
1,162,000
Per share
.36
.60


Court Authorizes Sale by Braniff
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge authorized Braniff Inc. to sell its trademarks, flight certificates and operating manuals to a former investor who wants to start his own airline, which will be based in Dallas.


Centerbank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerbank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
b14,600,000
c2,500,000
Per share
-
.21
b-Included a special reserve of $2.4 million set up to write down other investments.
c-Net income


A.T.&amp;T. Debt Is Upgraded
LEAD: The rating on about $9.2 billion of American Telephone and Telegraph Company debt was upgraded yesterday by Moody's Investors Service Inc.


Poughkeepsie Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poughkeepsie Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
7,776,000
b1,866,000
Per share
-
.53
b-Net income


Filming Puts Bronx Vanities Out of Joint
LEAD: The Bronx knew there was something funny about the upcoming film ''The Bonfire of the Vanities'' when rain soaked the county courthouse yesterday from a crystalline sky.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the release of an American hostage in Lebanon rendered President Bush's reaction incorrectly in some editions.


C.I.S. Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C.I.S. Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,233,000
687,000
Net loss
48,000
1,239,000
The company said it was in a development stage in the first quarter 1989; it had been developing since 1985 the ability to transmit health care claims electronically.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: In times of fiscal hardship, volunteers are dear to the hearts of governments, and so Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS handed out awards yesterday - the start of National Volunteer Week - in the Blue Room at City Hall to five organizations and to one individual who has been likened to an organization unto herself.


Norwich Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norwich Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
14,304,000
b1,408,000
Per share
-
.25
b-Net income
Norwich said its loss for the latest quarter included a $16.5 million provision for loan losses, increasing its reserve for loan losses to $20.5 million as of March 31.


RPC Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RPC Energy Services (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
28,477,000
27,482,000
Net inc
b2,278,000
b1,909,000
Share earns
.16
.13
b-Included tax credits of $804,000, or 6 cents a share, and $722,000, or 5 cents a share, for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


The Cincinnati Case: What Are the Issues And the Stakes?
LEAD: The prosecution on obscenity charges of the Cincinnati museum where Robert Mapplethorpe's photographs are on exhibition is by all accounts a legal first.
Until now, whatever is in museums has been presumed to be art, and in an obscenity case the First Amendment protects works of artistic value.


By Design;   Color Fashion Fun
LEAD: Constantly wearing basic colors like black or beige is easy.
But it's boring.
This spring with so many clothes available in so many brilliant shades, it's a shame not to experiment with bursts of brightness.
And once you get going, you'll find it's fun to assemble an outfit involving more than one explosive shade.


Browning-Ferris Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Browning-Ferris Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
708,475,000
582,277,000
Net loss
b226,324,000
c58,783,000
Share earns
-
.39
Shares outst
153,221,000
150,848,000
6mo rev
1,405,962,000
1,145,822,000
Net loss
b159,832,000
c118,433,000
Share earns
-
.79
Shares outst
152,714,000
150,686,000


Amerada Hess Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerada Hess Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,661,600,000
1,484,800,000
Net inc
39,700,000
220,200,000
Share earns
.49
2.70
Shares outst
81,000,000
81,600,000


Chess
LEAD: Can a player who grew up taking pawns, refuting gambits and hanging in tight in difficult defenses ever turn into an Alekhine?
Watch out for Yasser Seirawan, a Seattle grandmaster of a Syrian father and a British mother who is branching out in an unexpected way - speculative gambits.


Graco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Graco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
68,147,000
66,681,000
Net inc
2,513,000
2,357,000
Share earns
.35
.33


Washington Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
888,000
b137,000
Per share
.29
-
Shares outst
3,088,399
2,978,119
9mo net inc
3,296,000
164,000
Per share
1.08
.06
Shares outst
3,038,894
2,978,119


Metro Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,281,000
1,427,000
Per share
.54
.61
6mo net inc
2,839,000
2,940,000
Per share
1.20
1.01


Key Witness Speaks at Bensonhurst Trial
LEAD: With her dark eyes darting around a Brooklyn courtroom, Gina Feliciano told her story yesterday.


Newell Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newell Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
257,886,000
271,865,000
Net inc
b24,155,000
14,033,000
Share earns
.40
.23
Shares outst
60,393,000
59,660,000
b-Included net gain of 9 cents a share, representing gain on sale of securities less writedown of certain intangible and other noncurrent assets.


Paulette Goddard, 78, Is Dead; Film Star of 1930's Through 50's
LEAD: Paulette Goddard, a vivacious film actress adept at playing both sophisticated comedy and sultry melodrama, died of heart failure yesterday at her home outside the Swiss resort of Ronco overlooking Lake Maggiore.
Her age was usually listed as 78.


Finally, End Home Pork
LEAD: Mayor David Dinkins will speak for more than New York City today when he appears before a Congressional committee to oppose the completion of a new naval base on Staten Island.
The nation's defense needs have changed radically since the Navy proposed an elaborate system of home ports years ago.
That system no longer makes strategic or economic sense, in New


Town Reactions To Death Upset Teaneck Police
LEAD: Anger, a sense of isolation and resentment toward many town officials and news reporters have settled on the Police Department since a 16-year-old was fatally shot by Officer Gary Spath on April 10, officials say.


Tonka Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tonka Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
135,900,000
162,200,000
Net loss
10,700,000
6,100,000
Shares outst
14,500,000
7,900,000
Results reflected termination of its video-game distribution agreement with Sega at the end of 1989, and slow year-end retail sales of some 1989 product introductions.


Demonstrators Carry Earth Day Protest to Wall Street


Capitol Transamerica reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capitol Transamerica (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,879,000
1,636,000
Share earns
.83
.76


Washington Energy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Energy Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
130,123,000
138,743,000
Net inc
11,782,000
14,301,000
Share earns
.72
1.00
Shares outst
15,390,000
13,642,000


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It was easier during the Brezhnev era in Soviet Russia to get yourself elected to the Supreme Soviet than it is to beat a breathing member of Congress.''
-Lionel J. Kunst, a Democrat who lost in 1988.
[A18:1.]


Calfed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calfed Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
18,900,000
17,500,000
Share earns
.75
.70
Latest quarter results reflected a $1.3 million after-tax gain on the sale of Anglo American Insurance Co.


New Schedule On Retail Data
LEAD: Representatives of the nation's largest retailers agreed last week to announce their monthly sales on the same date each month to overcome the confusion created because some companies have different fiscal year endings, the National Retail Federation's retail services division said.


Cleveland-Cliffs reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cleveland-Cliffs (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
59,500,000
78,100,000
Net inc
b5,500,000
c12,900,000
Share earns
.47
1.11
Shares outst
11,700,000
11,600,000
b-After an extraordinary charge of $1,100,000 relating to unfavorable court decision regarding benefits to employees whose jobs were eliminated in 1986.


Foremost Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foremost Corp. of America (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b5,202,000
b11,929,000
Share earns
.43
.99
b-After a capital loss of $515,000 for the latest first quarter and a capital gain of $4,064,000, or 34 cents a share, for year-ago period.


Grass Isn't Greener After Earth Day
LEAD: Yes, environmentalists do pick up after themselves when they hold a huge outdoor jamboree, but no, they don't all keep off the grass.


Communications Satellite reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Satellite (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
110,800,000
97,400,000
Net inc
19,000,000
16,500,000
Share earns
1.01
.89


Gundle Environmental Sysems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gundle Environmental Sysems Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
19,198,000
15,797,000
Net inc
400,000
459,000
Share earns
.04
.05


Ciccarelli's Out, but Druce Is in Gear
LEAD: The Capitals have lost Dino Ciccarelli for the remainder of their series against the Rangers with a severely sprained left knee, but they have apparently found a new sniper from an unexpected source in John Druce.


Merger Deals Fall 13%
LEAD: A battered junk bond market and other financing difficulties contributed to a 13 percent drop in proposed mergers and acquisitions in the first quarter, according to a survey released today by W. T. Grimm &amp; Company, a unit of Merrill Lynch.


Duke Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duke Power Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
855,416,000
863,235,000
Net inc
127,045,000
127,280,000
Share earns
1.13
1.13
Shares outst
101,282,000
101,273,000


Jerusalem Clerics Plan Shrine Protest
LEAD: The leaders of the Christian churches in Israel and the occupied territories announced today that they would close all their shrines for a day to protest the Israeli Government's support for a new Jewish settlement in the Christian quarter of the Old City.


Exxon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exxon Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
26,713,000,000
22,256,000,000
Net inc
1,280,000,000
b1,810,000,000
Share earns
1.01
1.41
b-Included a gain from an accounting adjustment of $535,000,000, or 42 cents a share.


I'm a Producer, Not a Censor
LEAD: Since October, recipients of grants from the National Endowment for the Arts have been required by law to sign a pledge that the monies will not be used to produce works that contain ''depictions of sadomasochism, homoeroticism, the sexual exploitation of children or individuals engaged in sex acts and which, when taken as a whole, do not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific merit.


Miriam Witkin, Soprano, 97
LEAD: Miriam Witkin, a soprano who sang on several New York stations in the early days of radio and who gave concerts at Aeolian and Chickering Halls, died in her sleep on Sunday at a family home in Bridgewater, Conn., after a brief illness.
She was 97 years old.


Girl Jailed for Leading Role In Pin Attacks in Manhattan
LEAD: A teen-age girl was sentenced yesterday to 18 months in a juvenile detention center for her part in a series of pin attacks on women on the Upper West Side of Manhattan in October.


Amid a Juggling Act, Miller Lands in Center
LEAD: When the Mets played an exhibition game yesterday against the Tidewater Tides, their Class AAA affiliate, Keith Miller knew the directions to Met Park in Norfolk, Va., better than anyone.


Servicemaster L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Servicemaster L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
432,077,000
384,599,000
Net inc
16,671,000
16,354,000
Share earns
.53
.50


L &amp; N Housing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* L &amp; N Housing Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,447,000
1,622,000
Net inc
855,000
856,000
Share earns
.39
.39


Interstate Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interstate Power (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
74,076,000
78,301,000
Net inc
8,577,000
9,514,000
Share earns
.83
.93


People's Savings (Brockton) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* People's Savings (Brockton)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
3,379,000
74,000


A Weak Ex-Hostage Arrives in West
LEAD: Bobbing a football and smiling broadly, Robert Polhill, the hostage released in Beirut on Sunday, arrived today at the American Air Force hospital here for what has become the ritual of re-entry in the era of hostage-taking.


Acme Electric Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme Electric Corp. (NYSE)
13wks to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,915,000
23,272,000
Net inc
992,000
783,000
Share earns
.21
.17
Shares outst
4,715,410
4,609,041
39wk sales
66,778,000
66,858,000
Net inc
2,575,000
b2,683,000
Share earns
.55
.59
Shares outst
4,694,543
4,586,177


Soviet View on Cuba
LEAD: The Soviet Union and Cuba are trying to improve their economic relations and can expand them further despite the diverging economic and political paths taken by their Governments, the Soviet Deputy Prime Minister, Leonid Abalkin, said here last week.
In a weeklong stay in Cuba, Mr.
Abalkin, the Soviet Union's leading economic reformer, signed a $14 billion bilateral trade protocol for 1990 and helped to set up a commission to discuss future economic relations.


Iran's Goals With U.S.
LEAD: Iran has various economic, political and military interests that could benefit from improved relations with the United States if Teheran uses its influence to help gain the release of American hostages in Lebanon, experts on the region said today.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
AD HOC COMMITTEE OF THE SPECIAL SESSION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Martin Marietta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Martin Marietta Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,418,870,000
1,316,352,000
Net inc
67,093,000
59,212,000
Share earns
1.32
1.12
Shares outst
50,972,735
52,840,507


Tone Is Mild at U.N. Session for Third World Aid
LEAD: Representatives of two principal third world organizations pledged today to follow development policies that place greater emphasis on individual initiative, and also called for more aid from the industrial world.


Pork Bellies Up by 2A Limit; Cattle and Grain Are Mixed
LEAD: Prices of most pork belly futures contracts surged the permitted daily limit of 2 cents a pound yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange after an Agriculture Department report showed smaller supplies than traders had anticipated.


U.S. Urged to Join Effort to Preserve Plants' Gene Resources
LEAD: THE Bush Administration is being urged to join an international organization seeking to preserve thousands of obscure plants and seeds that may hold the key to future food needs.


Bob Davies, 70, Star On Basketball Court In the 40's and 50's
LEAD: Bob Davies, an all-America guard at Seton Hall a half-century ago and a member of the Basketball Hall of Fame, died of cancer Sunday in a hospital at Hilton Head, S.C.
He was 70 years old.


Security Pacific Change at Unit
LEAD: The Security Pacific Corporation said today that it had replaced the president and chief operating officer of its Arizona bank unit, one of the few areas of the company to experience operating trouble recently.


Bus Crash in Havana Kills 11
LEAD: Eleven people were killed and 13 were seriously injured when two buses collided in Havana on Sunday, the Cuban press agency Prensa Latina reported today.
Among the dead was Eduardo Lopez Morales, 51 years old, the host of a popular Sunday afternoon feature film program on Cuban state television.


Suffolk Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suffolk Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,409,000
1,362,000
Share earns
.43
.41


Arco Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arco Chemical (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
685,000,000
699,000,000
Net inc
b125,000,000
116,000,000
Share earns
1.30
1.21
b-Included an accounting adjustment of $43,000,000, or 45 cents a share.


F.D.A. Set To Reverse Blood Ban
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration is planning to abandon its policy that all people from Haiti be barred from donating blood and is considering other options for protecting the blood supply, agency officials said today.


Freymiller Trucking Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freymiller Trucking Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
19,086,000
15,845,000
Net inc
389,000
294,000
Share earns
.16
.12


MPB Is Acquired
LEAD: The Timken Company, a roller bearings and steel manufacturer based in Canton, Ohio, agreed to acquire the MPB Corporation of Keene, N.H., an aircraft bearings supplier, for $185 million.
Timken said that the deal would be financed from existing capital and that it was not part of Timken's $1 billion investment program announced last year.


SJW Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SJW Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
12,324,000
10,784,000
Net inc
472,000
245,000
Share earns
.16
.08
Yr rev
57,585,000
60,520,000
Net inc
4,534,000
6,194,000
Share earns
1.58
2.16


Stewart Information Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stewart Information Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
49,081,000
40,045,000
Net loss
1,597,000
3,868,000


Review/Art;   Johnson Collection of Sacred Art in Warsaw
LEAD: In Poland, where economic strains have forced cultural organizations like the National Museum in Warsaw to reduce telephone service for staff members, the exhibition entitled ''Opus Sacrum'' is singularly opulent.
It is also an inspired event.


Strikes Strangling Nicaragua And New Leaders Cry Foul
LEAD: As Nicaragua prepares for its first democratic transfer of power on Wednesday, strikes and work stoppages have paralyzed dozens of key services and industries here.
Opposition leaders describe the moves as a Sandinista-led attempt to raise costs and create chaos for the incoming government of President-elect Violeta Barrios de


Fansteel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fansteel Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
42,030,000
43,227,000
Net inc
2,018,000
b1,168,000
Share earns
.24
.14
b-Included a pre-tax loss from discontinued operations of $204,000.
The year-ago quarter restated to reflect the December 1989 disposal of the metal products business.


James Alsdorf, 76, Chicago Executive And Patron of Arts
LEAD: James W. Alsdorf, a Chicago business executive and a patron of the arts, died of a heart attack Saturday in Chicago.
He was 76 years old and lived in Winnetka, Ill.


British Vote to Permit Some Fetal Research
LEAD: The House of Commons voted tonight to give scientists legal authority to experiment on human embryos, rejecting calls by anti-abortion groups for a ban on all fetal research.


Ketema Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ketema Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
44,970,000
53,960,000
Net inc
1,249,000
b7,296,000
Share earns
.29
-
Shares outst
4,306,000
4,402,000
Yr sales
190,432,000
-
Net inc
4,866,000
-
Share earns
1.10
.


La Petite Academy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Petite Academy Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
49,899,000
41,991,000
Net inc
2,669,000
2,036,000
Share earns
.17
.13


Blame Japan? No. Save Ourselves
LEAD: Japan saves six times more per person than the U.S. does and, as the accompanying graph shows, invests at a rate more than twice as high.
Sound scary?
Many Americans seem to think so.


Cosmetic &amp; Fragrance Conepts reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cosmetic &amp; Fragrance Conepts
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
15,431,000
13,046,000
Net inc
144,000
26,000
Share earns
.05
.01
6mo sales
40,205,000
32,580,000
Net inc
1,025,000
357,000
Share earns
.33
.12


Ask Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ask Computer Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
52,822,000
46,687,000
Net inc
1,029,000
3,182,000
Share earns
.08
.23
9mo rev
140,946,000
130,507,000
Net inc
2,372,000
8,740,000
Share earns
.18
.65


Son Accused of Killing Over His Parents' Rules
LEAD: Angry over rules imposed by his parents, 17-year-old Martin Tankleff smashed their heads with a dumbbell, stabbed them and ''sliced their throats and necks as if they were pieces of meat,'' a prosecutor charged today.


White House Seeks Broader S.E.C. Role
LEAD: The Bush Administration will ask Congress to expand the powers of the Securities and Exchange Commission by shifting jurisdiction over stock-index futures to the S.E.C. from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Administration officials said today.


Northwest Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwest Natural Gas (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
102,747,000
102,504,000
Net inc
17,567,000
19,206,000
Share earns
1.47
1.73


Chubb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chubb Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b111,100,000
b104,900,000
Share earns
2.56
2.48
b-Included realized investment gains of $5.2 million, or 12 cents a share for the latest quarter and $3.1 million, or 7 cents a share for the year- earlier period and the latest quarter and year-ago period also included fresh start tax benefits of $2.7 million, or 6 cents a share and $4.8 million, or 11 cents a share, respectively.


Hamptons Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hamptons Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
111,000
262,000
Per share
.13
.31


Goldsmith Ends Bid For B.A.T.
LEAD: Sir James Goldsmith, the British-French financier, ended his nine-month battle to acquire B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. today - and failed to earn a place in the history books for pulling off one of the biggest takeovers ever.


Harvard Law Professor Quits Until Black Woman Is Named
LEAD: In a rare gesture of protest, the first black professor at the Harvard Law School said today that he had requested a leave of absence without pay until Harvard appoints a tenured black woman to its law faculty.


Storage Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Storage Technology Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
259,918,000
214,121,000
Net inc
b8,503,000
c12,802,000
Share earns
.32
.49
Shares outst
26,686,000
26,222,000
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $683,000 from redemption of debentures.


BancTexas Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancTexas Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
2,163,000
b6,961,000
b-Included a $5.6 million loss from BancTexas Dallas N.A., which was declared insolvent and taken over by Federal regulators in January.


3 Found Slain In Bronx House; Baby Is Unhurt
LEAD: Three people were found shot to death yesterday, their hands cuffed behind them, on the second floor of a Bronx home that bristled with security cameras and floodlights.
The victims, two men and a woman, had each been shot in the back of the head.


Hercules Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hercules Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
771,412,000
739,398,000
Net inc
33,711,000
b59,805,000
Share earns
.72
1.28
b-After income of $15,039,000, or 32 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting, and included net non- recurring gains of $6.1 million, or 12 cents a share.


Mel Powell's Musical Journey to a Pulitzer Prize
LEAD: Mel Powell, who runs the composition department at the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia, near Los Angeles, has taken a path with several detours on his way to winning the 1990 Pulitzer Prize for music this month at the age of 67.


Action Products International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Products International
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
954,202
704,449
Net loss
21,221
66,242


Benton Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Benton Oil &amp; Gas Co.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
128,989
-
Net loss
123,071
-
Yr rev
408,997
-
Net loss
513,352
-
Year-ago results are not available; company began operations Sept. 9, 1988.


Airship International Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airship International Ltd.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,362,000
3,000,000
Net inc
51,000
302,000
Share earns
.01
.06


Agreement Is Reached On Bond Issue
LEAD: Ending weeks of impasse, top officials here today agreed on the largest environmental bond act in New York State history.
The nearly $2 billion package will be put before voters this fall.


Delmarva Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delmarva Power &amp; Light (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
219,341,000
209,377,000
Net inc
24,677,000
23,840,000
Share earns
.48
.48
Shares outst
47,195,000
46,379,000


Israel Defends Aid to Settlers in Christian Quarter
LEAD: Israel expressed defiance today over the international criticism of secret Government funding for a new Jewish settlement here in the Christian Quarter of the Old City.


Crack Vial Factory Found in Brooklyn


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Milken Plea


Japan Urged to Aid U.S. Universities
LEAD: The president of the National Academy of Sciences suggested today that Japanese industries compensate American universities for training Japanese scientists and engineers.


McKesson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McKesson Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,089,900,000
1,877,400,000
Net inc
18,300,000
25,400,000
Share earns
.40
.61
Shares outst
40,100,000
41,100,000
Yr rev
7,790,900,000
7,046,400,000
Net inc
98,700,000
b100,600,000
Share earns
2.23
2.38
Shares outst
40,400,000
42,100,000


Market Place;   Milken's Plea Reflects Ethics of Drexel in 80's
LEAD: Michael R. Milken, the dethroned king of ''junk bonds,'' admitted yesterday that he had cheated some customers, rigged the prices of some stocks and bonds, and engaged in sham transactions designed to fool Federal regulators and help a crony avoid paying taxes.


Monsanto Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monsanto Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,286,000,000
2,265,000,000
Net inc
194,000,000
222,000,000
Share earns
2.95
3.24
Shares outst
65,900,000
68,500,000


Texaco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texaco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,156,000,000
9,610,000,000
Net inc
328,000,000
b1,455,000,000
Share earns
1.15
5.91
Shares outst
263,700,000
244,400,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $1,190,000,000 due to a restructuring gain, primarily resulting from the sale of Texaco Canada Inc.


Enserch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enserch Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
771,038,000
752,118,000
Net inc
b44,737,000
35,844,000
Share earns
.64
.55
Shares outst
64,943,000
58,289,000
b-Included gain of $22 million, or 34 cents a share, on the sale of a 4.2 million share stake in Oceaneering International Inc.


Rorer Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rorer Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
279,923,000
241,169,000
Net loss
b7,688,000
c9,771,000
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
36,006,000
31,825,000
b-After one-time transaction-related costs totaling $26.9 million; $11.9 million in connection with the pending combination of the worldwide human pharmaceutical business of Rhone- Poulenc S.A.


Rooney Thinks Tyson Is No Longer Interested
LEAD: First came word that Mike Tyson would be training in a newly-built facility in Catskill, N.Y.


A Black From Bensonhurst Tells of Carrying Bats to White Friends
LEAD: A young black man from Bensonhurst admitted yesterday that he helped bring softball bats to where a group of white neighbors was gathering the night Yusuf K. Hawkins was killed.


Bears Cleared by N.F.L.
LEAD: The Chicago Bears did not violate National Football League policy when they negotiated a contract with Mark Carrier before drafting the safety from Southern Cal on Sunday, the league said yesterday.


WEAPONS NOMINEE WITHDRAWS NAME
LEAD: Victor Stello Jr., the nuclear power expert nominated by President Bush to take charge of the nation's troubled nuclear weapons program, has asked that his nomination be withdrawn, the Department of Energy disclosed yesterday.


Fifth Straight Decline Puts Dow at 2,654.50
LEAD: Stock prices fell yesterday for the fifth consecutive day in the wake of rising bond rates, with the Dow Jones industrial average falling 12.17 points, to 2,654.50.


Landmarks Panel Decision Is Blow to Developer
LEAD: The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission yesterday gave landmark status to a complex of 14 buildings in the Yorkville section of Manhattan that were originally constructed as a privately financed experiment to provide housing for the poor.


Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
12,610,000,000
12,160,000,000
Net inc
106,300,000
257,700,000
Share earns
.31
.70


Dissident South African Rebels Return Home
LEAD: The African National Congress faced the prospect of embarrassing disclosures from within its own ranks as a group of dissident members returned home today with stories of torture and imprisonment at the group's hands.


Arthur N. Field; Lawyer, 84
LEAD: Arthur N. Field, a lawyer for more than 60 years, died of congestive heart failure on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Control Data reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Control Data (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
421,600,000
843,500,000
Net inc
b6,800,000
c3,500,000
Share earns
.16
.08
b-Included an after-tax restructuring gain of $5.8 million primarily from the sale of a facility.


Review/Dance;   One Troupe, 2 Styles And Energy To Spare
LEAD: Two styles of dancing were happily allied when the Ballet du Nord performed Saturday night at the Colden Center for the Performing Arts at Queens College.


Man Shoots 5, Killing One, In a Georgia Shopping Mall
LEAD: A 31-year-old man who had been released from a mental hospital a day ago killed one person and wounded four others today when he opened fire in a shopping mall just outside Atlanta with a gun he had bought in a pawnshop on Monday, the police said.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: THE assertive, rich flavor of calf's liver presents a challenge - and endless opportunities - to the home cook.


California Edison
LEAD: The Southern California Edison Company yesterday priced $100 million in first and refunding mortgage bonds due in 1992 through competitive bidding, won by underwriters led by the Shearson Lehman Hutton unit of American Express.
Underwriters gave the bonds a coupon of 9 1/8 percent and priced them at par, to yield about 27.5 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   G.M. Is Top Spender
LEAD: Spending for motor vehicle advertising on broadcast television rose 15 percent in 1989, to $2.84 billion, the Television Bureau of Advertising reported yesterday.
The leader was the General Motors Corporation, which spent $846.7 million, an increase of 17 percent.
The Ford Motor Company, in second place, spent $381.9 million, up 12 percent.


Umpire Arrested
LEAD: Bob Engel, a crew chief among National League umpires, was arrested over the weekend on a charge of stealing 4,180 baseball cards from a retail store in Bakersfield, Calif., authorities said.


In Books, Greed Is Out; The Environment Is In
LEAD: If the books people are buying are an indication, a new decade has already ushered in a new mood in America.


Dalton to Help Authors
LEAD: B. Dalton Bookseller, the nationwide book chain, said yesterday that it would begin next Tuesday to promote first-time or little known authors by displaying their books prominently in more than 250 of its stores.
The decision comes as the publishing industry has been accused by some writers of favoring commercial books at the expense of less profitable works of literary value.


Mapco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mapco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
636,400,000
468,400,000
Net inc
36,700,000
35,400,000
Share earns
1.10
.89
Shares outst
33,500,000
39,900,000


Anyone Who Can Read Can Cook, Right? Five Men Find Out
LEAD: Five of us sat in the living room, making small talk, acting nonchalant, but in reality we were at loose ends.
Five women trying to play the usual roles of the men we are married to.
For one night the roles were reversed and we weren't quite certain what to do with ourselves.


Progressive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progressive Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
27,400,000
22,500,000
Share earns
1.01
.80
Shares outst
24,900,000
26,900,000


Ingersoll-Rand Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ingersoll-Rand Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
902,300,000
801,800,000
Net inc
45,600,000
b49,200,000
Share earns
.86
.93
b-After an extraordinary credit of $8.5 million, or 17 cents a share, representing utilization of capital loss carryforward from the sale of its finance subsidiary.


American Petrofina reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Petrofina (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
896,272,000
718,890,000
Net inc
26,218,000
b48,760,000
Share earns
1.70
3.32
Shares outst
15,460,438
14,675,000
b-Included $23 million gain from an accounting adjustment.


Harsco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harsco (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
388,471,000
370,034,000
Net inc
13,002,000
15,483,000
Share earns
.50
.59
Shares outst
26,211,000
26,412,000


Cincinnati Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
260,200,000
243,000,000
Net inc
35,300,000
39,200,000
Share earns
2.14
2.40


Homestake Mining reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homestake Mining (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
131,561,000
98,607,000
Net inc
13,249,000
b7,138,000
Share earns
.13
.07
b-After income from discontinued operations of $1,841,000, or 2 cents a share.


Yankees Snap Losing Streak With 6-2 Victory Over Seattle


Holding Concern Signs Merger Pacts
LEAD: The NUI Corporation signed agreements for Pennsylvania Enterprises Inc. and its Pennsylvania Gas and Water Company unit to merge into it.
In addition, the United Water Resources Company will buy the water operations and related assets of Pennsylvania Enterprises for about $220 million.


EATING WELL
LEAD: CARLOTTA FLORES would rather have a corn tortilla than a flour tortilla any day.
A self-proclaimed health nut in the land of lard and melted cheese, Mrs.
Flores has managed to provide an oxymoron: low-fat, low-cholesterol Mexican food.


Vincent J. Hines, 77, Ex-Bishop of Norwich
LEAD: The Rev.
Vincent J. Hines, Roman Catholic Bishop of the Norwich Diocese in Connecticut from 1960 until he retired in 1975, died on Monday at Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center.
He was 77 years old.


Allergan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allergan Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
195,100,000
178,600,000
Net inc
13,600,000
14,400,000
Share earns
.20
-
Year-ago results are on a pro forma basis.
Allergan, formerly a division of Smithkline Beckman Corp., became a stand-alone public company on July 27, 1989, resulting in a new capital and administrative structure.


Salomon Shows Profit; Morgan Stanley Net Up
LEAD: First-quarter earnings reported yesterday by two of Wall Street's biggest firms - Salomon Inc. and Morgan Stanley Group Inc. - were buoyed by strong trading profits.
Investment banking revenues at both companies remained weak, reflecting the continued slowdown in corporate mergers and takeovers.


Phillips Petroleum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phillips Petroleum Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,132,000,000
3,102,000,000
Net inc
b259,000,000
190,000,000
Share earns
1.06
.78
Shares outst
243,916,000
243,362,000
b-Included net gain of $148 million from accounting change, settlement with Iran and charge from sale of insurance company.


2 Chemical Makers' Net Off
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company, the nation's second-largest producer of chemicals, said yesterday that its first-quarter net income plunged almost 38 percent because of higher costs for raw materials and lower prices for some products.


Free to Speak, but Willing to Listen and Learn
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Studies Whether to Seek Tax Indictment of Rep. Flake
LEAD: Justice Department officials in Washington are considering whether to approve criminal charges against Representative Floyd H. Flake, Democrat of Queens, in a tax investigation.


Helaine Lasky Is Wed To Marc E. Schweitzer
LEAD: Helaine Beth Lasky, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Lasky of Pembroke Pines, Fla., was married yesterday to Marc Edward Schweitzer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin S. Schweitzer of New York.
Rabbi Gilbert Klaperman performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.


Students Rally in Support of Harvard Professor's Protest


Verda F. Welcome, 83, A Maryland Legislator
LEAD: Verda Freeman Welcome, who was the first black woman to become a state senator in Maryland, died in a Baltimore hospital on Sunday after a series of strokes.
She was 83 years old.


Project for Homeless Delayed
LEAD: Acting Justice Donald Silverman in State Supreme Court granted a temporary injunction today prohibiting WestHELP from starting work on a 108-unit housing project for homeless people.
The ruling came in a suit filed by the Coalition for United Peoples, known as COUP, which said the construction would violate state environmental law and state education law.


Captive Audiences
LEAD: Moviegoers who resent the commercials they're forced to watch before the main feature can applaud the Walt Disney studio's ultimatum to theater owners: No more commercials when Disney films are playing.
Warner Brothers has now followed suit.
More applause.


Mercury Capri To Cost $12,588
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company today set $12,588 as the base price for its new Mercury Capri two-seat sports convertible, a model that Ford hopes will emulate the success of the Mazda Miata.


Metro Datelines;   Priest Is Arrested In Sex Abuse of Boys
LEAD: A Roman Catholic priest was arrested yesterday and charged with sexually abusing three boys he met as a parish priest in Queens, the police said.


Hitachi Opens U.S. Lab
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd. has opened a biotechnology center at the University of California here that is believed to be the first research lab operated by a Japanese company at an American university.
Hitachi officials said on Monday that they hoped the $16.5 million laboratory, called Plumwood House because of its plum color, would allow the company to advance in areas like neuroscience and biochemistry.


Amdahl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amdahl Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
506,764,000
470,312,000
Net inc
29,904,000
45,595,000
Share earns
.27
.42
Shares outst
110,013,000
109,329,000


Ernest W. Kulka, 93, Physician and Teacher
LEAD: Dr.
Ernest W. Kulka, an obstetrician and professor emeritus at New York University School of Medicine, died of a heart attack on Friday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Black-Hispanic Alumni Unit Approved by Baruch College
LEAD: The administration at Bernard M. Baruch College and a group of black and Hispanic graduates who want their own alumni association have ended a long court battle over the school's refusal to recognize such an organization.


Spurs Sign Mitchell
LEAD: In preparation for their first-round playoff series with Denver, which opens tomorrow night in San Antonio, the Spurs have signed Mike Mitchell, one of their former stars, and cut Zarko Paspalj, a rookie guard from Yugoslavia.
Mitchell, who spent this last season averaging 32.9 points in Italy after playing with the


Rates Jump At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates rose sharply at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper to their highest levels since late 1989.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-15
The coalition of the President-elect of Nicaragua, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, has been thrown into crisis over a tentative agreement by Mrs.
Chamorro to retain the Sandinista Defense Minister as chief of the country's army.
Page A1


Panel Says Government Is Not Leading AIDS Fight
LEAD: The Federal Government's top advisory panel on AIDS told President Bush today that AIDS policy in the United States was like ''an orchestra without a conductor'' because the Government had failed to lead the campaign against the epidemic effectively.


2 Arrested in Court Rug Thefts
LEAD: Two men who were in court last month to answer assault and weapons charges were arrested Monday and charged with stealing two cheap rugs on their way out of the courthouse.
The authorities say Vern W. Campbell and John J. Unkel, both members of the Compadres Motorcycle Club, took two floor rugs from the Superior Court building on Kendrick Avenue on March 21.


Don't Judge Yourself
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Peril Seen From Space Debris
LEAD: A Congressional agency has warned that astronauts aboard the proposed space station could be endangered by space debris and that NASA is underestimating the threat.


Chiles Transforms Florida Campaign
LEAD: Less than two years ago, Lawton Chiles stunned Florida voters and political veterans by complaining of ''burnout'' and promptly retiring from the United States Senate.
Now he has caused another stir, this time by declaring he wants to be Governor of Florida.


Building Self-Esteem
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Experts Fear a German Inflation Rise
LEAD: It is widely agreed that Bonn's decision to ground a German monetary union on a one-for-one exchange of currencies will make East Germans very happy indeed.
And by pleasing East German voters, the concession is likely to serve the immediate interests of West Germany's ruling party, the Christian Democratic


Clifton R. Wharton, 90, Is Dead; Pioneering Black U.S. Diplomat
LEAD: Clifton R. Wharton, the first black American career diplomat to attain the ranks of Minister and Ambassador in the United States Foreign Service, died on Monday at the Sunridge Care Center in Phoenix, Ariz.
He was 90 years old and lived in Phoenix.


Marion Merrell Dow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marion Merrell Dow Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
578,000,000
243,000,000
Net inc
111,000,000
55,000,000
Share earns
.40
.35
Shares outst
278,000,000
156,000,000


Oryx Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oryx Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
469,000,000
306,000,000
Net inc
40,000,000
b102,000,000
Share earns
.38
.96
b-Included $85 million gain from cumulative effect of accounting change.
Latest first quarter is the first to include results of its international operations.


Rising Interest Rates Spur A Drop in Precious Metals
LEAD: Prices of precious metal futures fell yesterday, reflecting a general lack of interest in gold and silver in the face of rising interest rates.


Japan Vehicle Output
LEAD: Domestic production of Japanese cars, trucks and buses declined 2.8 percent in March from a year earlier, the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association reported on Monday.
Despite the decline, to 1.234 million units, overall vehicle output in the fiscal year that ended March 31 reached a record 12.954 million units, up 1 percent from a year earlier, the group said.


Melville Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Melville Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,617,839,000
1,529,097,000
Net inc
7,811,000
24,230,000
Share earns
.04
.22


Harley-Davidson Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harley-Davidson Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
217,600,000
187,600,000
Net inc
12,100,000
b7,200,000
Share earns
1.36
.84
b-Included loss from discontinued operations of $200,000, and an extraordinary loss of $600,000 from additional costs of 1983 settlement.


University Chief's Ouster Is Tied To Investigation of Obscene Calls
LEAD: Two weeks after Richard Berendzen startled American University here by abruptly resigning as its president, law-enforcement and university officials said he was forced out because of a police investigation into complaints that he had made obscene telephone calls from his office.


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Utilities (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
597,674,000
559,610,000
Net inc
66,109,000
b70,099,000
Share earns
.61
.65
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $9,341,000, or 9 cents a share.


U.S. Securities Narrowly Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were narrowly mixed in a turbulent session yesterday, despite reports suggesting the economy is gathering strength and that inflation remains a real worry.


Chevron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chevron Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,300,000,000
7,700,000,000
Net inc
473,000,000
313,000,000
Share earns
1.33
.91


He Can Milk 'Em, But He Can't Hide
LEAD: The deed, apparently, is done.
Michael Milken, the premier financial swindler of all time, is being given a plea bargain.


Yankees Stop Slide With LaPoint Victory
LEAD: Dave LaPoint had just one word to describe the Yankees' 6-2 victory over the Seattle Mariners at the Stadium last night, his first pitching triumph since last June 6.


Albert Salmi, Actor, 62, Is Found Shot to Death in Home With Wife
LEAD: Albert Salmi, an actor who made a career of portraying cowboys in television westerns like ''Gunsmoke,'' and his wife, Roberta, were found shot to death in an apparent murder-suicide, the police said today.


Reviving the Flavor Of the Old West
LEAD: SAM ARNOLD has been known to open champagne bottles by slashing off their necks off with a tomahawk.
Such Wild West tactics are fairly typical for this mild-mannered, soft-voiced historian, radio commentator, food writer and restaurateur.
He runs a popular restaurant, the Fort, an adobe reconstruction of a historic


Anti-Takeover Bill Gains
LEAD: Pennsylvania's House of Representatives today overwhelmingly approved a controversial bill considered to be the nation's toughest anti-takeover measure.


Test Finds High TB Rate At a Shelter
LEAD: Doctors testing homeless men at a clinic in a New York City shelter have found that an extraordinarily high number are infected with tuberculosis.


Freshness, Convenience: Juice for Today's Tastes
LEAD: STICKER shock is what orange juice producers have been calling the reaction of shoppers who recoil at prices resulting from a devastating freeze just after Christmas.


Baseball Owners Ratify Labor Pact
LEAD: American and National League owners have ratified baseball's new four-year collective-bargaining agreement with the players' association.


President Named Chief At Cincinnati Milacron
LEAD: Cincinnati Milacron Inc., a leading machine tool maker, announced yesterday that it had named Daniel J. Meyer chief executive, ending the long leadership of the founding Geier family at the company.


Ametek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ametek Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
168,915,000
144,058,000
Net inc
9,758,000
11,304,000
Share earns
.22
.26
Shares outst
44,268,172
44,075,816


Don't Play Any Dirges for the LP Just Yet
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Interpublic Group
LEAD: The Interpublic Group of Companies yesterday reported earnings of $8.64 million, or 26 cents a share, for the first quarter, up 8 percent from $8.01 million, or 24 cents a share, for the comparable period in 1989.


Dollar Ends Mostly Lower But Rises Against the Yen
LEAD: The dollar declined against all major currencies yesterday except the Japanese yen, which weakened considerably.


Portrait of a Collector: Walter Annenberg
LEAD: Walter H. Annenberg, publisher, philanthropist, former Ambassador to Britain and high-rolling art acquisitor, doesn't really mind that the J. Paul Getty Museum bagged van Gogh's ''Irises'' in a recent transaction with Sotheby's. ''I like my irises better,'' he said, pointing to a big, lush Monet canvas, ''The Path Through the Irises,'' hanging over a white couch in a sitting area of his Astrodome-sized house here.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Escrow Violations Charged
Calling for stricter Federal oversight, seven states said the nation's mortgage lenders are charging homeowners billions of dollars in excess escrow payments.
Page D1.
Decision on Hitchcock Film
The Supreme Court ruled that the owners of ''Rear Window'' infringed the copyright of the short story on which the film was based.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Putting Up 'The Wall'


Consolidated Edison Co. of N. Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Edison Co. of N. Y.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,494,584,000
1,386,736,000
Net inc
128,794,000
143,187,000
Share earns
.56
.63


Pedro W. Guerrero, 93; Headed Food Concern
LEAD: Pedro W. Guerrero, an early entrepreneur in Mexican food specialties who was a founder of the Rosarita Company, died of kidney failure on Monday at Mesa (Ariz.) Lutheran Hospital.
He was 93 years old and lived in Mesa.


Reports Stir Fears Of Inflation
LEAD: Government reports provided fresh evidence today that the economy has successfully skirted recession but that it now confronts a problem of stepped-up inflation that may prompt the Federal Reserve to tighten monetary policy this spring.


Paris Food Purveyor Begets a Restaurant
LEAD: ''IMPOSSIBLE n'est pas francais'' (''Impossible is not French'') is a popular phrase in France, and Fauchon, the prestigious food emporium founded in 1886, seems to have just proved its veracity.
Fauchon has opened an attractive restaurant at a site in Paris that only three and a half months ago was a hollowed-out three-story building.


Sallie Mae Notes
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, is offering $200 milion in three-year notes through underwriters led by the Morgan Stanley Group.
Initially the notes were priced at par to yield 9.12 percent, or about 20 basis points more than Treausury notes with a similar maturity.
But now the notes will be reoffered to te public at various prices.


Real Estate;   Coffee, Sugar Exchange Expanding
LEAD: AT 10 A.M. every weekday a buzzer sounds on the eighth floor of 4 World Trade Center in lower Manhattan and the sugar trading ring at the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange erupts in chaos as several hundred brokers shout and signal orders for clients around the world.


Sears Earnings Drop 58.8% As Stores Lose $37.4 Million
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company today reported a 58.8 percent drop in its first-quarter earnings, citing losses in its department stores division and an unexpectedly large increase in claims at its Allstate Insurance Group.


Donors Plead for Ethiopian Truce To Prevent Starvation in the North
LEAD: A group of Western countries appealed today to the Ethiopian Government and its rebel opposition for an immediate cease-fire and the reopening of the Red Sea port of Massawa to allow food shipments to avert starvation in the country's northern region.


Judge Finds Bias in Bus Terminal Search
LEAD: A Manhattan judge has thrown out crucial evidence in a drug-arrest case at the Port Authority Bus Terminal, charging that the authority's drug-enforcement efforts were aimed almost exclusively at black and Hispanic people.


Santa Fe Energy Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Energy Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
96,100,000
79,100,000
Net inc
5,100,000
b30,300,000
Share earns
.09
.58
Shares outst
55,300,000
52,100,000
b-Included income from a change in accounting for income taxes of $24,500,000, or 47 cents a share.


Salomon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salomon Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,353,000,000
1,539,000,000
Net inc
119,000,000
b28,000,000
Share earns
.88
-
Shares outst
117,900,000
125,400,000
b-Net loss
Revenue represented gross or total revenue.


Jostens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jostens Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
162,379,000
151,300,000
Net inc
10,675,000
9,994,000
Share earns
.27
.25
9mo sales
491,555,000
436,529,000
Net inc
26,150,000
23,227,000
Share earns
.66
.59


Masur to Seek 'Inner Harmony' With Philharmonic


Playoff Picture Is Far From Clear As Many Clubs Have High Hopes
LEAD: The Los Angeles Lakers ruled the 1980's by winning five National Basketball Association championships.
Will the new decade be anything like the old?


Dinkins Urges Halt to S.I. Naval Port Funds
LEAD: Calling a planned naval station on Staten Island ''a port without a purpose,'' Mayor David N. Dinkins urged two Congressional panels at a hearing today to stop spending for the partly built project and free the money to help fight crime, homelessness and other domestic problems instead.


Papers Urged to Include Minorities
LEAD: The nation's newspaper publishers heard a blunt warning here today that they must change or risk becoming irrelevant.


Buenos Aires Journal;   Menems' Marriage: Well-Matched Pillow Fights?
LEAD: A group of retirees interrupted a hunger strike in front of a Government office recently to call on Zulema Yoma de Menem, the Argentine First Lady, and press demands for pension increases to cover inflation.


Times Mirror Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Times Mirror Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
875,152,000
846,895,000
Net inc
46,013,000
68,787,000
Share earns
.36
.53


EG&amp;G Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EG&amp;G Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
560,995,000
390,911,000
Net inc
14,654,000
16,710,000
Share earns
.51
.56
Shares outst
28,967,000
29,821,000


Dow Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Chemical Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,900,000,000
4,485,000,000
Net inc
462,000,000
743,000,000
Share earns
1.71
2.72
Shares outst
269,500,000
272,700,000


Helping Migrant Students Beat the Odds in School
LEAD: All her life, Christina Garza has worn the path between this small agricultural town and Texas, moving with her parents and the crops.


Romanian Protesters Split Bucharest in Half


Gooden Erasing Doubts
LEAD: Forget, for the moment, the difficulty the Mets continued to have with pitchers named Smith.
Note, but only briefly, that Barry Lyons, the Mets' catcher, actually threw out two would-be basestealers, albeit one with an umpire's assistance.
Savor, with only a quick taste, the way the Mets won the game in the ninth inning, with the 6-foot-5-inch, 220-pound Mike


Rig Count Slips a Bit
LEAD: The number of working United States oil and gas rigs fell last week by two, to a total of 932, Baker Hughes reported on Monday.
The rig count also declined slightly in the previous two weeks.


U.S. Vehicle Sales Fell 17.8% in Mid-April Period
LEAD: Sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks fell 17.8 percent in mid-April from strong levels a year ago.


Northern Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Telecom (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,570,600,000
1,379,700,000
Net inc
79,100,000
52,600,000
Share earns
.30
.20


Gorbachev Is Said to Delay Soviet Economic 'Shock Therapy' Plan
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has ruled out a Polish-style economic ''shock therapy'' for the Soviet Union this year because the Government does not have the popular support for such drastic change, Mr.
Gorbachev's main economic advisers say.


Many Interests at Stake as Farm Act Is Rewritten
LEAD: Addressing a trade group the other day, Agriculture Secretary Clayton Yeutter complained that he had ''taken a lot of flak'' for supposedly seeking to cut farm subsidies by $1.5 billion when he actually favored a $2 billion increase.


Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
152,874,373
145,706,592
Net inc
9,868,038
10,307,550
Share earns
.69
.73
Shares outst
12,964,652
12,760,656


Liz Claiborne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liz Claiborne Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
420,851,000
352,894,000
Net inc
52,614,000
44,300,000
Share earns
.60
.50
Shares outst
87,996,958
87,801,739


Viacom Plans Stock Payout
LEAD: Viacom Inc.'s board has created a class of nonvoting common stock to give the communications and entertainment company greater financial flexibility, the company said yesterday.


Text of Statement to Court Describing 6 Felonies
LEAD: Following is the text of the allocution, or statement to the court, by Michael R. Milken yesterday describing the six felonies to which he pleaded guilty:


Rexene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rexene Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
130,196,000
173,706,000
Net inc
b13,211,000
c23,409,000
Share earns
.42
.74
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $12,911,000, or 41 cents a share, from the gain on repurchase of $84 million principal amount of senior increasing rate notes.


Villagers Say Sandinista Raid Breaks Cease-Fire
LEAD: Five rebels were ambushed and nearly killed on Sunday by Sandinista troops while preparing a feast for villagers here, residents say.


No, No, Not Ratty
LEAD: We had a white Thanksgiving with six inches of snow, so I could not fertilize the lawn on Thanksgiving Day as is my wont.


Police Seize Vial Machines Tied to Crack
LEAD: Customs agents searching for a man wanted in the smuggling of drug paraphernalia stumbled onto a factory Monday night in Brooklyn where workers were producing millions of crack vials, Federal authorities said yesterday.


Soviet Deal On Ice Cream
LEAD: Baskin-Robbins Inc. said today that it had signed a joint venture agreement with Soviet officials to build an ice cream plant in a suburb of Moscow.


The Seder's Meaning
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Final Twist in 'Rear Window' Case
LEAD: In a copyright decision calling into question the legal status of hundreds of motion pictures, the Supreme Court ruled today that the current owners of Alfred Hitchcock's ''Rear Window'' had infringed the copyright of the short story on which the 1954 movie classic was based.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
Eighteenth special session at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
AD HOC COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION - 10:30 A.M.
PLEDGING CONFERENCE FOR INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT AND VERIFICATION COMMISSION - 10 A.M. and 3 p.M.


Review/Piano;   A 98-Year-Old Virtuoso And Music of His Heart
LEAD: According to the people who negotiate such matters at Carnegie Hall, Mieczyslaw Horszowski's piano recital on Monday night has been the toughest ticket to come by all season, the Vienna Philharmonic included.
Musicians, music business professionals and just plain fans have wheedled and bargained to see and hear the 98-year-old pianist.


American National Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American National Insurance (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
24,875,000
26,193,000
Share earns
.89
.93
Shares outst
28,048,315
28,267,340


Free to Speak, but Willing to Listen and Learn;   First Amendment Peril
LEAD: To the Editor:


Accounting Official to Quit
LEAD: Raymond C. Lauver said yesterday that he would resign from the seven-member Financial Accounting Standards Board at the end of the year, more than three years before his current term would have expired.


Resting Two Players Brings Lakers a Fine
LEAD: On the eve of the opening of the National Basketball Association playoffs, Commissioner David Stern yesterday fined the Los Angeles Lakers $25,000 because Coach Pat Riley failed to play two healthy starters Sunday night in Portland in the Lakers' final game of the season.


$300 Million Issue By Philip Morris
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies is offering $300 million in notes due 1997 through the underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Bush Delays Action on Lithuania, Not Wanting to Harm Gorbachev
LEAD: After conferring with allies and Congressional leaders, President Bush today delayed carrying out a threat to take action against Moscow for tightening its chokehold on Lithuania, fearing sanctions might undermine President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and worsen the Baltic crisis.


High-Tech Toddler
LEAD: The father of a 3 1/2-year-old boy looked in on his son just after dawn one morning, expecting to find a sleeping innocent.
Instead he found a wide-awake warrior, clutching a plastic sword and chanting: ''Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
Heroes in a Half Shell.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 20
Apr. 13
Apr. 21
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
6.8
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.7
2.7
Gasoline stocks
221.6
222.5
223.0
Distillate stocks
98.0
98.7
96.0
Crude imports, daily
5.6
5.9
5.7
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.6
1.9
Crude stocks
372.9
371.7
330.7
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.7
Refinery utilization (%)
86.2
85.4
82.3


Metro Datelines;   Ex-Prosecutor Says He Made Up Attack
LEAD: A former Camden County Prosecutor pleaded guilty yesterday to fabricating a story that armed drug dealers tried to kill him during a high-speed chase through the streets of Camden.


The High School Press Needs More Support
LEAD: To the Editor:


Richard DeLauer, Pentagon Aide And an Aerospace Executive, 71
LEAD: Richard D. DeLauer, a former Under Secretary of Defense and an executive in the aerospace industry, died of leukemia on Sunday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 71 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


Corrections
LEAD: A television schedule listing yesterday for the program ''Frontline: Hilary in Hiding'' referred incorrectly to the father of Hilary Foretich.
In a custody dispute, his former wife has accused the father, Dr.
Eric A. Foretich, of abusing their daughter.
He has denied the accusations.


Moody's Reviews Ratings Of 2 Giant Japanese Banks
LEAD: The top triple-A ratings for long-term borrowings of Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. and the Fuji Bank Ltd., the largest and fourth-largest banks in the world, are under review, Moody's Investors Service said yesterday.


Gerte Willner; Ophthalmologist, 95
LEAD: Gerte Willner, a retired New York City ophthalmologist, died of a respiratory ailment on Sunday in Booth Memorial Hospital in Queens.
She was 95 years old and lived in Queens.


Can Eastern Europe Survive Nationalism?
LEAD: To the Editor:


IMO Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IMO Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
252,411,000
178,300,000
Net inc
8,029,000
7,916,000
Share earns
.44
.45
Shares outst
18,208,000
17,592,000


AMCA International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMCA International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
315,344,000
310,347,000
Net inc
5,306,000
b9,056,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $4,651,000, or 3 cents a share.


Louisville Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisville Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
183,690,000
190,664,000
Net inc
b36,723,000
23,030,000
Share earns
1.63
1.00
Shares outst
21,091,000
20,685,000
b-After income from the cumulative effect of an accounting change of $18,236,000, or 87 cents a share.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.18
9.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.73
8.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.90
7.87
8.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.98
8.95
9.14
30-YR.


Toyota in Pakistan
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation, Japan's largest automobile maker, said it would build a car manufacturing plant in Pakistan by early 1993.
A Toyota spokesman, Yoshiharu Tateishi, said the plant could produce up to 20,000 cars a year.
He said about 3,000 Corollas would be produced in the first year, with production increasing later to 10,000 a year.


Knitwear Group's Head Is Used to Import Fights
LEAD: Sweater makers in the United States have won a big round in their battle against imports, and the man behind their victory is Seth Bodner, executive director of the National Knitwear &amp; Sportswear Association, which represents 300 domestic manufacturers.


Court Rejects Death Sentence Appeal by Outsider
LEAD: The Supreme Court today barred outsiders from bringing Federal court challenges to the death sentences of convicted murderers who have decided not to appeal their own cases.


Germans to Let Marx Wither
LEAD: Karl Marx appears to be the loser among voters in this East German city.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harris Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
778,649,000
524,216,000
Net inc
34,776,000
b27,555,000
Share earns
.87
.71
Shares outst
40,033,000
38,718,000
9mo rev
2,262,489,000
1,445,381,000
Net inc
91,155,000
b73,309,000
Share earns
2.31
1.89
Shares outst
39,407,000
38,747,000


Grace Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grace Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
113,978,000
95,133,000
Net inc
5,917,000
b5,586,000
Share earns
.24
.23
b-The net income and share earnings were calculated on a pro forma basis to include interest and estimated administrative expenses as if the company's initial public offering in the 1989 third quarter had been completed on Jan.


Hampton Is Content With His Big Decision
LEAD: Last fall, when Rodney Hampton finished his junior season at Georgia, he faced a big decision.
Should he stay in college for his senior season or should he make himself eligible for the National Football League draft?


Chronicle
LEAD: Liberal politicians from all over the country flock to the rich West Side of Los Angeles to raise money, so it was perhaps inevitable that leaders of the fledgling democracies of Eastern Europe would find their way there, too.


Fauntroy Investigation Closed
LEAD: A Justice Department spokesman said today that the department had closed an investigation into a report that Walter E. Fauntroy, the District of Columbia's nonvoting delegate to Congress, had kept Thomas John Savage, the son of Representative Gus Savage, Democrat of Illinois, on his payroll while he ran for office in Illinois.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Advertising column yesterday about the new officers of the Newspaper Advertising Bureau misidentified the position held in the organization last year by John P. Giuggio, vice chairman of the Globe Newspaper Company of Boston.
He held the post of treasurer, to which he was re-elected this year.


Britain 'Deeply Skeptical' of Plan By France and Germany on Unity
LEAD: Setting the stage for a fresh dispute with its European partners, Britain said today that it opposed a new French-German plan to speed the political integration of the European Community in response to developments in Eastern Europe.


MDU Rssources Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDU Rssources Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
104,200,000
113,200,000
Net inc
16,700,000
16,620,000
Share earns
.87
.86


Ames Chapter 11 Bid Speculated On
LEAD: Ames Department Stores Inc. has hired a bankruptcy specialist from a New York law firm, fueling speculation that the retailer will seek bankruptcy protection, The Hartford Courant said today.
An article in the newspaper said Ames had hired Michael L. Cook, a partner at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, to begin preparing for a Chapter 11 filing, which would allow


Bigger Print, Please
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Quaker Oats Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quaker Oats Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,265,200,000
1,208,200,000
Net inc
b25,600,000
c64,100,000
Share earns
.32
.81
9mo sales
3,620,100,000
3,520,200,000
Net inc
b102,700,000
c146,500,000
Share earns
1.29
1.85


How Do You Fix A Broken Planet?
LEAD: PATTY FREEMAN DORSON is not unlike many other Americans trying to do their part when it comes to the environment.


Automatic Sentences For All Gun Crimes
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHOICE IN MANAGUA FOR MILITARY CHIEF SETS OFF A FUROR
LEAD: On the eve of taking power, the political coalition of President-elect Violeta Barrios de Chamorro has been thrown into crisis over a tentative agreement by Mrs.
Chamorro to retain the Sandinista Defense Minister, Humberto Ortega Saavedra, as head of Nicaragua's army.


Computers to Help Drivers Find Their Way
LEAD: This summer the General Motors Corporation will begin a yearlong experiment on a 12-mile stretch of Los Angeles freeway to examine how 12 cars equipped with electronic navigation systems can elude congested highways by turning on to local streets shown on a computerized map.
In Japan, the Honda Motor


Nicaragua's Second Revolution
LEAD: Nothing happens tidily in Nicaragua.
That's conspicuously true in today's landmark transfer of power from President Daniel Ortega to his conservative opponent, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro.
Her succession is marred by defiance among the Sandinistas and die-hard contras, paralyzing strikes and unresolved arguments over the armed forces.


Thermo Unit Sets Deal for Finnigan
LEAD: Thermo Instrument Systems Inc., maker of analytic instruments in Waltham, Mass., that is a unit of the Thermo Electron Corporation, reached an understanding to acquire the Finnigan Corpration, which makes spectrometers, for $20 a share, or $110 million to $120 million.


Belgian Bank Deal
LEAD: Banque Nationale de Paris S.A., France's largest commercial bank, agreed to buy the banking assets of Banque Nagelmackers 1747, Belgium's oldest bank, for $123 million.
Nagelmackers said it would propose that its assets be split into a banking company and a real estate and portfolio investment company.


Latin Aid Bill Advances in Senate
LEAD: The Senate Appropriations Committee approved a special $2.6 billion spending bill tonight that provides the full $300 million aid President Bush requested for Nicaragua and $420 million of the $500 million he sought for Panama.


Musician and Composer Wins $150,000 Award
LEAD: Joan Tower, a professor of music at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., was named the 1990 recipient of the $150,000 Grawemeyer Award for original music composition by the University of Louisville today.


Leading Foe of Teheran Slain In Ambush Near Swiss Home
LEAD: Kazem Rajavi, a leading opponent of the Iranian Government, was shot dead near his home in this town on Lake Geneva today, relatives said.


Surgery for McCants
LEAD: Keith McCants underwent arthroscopic knee surgery yesterday, and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers' coach, Ray Perkins, said the procedure reassured him it wasn't a risk for his team to have taken the former Alabama linebacker with the fourth pick in the National Football League draft Sunday.


Review/Theater;   Orton and Pinter One-Acts Investigate Dualities
LEAD: Though both Joe Orton and Harold Pinter are playwrights with original, distinct voices, they have similarities as well as disparities.
Arriving first, Mr.
Pinter became something of a model to Mr.
Orton.
Just as Pinter plays have a metaphorical weasel lurking under the cocktail table, Mr.
Orton's plays are inhabited by carpenter ants insidiously attacking the roofbeams and floorboards.


Drug Abusers Still Sell Blood Plasma, Study Finds
LEAD: In a new study, researchers say more needs to be done to prevent drug abusers who have the AIDS virus from selling blood plasma to commercial collection centers.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
Pastas From India


Warsaw Fire That Killed Wife Of Journalist Is Called Arson
LEAD: Investigators have concluded that a fatal fire at the apartment of a journalist who specialized in exposing abuses by the secret police was arson.


Challenge to Pentagon
LEAD: Eleven members of Congress today asked the Pentagon to reinstate Dr.
Craig I. Fields as head of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or Darpa.
Dr.
Fields, 43 years old, had headed the agency for a year until he was transferred last Friday.
The agency provides money to industry to develop high-technology goods with military uses.


Chronicle
LEAD: ELIZABETH TAYLOR, who has pneumonia, was improving yesterday at a California hospital but breathing with the help of a ventilator after surgery to determine the cause of her illness.


Control Data Net Up by 94%
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation reported today that its first-quarter profit rose by 94 percent from a year ago because of a huge after-tax gain from its reorganization, but the revenue of the scaled-down computer company declined sharply.


U.S. JEWISH GROUP CRITICAL OF ISRAEL ON AID TO SETTLERS
LEAD: The leading pro-Israeli lobby in the United States told the Israeli Government today that its covert sponsorship of a Jewish settlement in the Christian Quarter of Jerusalem could seriously damage American-Israeli relations.


Dr. Irving Sarot, 78, A Thoracic Surgeon
LEAD: Dr.
Irving Sarot, a retired New York thoracic surgeon, died on Monday, apparently of a heart attack, at the Lotus Club in Manhattan.
He was 78 years old and lived in West Hampton Beach, L.I.


Santa Fe Pacific Seeks To Spin Off 2 Big Units
LEAD: In a move widely anticipated on Wall Street, the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation said today that it would seek to spin off to shareholders two of its three principal operating units - Santa Fe Pacific Realty and Santa Fe Energy Resources.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I transgressed certain of the laws and regulations that govern our industry.
I was wrong in doing so and knew that at the time and I am pleading guilty to these offenses.''
- Michael R. Milken. [A1:5.]


Lieutenant Who Aided Bronx Club Faces Charges
LEAD: The police lieutenant who, acting as a private lawyer, filed incorporation papers for the Bronx social club in which 87 people were killed last month has been brought up on departmental charges of giving evasive answers about his moonlighting activities.


Ball Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ball Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
321,500,000
257,300,000
Net inc
9,200,000
7,700,000
Share earns
.36
.33
Shares outst
21,850,028
23,473,696
The company said that earnings for the latest first quarter reflected a net cost of $1.1 million for the Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) adopted at the end of the second quarter of 1989, or about 5 cents a share.


Bridge
LEAD: A decade or so ago, when some experts were hungrily hunting points in the McKenney Race for the most master points won in a year, one of them brought off a remarkable coup.
He played in a Regional Team Championship one afternoon, left his team, flew West to an another time zone, and played in the evening in another Regional with different teammates.


Excerpts From Ruling On Death-Case Appeals
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 7-to-2 decision today barring Federal court appeals on behalf of death row inmates who choose not to appeal their own death sentences.


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
556,690,000
486,998,000
Net inc
15,627,000
13,147,000
Share earns
1.01
.87
Shares outst
15,509,245
15,079,505
Yr rev
2,072,644,000
1,845,484,000
Net inc
62,003,000
40,020,000
Share earns
4.02
2.64
Shares outst
15,413,494
15,131,745


Review/Music;   Riches of the Clarinet, Familiar and Strange
LEAD: Outside of the keyboard, the violin and, of course, the human voice, no solo instrument has more successfully prodded creative musical imaginations than the clarinet.
Mozart raised the instrument to legitimacy, making it central to his dark orchestrations and composing for his friend Anton Stadler three of the instrument's important pieces.


Milken Defends 'Junk Bonds' As He Enters His Guilty Plea
LEAD: Apologizing for his crimes but defending the ''junk bond'' market he created, Michael R. Milken pleaded guilty yesterday to six felony charges of securities fraud and conspiracy.
The 43-year-old financier agreed to pay $600 million in fines and penalties.


Oilers Need Overtime, but Sweep
LEAD: Joe Murphy banged in a rebound of his own shot 4 minutes 42 seconds into overtime, lifting the Edmonton Oilers to a 6-5 victory over the Los Angeles Kings tonight and a sweep of the Smythe Division finals.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Tyco Toys, to Bozell, its creative agency, for the media portion of its account.


Mobil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mobil Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,908,000,000
14,020,000,000
Net inc
400,000,000
429,000,000
Share earns
.94
1.04


Gaylord Container Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gaylord Container Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
161,500,000
178,000,000
Net loss
12,500,000
b6,000,000
Share earns
-
.38
6mo sales
344,500,000
360,700,000
Net loss
10,500,000
b18,400,000
Share earns
-
1.16


Album Is to Help Children In Romania With AIDS
LEAD: George Harrison, Ringo Starr and Elton John are among the musicians who are to contribute newly recorded or previously unreleased tracks to ''The Romanian Angel Appeal,'' an album to benefit orphanages and hospitals in Romania.


Times Mirror Net Down 33%
LEAD: The Times Mirror Corporation said today that its first-quarter profit fell by 33 percent, while revenues rose by 3.3 percent.


Allegheny Ludlum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Ludlum (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
279,420,000
363,923,000
Net inc
23,258,000
34,366,000
Share earns
1.04
1.52


Morgan Stanley Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan Stanley Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,397,189,000
1,238,774,000
Net inc
82,134,000
81,129,000
Share earns
2.07
2.02
Shares outst
37,620,315
37,765,778
Revenue represented total revenue.


Lawyers Ask Judge To Void Conviction Of Ex-Security Aide
LEAD: Lawyers for John M. Poindexter asked a Federal district judge today to overturn his conviction or grant him a new trial, asserting that the Government failed to prove its case against the former national security adviser.


Chronicle
LEAD: When the first Arab in space, Prince Sultan SALMAN AL SAUD, gave a dinner for a hundred or so friends at the Waldorf-Astoria Monday night, Earth Day was still much on his mind.
The Prince, a nephew of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, had joined other astronauts before the United Nations in a warning about the damage mankind is doing to its habitat, as seen from space.


After Gains of 80's, Northeast Is Lagging In the Growth of Jobs
LEAD: After years that brought some of the sharpest economic gains since World War II, the Northeast is now trailing the rest of the nation in job growth.


Economic Scene;   Soviet Economy: Red Storm Ebbs
LEAD: JUST how much are Soviet consumers really suffering?
Alfred Volkov, a researcher from Moscow's Academy of National Economics, replies with a story about the quality of food in state-run markets: Criminals vowing not be be taken alive, he quips, now carry a piece of sausage to swallow in case they are cornered by the police.


Investigators of Derailment Find Signs That Track Moved
LEAD: Federal investigators said today that they had found ''slight indications'' of rail movement where an Amtrak passenger train derailed.


Several Mistakes Seen In the Defense of Milken
LEAD: Among the post-mortems following the agreement that ended the largest securities fraud case in history, many lawyers, prosecutors, academics and several people involved in the case say that Michael R. Milken and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. could have drawn much more lenient treatment had they reached settlements years ago instead of putting up defiant fronts for so long and then abruptly reversing course.


German Leaders Agree on a July 2 Unification Date
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany held a hastily arranged meeting here with Prime Minister Lothar de Maiziere of East Germany today, and the two leaders agreed to set July 2 as the date for a monetary, economic and social union of the two Germanys.


Nacco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nacco Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
328,223,000
150,765,000
Net inc
b12,733,000
7,853,000
Share earns
1.43
.89
Shares outst
8,876,000
8,873,000
b-Included a charge equivalent to 11 cents a share from writedowns connected with Hyster Yale's Brazilian manufacturing operation.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:
NEW YORK SPRING
is a time for beginnings: a time to
learn ten words in a foreign language
invent a new dance step
explore streets where historical houses
rub shoulders with skyscrapers
celebrate daffodils and Park Avenue tulips
and listen to tourist birds
home in greening trees.


Allentown Journal;   True Love, True Life, And Truly Bizarre
LEAD: ''Two for the nut movie,'' local residents say through the hole in the ticket window of the Eric Five Theater here on Fourth Street.
Some ask for tickets to ''The Toto movie.''


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Kennedy Delays Plan For Tobacco Ads
LEAD: Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, has temporarily dropped a provision in his tobacco regulation bill that would have permitted states to regulate tobacco advertising, which is currently the responsibility of the Federal Government.
A staff member of the Labor and Human Resources Committee said, however, that the provision would be introduced as an amendment should the bill, as is expected, reach the Senate floor.


Credit Education Fund at A.T.&amp; T.
LEAD: Less than a month after entering the credit card business, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it would donate $1 million over four years to start a consumer credit education fund.
The fund is ''designed to increase consumer understanding of credit and its proper uses,'' A.T&amp; T. said.


Quaker Oats Planning Fisher-Price Spinoff
LEAD: Ending months of speculation, the Quaker Oats Company said today that it would leave the volatile toy business by spinning off its Fisher-Price division into an independent company.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
A Scare for Becker
Boris Becker, the three-time Wimbledon champion, struggled yesterday to beat a French qualifier ranked 167th in the world in the $1 million Monte Carlo Open.
Becker, seeded No. 2, downed 19-year-old Cedric Pioline, 7-5, 6-4, in the second round after receiving a first-round bye.


Industrial Equity
LEAD: Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd., the Hong Kong investment arm of the New Zealand investor Ron Brierley, has sought Federal clearance to raise its stake in Petroleum Helicopters Inc. to as much as 25 percent, from 17 percent.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Industrial Equity said it would continue to try to gain a seat on the board of Petroleum Helicopters, which provides helicopter services to the oil and gas industry.


USX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,689,000,000
4,458,000,000
Net inc
b176,000,000
c296,000,000
Share earns
.66
1.09
b-Included a pretax gain of $3 million on disposal of assets.
c-Included a pretax gain of $119 million for provisions and settlements of litigation, a net gain of $60 million related to a change in the company's marathon unit's inventory market valuation reserve, and a pretax gain of $74 million on disposal of assets.


Federal Mogul Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Mogul Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
280,372,000
288,744,000
Net inc
4,909,000
b4,722,000
Share earns
.17
.17
b-Included a charge of $3 million related to reorganization activities.


28 Sudan Officers Executed On Charges of Trying a Coup
LEAD: A military firing squad executed 28 officers, including three retired generals and a brigadier, after a summary court-martial on charges of trying to stage a coup, official news organizations reported.


Tambrands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tambrands Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
159,256,000
129,936,000
Net inc
22,065,000
18,022,000
Share earns
1.02
.81


Roche Holding Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roche Holding Ltd.
Year to Dec 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,021,000,000
5,572,000,000
Net inc
553,000,000
428,000,000
The company said sales and other figures were translated at rate of one Swiss franc equals 61 cents, the average 1989 prevailing rate, while consolidated net income was translated at one Swiss franc equals 65 cents, the rate at Dec.


Centerior Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerior Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
560,594,000
555,230,000
Net inc
50,509,000
67,690,000
Share earns
.36
.48
Shares outst
139,486,000
140,829,000


Despite Loss, RJR Seen As Strong
LEAD: Burdened with debt from history's largest buyout, the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation yesterday announced a first-quarter loss of $222 million, compared with a loss of $239 million for the comparable period of 1989.
But strong operating profits and cash flow exceeded analysts' expectations.


S.E.C. Chief Calling for Long Term
LEAD: Richard C. Breeden, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, said today that Michael R. Milken should serve a lengthy prison sentence.


Flight Attendants Back UAL Accord
LEAD: The UAL Corporation's flight attendants ratified a $4.4 billion employee buyout of the company, becoming the first of UAL's three unions to endorse the pact.
The Association of Flight Attendants represents UAL's 13,000 flight attendants.
UAL is the parent of United Airlines, the nation's second-largest carrier.


Ex-Party Chief Cleared In Yugoslavia Unrest
LEAD: The ethnic Albanian former Communist Party chief of Yugoslavia's strife-torn Kosovo region was acquitted today of criminal charges that he instigated a wave of strikes and protests that set off popular unrest in the region a year ago.


Metro Datelines;   Man Held in Killing Of Brooklyn Cabbie
LEAD: A 20-year-old man was arrested yesterday and charged with killing a taxi driver on Saturday in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, the police said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Old Agency Reaches for A New Image
LEAD: THESE days the buzzword at Ayer is ''stretch.'' Today, exactly a year after he became chief executive of Ayer, Jerry J. Siano will introduce a campaign to forge a strong identity for the country's oldest advertising agency.


Lenders Accused On Escrow
LEAD: Attorneys General from seven states charged yesterday that the nation's mortgage lenders are charging homeowners billions of dollars in excess escrow payments and holding the funds in accounts that bear little or no interest.


USX Net Off 40.5%; Bethlehem, 67.1%
LEAD: Citing continued weakness in demand for steel and higher operating costs, the USX Corporation and the Bethlehem Steel Corporation, yesterday reported sharply lower first-quarter earnings.


Savings Officials Delay Sales Plan
LEAD: Savings and loan bailout officials today delayed action on a proposal to speed the sale of repossessed real estate after a top bank regulator said the plan could hurt struggling institutions.


Harvard Picks Rosovsky For Post of Acting Dean
LEAD: Henry Rosovsky, one of the most respected figures in American higher education, has been named acting dean of Harvard University's Faculty of Arts and Sciences, resuming a job he left six years ago.


Brighter Future Ties Pupils and Teacher
LEAD: Irene Fried graduated from Public School 94 when Fiorello La Guardia was still Mayor and the surrounding northeast Bronx neighborhood was predominantly Italian, Jewish and Irish.
Today Mrs.
Fried is a special-education teacher at her old school.


Almodovar Film's X Stands
LEAD: The distributor of ''Tie Me Up!
Tie Me Down!,'' the new film by the Spanish director Pedro Almodovar, which is soon to open in the United States, failed yesterday to reverse an X rating given the film by the rating board of the Motion Picture Association of America.


As Oakley Practices, Knicks' Spirits Lift
LEAD: Charles Oakley moved laterally a foot or so behind the foul line, catching the ball and shooting it while Paul Silas, one of the Knicks' assistant coaches, kibitzed with him.


Black Identity vs. Success and Seeming 'White'
LEAD: Many black students may perform poorly in high school because of a shared sense that academic success is a sellout to the white world, according to a study by two anthropologists.


About New York Restoring Curls, Waves, Bangs And Dignity
LEAD: Jillian Matthews swiveled in the big chair and studied the mirror.
The 6-year-old was being fitted with two wigs - one straight and one curly.
She pursed her lips and fussily scrutinized the curly one.


Lessons
LEAD: Is the battle to attract more students from minority groups in American colleges and universities being won or lost?


Capitals Confident With Liut in Goal
LEAD: Mike Liut was acquired by the Capitals the day before last month's trading deadline to provide the kind of goaltending that brings success in the playoffs.


New Finishing Process Improves Steel
LEAD: rrThe Nippon Steel Corporation of Japan and Inland Steel Industries of Chicago officially began production yesterday on one of the world's most advanced plants for finishing steel.


CT Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CT Financial Services
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
972,958,000
804,772,000
Net inc
63,945,000
61,724,000
Share earns
.49
.48
The company is listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Telecom USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telecom USA Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
209,901,000
161,929,000
Net inc
8,628,000
9,207,000
Share earns
.30
.32
The company said net income and earnings per share comparisons were negatively impacted by an increase in the company's effective tax rate from 36 percent in the first quarter of 1989 to 41 percent in the current quarter.


Hostage Was Held in a Building With Other Captives, U.S. Says
LEAD: Robert Polhill spent most of his captivity in a room with two fellow hostages and probably in the same building that held other Western captives in Lebanon, United States officials said today.


Fieldcrest Cannon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fieldcrest Cannon Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
274,368,000
296,286,000
Net inc
338,000
3,045,000
Share earns
.03
.30
Shares outst
10,333,960
10,275,189


Intel Sues Advanced Micro
LEAD: In an extension of a bitter feud between two Silicon Valley computer chip makers, the Intel Corporation today sued Advanced Micro Devices for copyright infringement.


A Deadly Investment in Connecticut
LEAD: Connecticut's State Treasurer, Francisco Borges, was boasting last month of a ''bold, exciting and very inventive partnership'' to which he had committed $25 million in pension funds belonging to state employees.
Now he's gagging on those words, and well he should.


Light Dishes with Mexican Flair


How Airport Rail Link Could Serve the Region
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: In color and black and white, the pictures - portraits, landscapes and city scenes - glowed on a screen in the Grand Ballroom of the New York Hilton last night.
They were the works of two masters of photography who were being honored with the International Center of Photography Infinity Awards.


Sketches of Five Astronauts
LEAD:
Loren J. Shriver; Mission Commander


MCI to Get Loan
LEAD: The Bank of America said it had agreed to make a $1 billion loan to finance the proposed acquisition of Telecom U.S.A. by the MCI Communications Corporation.
MCI, based in Washington, will draw down part of its $500 million credit line with Bank of America to pay for the $1.25 billion transaction, which must still be approved by state and Federal regulators and Telecom's shareholders.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addendum
LEAD: *
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles has acquired the Australian advertising agency Weekes Morris &amp; Osborn, which has $30 million in billings.


Collapse of Their Defense Is Making the Rangers Insecure
LEAD: The Rangers' defense, having been picked apart and then shredded on the ice by the Capitals, later stood dispersed in a funereal locker room, wearing looks of embarrassment, confusion and very nearly fright.


Washington at Work;   An Unlikely Diplomat Seizes the Opportunity To Shape Latin Policy
LEAD: The day the Senate confirmed the nomination of Bernard W. Aronson as Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs a year ago, lightning struck two century-old oak trees on his lawn, toppling one into his dining room.


Hockey And Hoops Get Real
LEAD: This is the real season, the one we've been waiting for since, oh, October.
This is when the hockey players and the basketball players put on their game faces that they keep in a jar by the door.
Who is it for?
Their playoff opponents.
It's a different season, and almost a different sport.
Basketball referees totally give up calling walking, double-dribbling and palming on the theory that if these guys were good enough to get into the playoffs, they must know what they're doing.


Americans' Lives Threatened By Militants Over Jerusalem
LEAD: A militant Muslim group said today that it would kill Americans throughout the world unless the United States Senate rescinded a recent resolution calling Jerusalem the capital of Israel.


Books of The Times;   Glacial and Erudite Japanese Subtlety
LEAD:
Rain in the Wind
Four Stories
By Saiichi Maruya
Translated by Dennis Keene. 234 pages. Kodansha International. $18.95.


The Bush Message to Vilnius: Talk
LEAD: For days, Administration officials have been floating stories suggesting that the United States would impose sanctions against the Soviet crackdown in Lithuania.
Yesterday President Bush did the right thing - nothing.
And he chose to do it at the right time.


Interface Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interface Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
154,517,000
147,430,000
Net inc
6,083,000
5,625,000
Share earns
.35
.33
Shares outst
17,186,000
17,122,000


Shuttle Soars 381 Miles High, With Telescope and a Dream
LEAD: In a thunderous overture to a promised new era in astronomy, the space shuttle Discovery rocketed into orbit today with the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope, which scientists believe will give them a commanding view of the universe as it was, is and will be.


Interpublic Group of Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interpublic Group of Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
284,486,000
276,489,000
Net inc
b8,636,000
b8,011,000
Share earns
.26
.24
Shares outst
33,750,916
33,825,295
b-Included after-tax losses from exchange and translation of foreign currencies of $2,939,000 for latest first quarter and $825,000 for year-ago period.


Shell Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shell Oil Co.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,754,000,000
5,178,000,000
Net inc
203,000,000
b362,000,000
b-Included $70 million gain from insurance settlement.
Shell is a unit of Royal Dutch-Shell Group.


Metro Datelines;   New York City Police Name Spokeswoman
LEAD: A former spokeswoman for the New York City Human Resources Administration will become the Deputy Commissioner for Public Information in the Police Department.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bogert Oil Co., Oklahoma City, agreed to be acquired for $13.20 a share in a merger agreement with LDEC Acquisition Corp, a unit of Louis Dreyfus Energy Corp.


International Lease Accords for 15 Jets
LEAD: The International Lease Finance Corporation said it had leased 15 jets to 11 airlines in deals worth $705 million.
The company, based in Beverly Hills, Calif., also completed several other transactions, including selling four aircraft and acting as agent in leasing two aircraft on behalf of the financial institutions that own them.


Celtics' Lewis Set To Exploit Any Chance
LEAD: Reggie Lewis has grown accustomed to fighting for recognition.


British Slightly Curb Period for Abortions
LEAD: The House of Commons voted tonight to reduce the time limit on legal abortions in Britain to 24 weeks from 28.
The 28-week limit was one of the most liberal provisions in the West.


The '87 Bordeaux Charm on Their Debut
LEAD: THE curtain went up on the 1987 Bordeaux vintage at the Four Seasons in Manhattan on Sunday.
On previous New York opening nights, the reds showed the complexity of grand opera, but this time they resembled an operetta: colorful, romantic and crowd-pleasing.


Chevron Net Up 51.1%; 3 Big Oil Concerns Off
LEAD: The Chevron Corporation captured the spotlight among the five leading integrated energy companies that announced first-quarter earnings results today, reporting a surprisingly sharp gain in net income of 51.1 percent.


Clemens Helps Red Sox Top Angels and Langston
LEAD: Roger Clemens improved his record to 4-0 and the Boston Red Sox scored three unearned runs after an error by Mark Langston tonight to record a 4-2 victory over the California Angels.


Solicitor General to Review News Leak Report
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh has asked the Solicitor General to review the findings of an internal investigation into the role played by department employees in a politically damaging news report about Representative William H. Gray 3d last year, Government officials said today.


Cyclops Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyclops Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
299,259,000
364,707,000
Net inc
3,583,000
10,114,000
Share earns
.49
1.42


Freeport-McMoran Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
392,588,000
470,820,000
Net inc
b219,411,000
69,937,000
Share earns
4.00
.93
Shares outst
53,841,000
69,628,000
b-Included gains of $211.5 million from sale of certain nitrogen fertilizer assets and shares of Freeport- McMoran Gold Co.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Robert S. Minner has announced his retirement as vice president and treasurer of Leo Burnett Co.


About Education
LEAD: Why is college so expensive?
The question won't go away until parents get more believable answers.


What Aphrodisiacs Do
LEAD: To The Living Section:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Emerson Electric Co., St.
Louis, a diversified manufacturing company, named Jean-Paul L. Montupet executive vice president for industrial motors and drives.


RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,204,000,000
2,926,000,000
Net loss
222,000,000
b239,000,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $12 million for RJR Nabisco Holdings from Feb.


Sierra Pacific Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sierra Pacific Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
129,896,000
121,974,000
Net inc
15,267,000
15,143,000
Share earns
.68
.70


Mobutu Ends Zaire's One-Party System
LEAD: Bowing to rising demands for social and political change, President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire said today that he was lifting a 20-year ban on opposition parties, opening the possibility of a multiparty government.


USLife Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USLife Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
293,200,000
283,114,000
Net inc
b13,501,000
c15,523,000
Share earns
.81
.90
Shares outst
16,486,000
17,191,000
b-Included a capital loss of 9 cents a share primarily from disposal of a joint venture real estate investment.


WINE TALK
LEAD: GERALD ASHER, the whilom wine merchant and distinguished wine writer, was in town recently to talk about clones, specifically chardonnay clones.


Jackie McLean Is Back With His Alto Sax After 20 Years Away
LEAD: Jackie McLean's return to the Village Vanguard with his alto saxophone last night was both a homecoming and a personal renewal.
In 1970, Mr.
McLean, who was acknowledged as one of the jazz world's finest composers and saxophonists, made a major career decision: He left the performer's spotlight for the campus.


Yields at Banks Are Mixed
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were mixed for the week ended yesterday.


Soviets and Chinese Sign Broad Pact
LEAD: China and the Soviet Union signed a 10-year agreement today for economic and scientific cooperation that is to focus on developing the high-technology proficiency that both nations badly need.


Genuine Parts Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genuine Parts Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
821,258,000
770,966,000
Net inc
46,986,000
44,999,000
Share earns
.61
.58
Shares outst
77,468,000
77,392,000


Morrison Knudsen Offering $500 Million Option Notes
LEAD: The Morrison Knudsen Corporation, an Idaho-based holding company, is offering $500 million in liquid yield option notes due May 1, 2005, up from an orignally planned $375 million, through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


'King' Opens in London
LEAD: ''King,'' a musical about the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., has opened at the Piccadilly Theater here to mostly negative reviews, with several critics asserting that the show lacked focus and failed to portray its central character realistically.


Kansas City Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas City Power &amp; Light (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
163,552,000
163,225,000
Net inc
13,952,000
17,711,000
Share earns
.40
.52
Shares outst
30,947,000
30,904,000


All Things Considered, a Restful Place


Bethlehem Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bethlehem Steel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,215,300,000
1,402,500,000
Net inc
21,300,000
b64,700,000
Share earns
.20
.78
Shares outst
75,270,000
74,628,000
b-Included a charge of $55,000,000 related to restructuring.


Japan Studying Insider Case
LEAD: The Tokyo police are in the final stages of an investigation into stock dealings that could become the first significant insider-trading case in Japan, a police official said today.


Shorter Rations for Borrowers
LEAD: Some companies are complaining that their banks have turned stingy with loans, creating a ''credit crunch'' that could needlessly strangle business activity and cause a recession.
For their part, bankers talk about ''prudent'' lending as a reasoned response to a weaker economy and to the tightening of standards by


Evolution in Europe;   LITHUANIANS HALT SOVIET SHIPMENTS
LEAD: Lithuania announced today that it had cut off meat and milk exports to Soviet customers in retaliation for a Kremlin economic embargo, and offered to barter farm products directly with Soviet cities now controlled by political insurgents.


Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,691,700,000
2,642,900,000
Net inc
b20,900,000
b94,500,000
Share earns
.36
1.64
Shares outst
57,967,059
57,559,850
b-Included $4.4 million, or 7 cents a share, for the latest first quarter and $4.4 million, or 8 cents a share, for year-ago period, both from utilization of foreign loss carryover tax benefits.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Borden Inc., to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., for Wise Foods and other snack brands, including Krunchers! potato chips.


UGI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UGI Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
122,272,000
113,594,000
Net inc
19,198,000
19,592,000
Share earns
1.79
1.85


Landmark Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Bank for Savings
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
71,000
301,000
Per share
.05
.23


Incstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Incstar Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,440,000
4,908,000
Net inc
b559,000
c57,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
14,536,000
3,337,000
b-After an extraordinary tax benefit of $186,000, or 1 cent a share.


AMR Upgrading
LEAD: The AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, said it would spend $11 billion to expand passenger services to try to become the nation's premiere international airline.
The company said it was beginning a five-year plan that would include such luxuries as lobster served on china, despite the $19.3 million first-quarter loss that AMR reported last week.


Currents;   Don't Squeeze The Grapes
LEAD: ''NEW YORKERS seem starved for fruit and flower motifs: they like eating them, looking at them and wearing them,'' said Anne Bialos, an artist whose Brooklyn garden is the inspiration for her line of horticultural jewelry.


Anheuser-Busch Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anheuser-Busch Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,593,000,000
2,398,200,000
Net inc
182,500,000
167,100,000
Share earns
.64
.58
Shares outst
289,900,000
285,900,000


Landmark Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Bancshares (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,080,000
3,426,000
Per share
.14
.53
Shares outst
7,201,000
6,363,000


One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b17,381,000
c15,473,000
Per share
2.12
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $29,716,000, or $3.63 a share, from retirement of debt.
c-Net loss and after an extraordinary credit of $577,000, or 7 cents a share.


Enserch Exploration Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enserch Exploration Partners (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
52,087,000
51,463,000
Net inc
11,934,000
14,211,000
Share earns
.12
.14


Cuomo and Lawmakers Agree on Medicaid Cuts
LEAD: Inching toward an agreement on a new state budget, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders said today that they had resolved two issues - how to cut Medicaid spending and how to reduce the state's contribution to its pension system.


FHP International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FHP International Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
266,446,000
186,810,000
Net inc
9,055,000
5,347,000
Share earns
.35
.25
Shares outst
26,117,000
20,970,000
9mo rev
699,040,000
499,729,000
Net inc
22,320,000
14,358,000
Share earns
.86
.70
Shares outst
26,071,000
20,622,000


Currents;   A Bliss Of Orchids Is Nigh
LEAD: DEPRESSED by a droopy Dendrobium?
The place to work out your angst is the orchid show that opens this morning at the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory of the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.


KEY RATES Uncovered Short Sales in Active Nasdaq Stocks Dip 1.3%
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.18
9.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.83
7.80
8.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.01
7.96
8.50
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.08
9.01
9.06
30-YR.


Shanghai Protest Paper Is Closed, Staff Says
LEAD: The World Economic Herald, the newspaper that boldly challenged the Communist leadership last spring, was officially closed this month, staff members at the newspaper say.


7 Chinese Reported Abducted at Kennedy
LEAD: Seven Chinese peasants were abducted at Kennedy International Airport last night minutes after arriving to take part in an agricultural project, the Port Authority police said.


U.S. Increases Sugar Quota
LEAD: Agriculture Secretary Clayton K. Yeutter announced today that American sugar processors could import 9.7 percent more sugar from 40 countries.


Bell Savings Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Savings Holdings (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
9,306,000
b1,039,000
Per share
-
.42
9mo net loss
12,423,000
b3,661,000
Per share
-
1.46
b-Net income


Blair Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Blair Co.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
116,938,484
102,463,459
Net inc
9,492,446
6,262,116
Share earns
1.04
.69


BRIEFS
LEAD: Debt


Altera Buys Stake
LEAD: The Altera Corporation, a small but fast-growing semiconductor company, said it would buy a minority stake of a chip production factory in Texas from Cypress Semiconductor for $7.4 million.
The agreement will give Altera its own production facility for a minimal investment.
Cypress will get access to the next generation of Altera's technology.


Durkin Hayes Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Durkin Hayes Publishing
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
908,000
1,100,000
Net inc
90,501
41,000
Share earns
.02
.01
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Overtime Goal Gives Capitals 3-1 Series Edge
LEAD: For each of the Rangers on the ice for Rod Langway's overtime goal, panic set in at different intervals in the brief sequence that led to a 4-3 loss to the Capitals, a defeat that carried with it a nearly suffocating despair.


Cilcorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cilcorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
139,287,000
134,098,000
Net inc
6,930,000
12,565,000
Share earns
.52
.93


Polls Try to Account for the Census's Uncounted
LEAD: Using a poll to explore the public's response to the census runs up against many of the same problems that the census itself encounters: difficult-to-find respondents, indifferent or suspicious attitudes and unwillingness to respond.


Bush Can Discontinue Drops For Glaucoma, Doctors Say
LEAD: Two prominent eye doctors said today that President Bush could discontinue using prescription eye drops for his glaucoma.





Prison Sentence of Top Aide To Bakker Cut to 2 1/2 Years
LEAD: A Federal judge today reduced from eight years to two and a half the prison sentence of Richard Dortch, former top aide to Jim Bakker at the PTL television ministry.


North Fork Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Fork Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,568,000
5,265,000
Per share
.40
.57


First Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Republic Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
272,000
186,000
Per share
.08
.06


Newmont Mining Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmont Mining Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
165,530,000
111,344,000
Net inc
b57,407,000
c9,403,000
Share earns
.85
.14
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $14,725,000, or 22 cents a share, which reflected Peabody Holding Co.


Warren Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warren Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
612,000
b657,000
Per share
-
.19
Shares outst
3,499,000
3,488,000
b-Net income


Confertech International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Confertech International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,092,484
1,880,071
Net inc
97,021
b58,662
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
5,338,477
3,274,063
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $59,302.


Automobile Protection Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automobile Protection Corp.
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
2,847,988
2,181,812
Net loss
b40,013
c91,497
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
6,287,506
4,841,270
Net loss
b39,416
c268,194
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
5,204,000
4,597,467


American Barrick reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Barrick (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
52,921,000
46,551,000
Net inc
13,082,000
6,972,000
Share earns
.10
.06
Shares outst
128,400,000
118,000,000
The company said some year- earlier figures have been restated to reflect a change in accounting policy for mineral exploration expenditures.


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
223,400,000
196,100,000
Net inc
13,300,000
b20,600,000
Share earns
.47
.68
Shares outst
28,300,000
30,300,000
b-Included $12.5 million after-tax gain on the sale of real estate.


Mid Maine Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid Maine Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
334,040
329,747
Per share
.24
.24
The latest quarter included $170,000 in income tax expenses related to a proposed change in tax regulations, and a pre-tax gain of $325,000 from the sale of about $8.5 million of mortgage loans.


Cohu Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cohu Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,843,000
8,480,000
Net inc
692,000
677,000
Share earns
.35
.34


Space Telescope Is Placed in Orbit


Harvesting the Universe
LEAD: The deployment of the Hubble Space Telescope yesterday is among NASA's finest achievements.
Floating above the distorting veil of the atmosphere, the huge instrument will bring the universe into view with far greater clarity than ever before.
Landing on the Moon was a giant technical step for humankind; the


New Police Academy Class Is Dinkins's First


House Passes Bank Bill On Money Laundering
LEAD: The House voted today to set up a process that would allow the Government to close banks and savings and loans convicted of laundering drug money.


Gateway Federal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Federal
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
423,000
1,732,000
Per share
.22
.89


Ameritrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
51,600,000
b27,800,000
Per share
-
.76
b-Net income


American Colloid Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Colloid Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
30,724,000
31,013,000
Net inc
198,000
799,000
Share earns
.04
.15


Review/Television;   Jennings Says U.S. Helps Khmer Rouge
LEAD: ''From the Killing Fields,'' tonight's report by Peter Jennings at 10 P.M. on ABC, makes the argument that the United States is covertly supporting the return to power in Cambodia of the Khmer Rouge.
That is a heavy accusation, given the death and devastation that the Communist movement under Pol Pot inflicted on the country before it was driven out by the Vietnamese a decade ago.


MGM Grand Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MGM Grand Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
45,438,000
64,550,000
Net loss
1,635,000
b5,870,000
Share earns
-
.28
Shares outst
25,430,000
20,902,000
b-Net income and after an extraordinary credit of $1,454,000, or 7 cents a share.


New Jersey Voters in Revolt Against Soaring School Taxes
LEAD: Voters in nearly half the school districts in New Jersey soundly rejected budgets in elections on Tuesday in the most sweeping revolt against soaring taxes since the state was forced to change its financing of education 14 years ago.


Freeport-McMoran Copper reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Copper (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
80,144,000
83,975,000
Net inc
15,639,000
24,816,000
Share earns
.18
.29


Acuson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acuson Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
63,914,000
51,213,000
Net inc
10,693,000
8,569,000
Share earns
.45
.36


Jones Intercable Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jones Intercable Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
30,155,000
16,768,000
Net inc
189,000
c5,923,000
Share earns
.02
-
9mo rev
69,399,000
47,085,000
Net loss
b16,336,000
16,720,000
b-Included extraordinary loss of $1,996,000, net of related income tax benefit of $1,027,000, or 16 cents a share, related to the company's Aug.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Edberg Beats Arias
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden struggled to beat Jimmy Arias of the United States, 7-6, 6-3, in the second round of the Monte Carlo Open yesterday.
Edberg had to hold off 3 set points in the first set before winning the tie breaker.


Cray Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cray Research Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
135,869,000
116,139,000
Net inc
9,478,000
1,509,000
Share earns
.33
.05
Shares outst
28,355,000
29,381,000


Procter &amp; Gamble reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Procter &amp; Gamble (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,123,000,000
5,430,000,000
Net inc
404,000,000
310,000,000
Share earns
1.14
.92
9mo sales
17,865,000,000
15,965,000,000
Net inc
1,318,000,000
1,035,000,000
Share earns
3.71
3.06


Walt Disney Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walt Disney Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,303,795,000
1,037,886,000
Net inc
178,487,000
149,018,000
Share earns
1.29
1.08
Shares outst
138,148,000
137,852,000
6mo rev
2,591,946,000
2,081,447,000
Net inc
352,897,000
297,307,000
Share earns
2.55
2.16
Shares outst
138,531,000
137,756,000


ITT Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ITT Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,933,000,000
4,830,000,000
Net inc
253,000,000
200,000,000
Share earns
1.88
1.40
Shares outst
130,044,000
141,750,000
The latest quarter included an after-tax gain of $47 million, or 33 cents a share, on the sale of the company's investment in Compagnie Generale d'Electricite.


Crystal Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crystal Brands Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
218,800,000
223,317,000
Net inc
6,634,000
b6,068,000
Share earns
.73
.67
b-Included income of $40,000 from discontinued operations.


BancOklahoma Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancOklahoma Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,916,000
2,856,000
Per share
.01
.08
Shares outst
30,177,000
13,852,000


Second National Fedl Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Second National Fedl Savings (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b2,400,000
2,300,000
Per share
.28
.31
b-Included about $400,000 from securities gains.
The latest per share earnings were after preferred dividends.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Asarco Inc., a maker of mineral, gas, and chemical byproducts, said it would repurchase an additional $25 million of its common stock in the open market from time to time in the next two years, bringing the total value of authorized stock repurchase programs to $120 million.


Ciatti's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ciatti's Inc.
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
4,300,697
2,955,975
Net inc
222,754
163,024
Share earns
.06
.05
Shares outst
3,759,526
3,682,814
9mo sales
12,072,559
7,922,935
Net inc
597,541
365,606
Share earns
.16
.11
Shares outst
3,778,798
3,489,965


Solzhenitsyn Bars 'Gulag' Staging So Muscovites Have 'Rehearsals'
LEAD: Two men sit in a large Moscow building among scaffolding and buckets of paint and wait for a word from Vermont.
They are Vyacheslav Spesivtsev, the director of the Moscow Experimental Theater Studio, and his aide, Vitaly Mozgalin, and they are filled with hope that Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn will one day say yes to their theatrical interpretation of his ''Gulag Archipelago.


Gruber Leads Blue Jays Past Indians
LEAD: Kelly Gruber hit his seventh home run tonight, the most in the major leagues, and went 4 for 5 as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Cleveland Indians, 5-3.


Big Investor in Household Names
LEAD: The Arab-led investor group that agreed yesterday to buy the Saks Fifth Avenue chain for roughly $1.5 billion has in recent years bought parts or all of companies whose products carry brands that are household names, from Gucci handbags to Tiffany jewelry to Carvel ice cream.
But none of its previous purchases have been as big as its deal with B.A.T.


Chiquita Brands International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chiquita Brands International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,024,430,000
895,275,000
Net inc
42,878,000
9,693,000
Share earns
1.06
.24
Results in the latest quarter included a pretax gain of $8.5 million resulting from the sale of common stock investments.


Du Pont's Profits Declined By 16.4% in First Quarter
LEAD: E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, the nation's largest chemical manufacturer, said yesterday that its first-quarter net income dropped 16.4 percent, reflecting a cost-improvement program and continued weakness in the housing and automotive industry.


Family Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Family Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
1,023,000
b1,315,000
Per share
-
.40
Shares outst
2,608,150
3,294,472
b-Net income


Calling to Mind One of Music's Forgotten
LEAD: Meet Gordon Wright, the president of the Reznicek Society.
The what society?
Emil Nickolaus von Reznicek (1860-1945) was a German composer and conductor who wrote about a dozen operas, four symphonies, chamber music and just about everything else.
He was associated with Mahler and every other major musician of his time, his music was conducted by the likes of Felix Weingartner and Karl Muck, and he was at one time very well known.


Icahn May Lift Stake If USX Plan Is Cleared
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn, the New York financier, said yesterday that he intended to buy an additional $800 million of stock in the USX Corporation if a proposal to split the company is approved by shareholders at the May 7 annual meeting.


County Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* County Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
5,046,000
3,714,000
Per share
.08
.07
Shares outst
672,000
618,000


P.&amp;G. Profits Rise by 30%
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, one of the world's leading makers of consumer products, said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings rose more than 30 percent, to $404 million, or $1.14 a share, compared with a profit of $310 million, or 92 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.


Yields Stable To Higher
LEAD: Yields of the taxable money market funds monitored by the IBC/ Donoghue's Money Fund Report were unchanged for the week that ended yesterday, while those of tax-exempt funds were slightly higher.


Exalting the Tassel, Or, Chrome Go Home
LEAD: MARTHA STEWART'S favorite book is titled ''The Standard of Perfection.'' The book is about raising chickens, not decorating, but there are parallels. ''It's not necessary to do everything yourself,'' she explained, ''but to be able to judge what's good.''


Perry K. Sellon, Editor, 78
LEAD: Perry Kimball Sellon, a business editor for U.S.
News and World Report for 21 years, died of congestive heart failure on Monday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 78 years old.


Anheuser Net Up 9.2%
LEAD: The Anheuser-Busch Companies reported today that its profits had risen 9.2 percent in its first quarter.
The company, the world's largest brewer, said it had earned $182.5 million, or 64 cents a share, in the quarter, up from $167.1 million, or 58 cents, a year earlier.
Sales rose 8.1 percent, to $2.59 billion from $2.40 billion.


To Abortion Foes, Issue Is Ethical, Not Moral;   Selling Church's View


Engelhard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Engelhard Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
658,539,000
587,282,000
Net inc
14,751,000
14,355,000
Share earns
.33
.32


Drug Adviser Named
LEAD: Dr.
John A. Lombardo, an expert in sports medicine and anabolic steroids, was named yesterday by Commissioner Paul Tagliabue to the newly-created position of drug adviser to the N.F.L. for anabolic steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs.


Altus Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altus Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
2,671,000
4,543,000


Cambrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cambrex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
36,594,100
32,806,800
Net inc
b2,632,300
1,852,200
Share earns
.49
.33
Shares outst
5,321,200
5,608,500
b-Included an after-tax gain of $1.8 million on sale of assets.


New U.S. Aid Sought For High Technology
LEAD: Proponents of increased financial support for the development of advanced technologies, concerned that the Bush Administration is reducing its commitment to research sponsored by a Pentagon agency, are scrambling to find new sources of money outside the military budget.


Sara Lee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sara Lee Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,798,200,000
2,835,900,000
Net inc
108,900,000
95,000,000
Share earns
.44
.40
9mo sales
8,652,100,000
8,661,500,000
Net inc
352,000,000
b307,800,000
Share earns
1.43
1.32


Show of Peretti Designs Celebrates Tiffany Era
LEAD: To mark the 15th year of Elsa Peretti's association with Tiffany &amp; Company, and her 50th birthday on May 1, jewelry and tableware by the designer will be on display in ''Fifteen of My Fifty with Tiffany,'' a show that opened Tuesday at the Shirley Goodman Resource Center at the Fashion Institute of Technology in


Wm. Wrigley Jr.  Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wm. Wrigley Jr.  Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
238,276,000
261,416,000
Net inc
29,841,000
26,361,000
Share earns
.76
.67


Nicaragua's Hard Road to a New Day
LEAD: Jan 10, 1978: Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, a newspaper publisher who is an outspoken opponent of the dictator Anastasio Somoza Debayle, is killed in downtown Managua, and widespread anti-Government protests ensue.


Child-Care Worker Is Cleared
LEAD: A state child protection worker was acquitted today of charges that she had failed to report suspected abuse before the death of an infant who, the authorities say, was dunked in a toilet for soiling his pants.
The defendant, Shirley Duboise, contended that she had never seen any evidence that would have led her to suspect abuse.


Energen Corp. reports earnings for 12mo March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energen Corp. (NYSE)
12mo March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
330,532,000
306,259,000
Net inc
b9,644,000
c11,222,000
Share earns
.99
1.27
Shares outst
9,697,000
8,869,000
b-After a loss on disposal of discontinued operations of $2,061,000 and a loss from discontinued operations of $499,000.


Market Place;   Safeway Reduces Its Offering Price
LEAD: AFTER a cold reception from institutions, the initial public offering of Safeway Stores Inc. will go forward today at a lower price in the retail market.


Disney Posts Record Profit
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company today reported record profits and revenues for the second quarter as all three of its operating segments showed continued strength.


Metro Matters;   Alumni of Club, Recalling Past, Ponder Present
LEAD: Gray-haired Brownsville natives were debating whether the legendary boys club some joined as teen-agers 50 years ago could be duplicated today when Norman Podhoretz impatiently held up a photograph.


Last British Prisoners Give Up in Manchester
LEAD: The last five prisoners abandoned the roof of Strangeways Prison today, ending a 25-day siege, the longest in British history.


Yankees Turn to Grey
LEAD: In yet another addition to the ever-changing New York Yankee roster, George Steinbrenner has hired Grey Entertainment and Media, a division of Grey Advertising, as its new advertising agency.
Grey's campaign, entitled ''Heroes in Pinstripes,'' will draw heavily on Yankee legends.
Billings for the account, formerly handled in the house that Ruth built, were not disclosed.


To Abortion Foes, Issue Is Ethical, Not Moral
LEAD: To the Editor:


Currents;   One Thing About Dirt: It's Really Dirty
LEAD: SPRING is a dirty business, with all its potting, repotting and coaxing seeds into life.
It's especially messy for those without a proper place to play in soil.
But now tidy potting is possible anywhere, with a gadget that Graham Kinsman sells by mail order in Pennsylvania.


Washington Gas Light reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Gas Light (NYSE)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
736,370,000
721,041,000
Net inc
49,084,000
43,328,000
Share earns
2.47
2.35
Shares outst
19,335,000
17,892,000


Japan's NKK Buys More of National Steel
LEAD: National Intergroup Inc., which owns 50 percent of the National Steel Corporation, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell all but 10 percent of the steel company to the NKK Corporation of Japan.


From San Francisco, A Bohemian Message
LEAD: The piano accordion, an Italian import that once flourished here, then suffered decades of eclipse and is now making a comeback, has become the city's official instrument.


Computer Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Products Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
29,008,000
31,563,000
Net inc
b1,399,000
b1,012,000
Share earns
.07
.05
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $137,000, or 1 cent a share for the latest quarter and $101,000, or 1 cent a share for the year-earlier period.


Baldwin Piano &amp; Organ reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baldwin Piano &amp; Organ (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
29,759,000
31,715,000
Net inc
968,000
936,000
Share earns
.25
.24
Shares outst
3,833,000
3,936,000


Sysco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sysco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,865,300,000
1,717,724,000
Net inc
28,522,000
22,501,000
Share earns
.31
.25
Shares outst
91,477,371
90,524,464
9mo sales
5,631,542,000
5,009,355,000
Net inc
93,849,000
76,135,000
Share earns
1.03
.84
Shares outst
91,246,373
90,270,396


MacLean Hunter reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MacLean Hunter
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
370,000,000
334,000,000
Net inc
11,000,000
19,500,000
Share earns
.07
.13
Results are in Canadian funds.


Newspaper Ad Unit Merger
LEAD: Two organizations that handle national advertising sales for large American newspapers said today that they planned to merge.


Gateway Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
b6,980,000
c3,136,000
Per share
-
.39
b-Included $1.5 million recognition of securities losses to bring the investment portfolio in bank stocks to its current market value.


American Savings Bank (N.Y.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Savings Bank (N.Y.) (N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
9,395,000
b6,562,000
Per share
-
.88
b-Net income
The bank said about $11 million was added to real estate reserves, reflecting weakened Northeast market conditions.


America West Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* America West Airlines (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
304,804,000
233,130,000
Net loss
b2,578,000
c10,069,000
Share earns
-
.58
Shares outst
17,886,000
16,637,000
b-After a $7.4 million gain from the sale of certain foreign tax benefits related to the acquisition of aircraft.


Diversified Human Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Human Resources
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,038,470
7,192,686
Net inc
403,842
159,885
Share earns
.21
.09


LPL Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LPL Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
190,832,000
156,670,000
Net inc
4,203,000
16,879,000
Share earns
.56
2.09
Shares outst
7,500,797
8,078,969
Results in the year-ago first quarter included a gain on sale of the company's Times Microwave subsidiary of $14,478,000, or $1.79 a share.


First United Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First United Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,790,000
1,520,000
Per share
.84
.71


Fuqua Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fuqua Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
246,283,000
246,726,000
Net inc
5,986,000
5,119,000
Share earns
.30
.24
Shares outst
19,841,000
21,483,000


Shareholders Clear Volvo-Renault Link
LEAD: Shareholders of the Swedish car maker Volvo A.B. approved a link with Renault S.A. of France.
The alliance of the companies' car, truck and bus operations through cross-ownership deals calls for cooperation on research and development, component purchases and investment.


House Panel Wants Milken
LEAD: Almost two years to the day when Michael R. Milken appeared before a House panel and refused to answer any questions by invoking his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination, John D. Dingell, the chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, said today that he would ask Mr.
Milken to return and complete his testimony.


Christian Factions Resume Battle in Beirut
LEAD: Rival Christian forces fought with tanks, artillery and multi-barreled rocket launchers today in a fresh flareup of their three-month battle for control of their enclave north of here.


San Diego G&amp;E reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* San Diego G&amp;E (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
539,517,000
499,441,000
Net inc
56,141,000
35,919,000
Share earns
.95
.59
The company said the 1989 quarter was depressed by a Public Utilities Commission decision to disallow $25 million in costs to import power over the southwest powerlink.


Pacific Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,906,000,000
1,861,000,000
Net inc
68,000,000
67,000,000
Share earns
.92
1.02
Shares outst
69,531,000
64,231,000


General Binding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Binding Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
75,636,000
67,284,000
Net inc
3,914,000
4,109,000
Share earns
.25
.26


First Financial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,094,000
3,894,000
Per share
.81
.77
First Financial is based in Hamilton, Ohio.


Milken's Sentence;   Leniency to Be Sought on Argument That 'Junk Bonds' Helped Business
LEAD: Although the guilty pleas that Michael R. Milken entered on Tuesday were not to selling ''junk bonds,'' his legal team is planning to make the high-risk, high-yield securities a focal point of his attempt to avoid a long prison sentence.





The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
AD HOC COMMITTEE OF SPECIAL SESSION -10 A.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS - 3 P.M.


Branford Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Branford Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
195,000
618,000
Per share
.13
.40





North Side Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Side Savings (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,451,000
2,107,000
Per share
.35
.52
6mo net inc
3,298,000
3,458,000
Per share
.81
.85


Texas Air Investor
LEAD: Mark Schwarzman, a Greenwich, Conn., investor, has acquired a 6.77 percent stake in the Texas Air Corporation's 6 3/4 percent cumulative convertible junior preferred stock.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Schwarzman said he had purchased the shares of the troubled airline holding company for investment purposes only.


Canadiens Stave Off A Sweep
LEAD: On a night when desperation carried more weight than confidence, the Montreal Canadiens evaded a playoff sweep by outscrambling the unconvincing Boston Bruins.


Currents;   As the Twig Is Bent, So Grows a Bench
LEAD: RUSTIC garden furniture, a remnant of 19th-century romanticism, is alive and well and being built by David Robinson.
His twiggy gazebos, benches, arbors and chairs, which dot Central and Prospect Parks, were much in evidence for visitors' use last month at the flower show of the New York Horticultural


Anthony Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anthony Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
94,274,000
90,335,000
Net inc
1,312,000
2,016,000
Share earns
.15
.25
The company said share earnings reflect a 5 percent stock dividend in December 1989.


Illinois Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Power Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
315,851,000
327,354,000
Net loss
13,080,000
b348,450,000
b-Included an after-tax charge of $346 million in response to disallowances relating to the construction of Clinton power station.


Militant Urges Captors Not to Free Hostages
LEAD: A leader of the pro-Iranian Party of God today urged kidnappers holding seven American hostages not to free any of them because of what he called ill will on the part of the United States.


In Managua Stadium, Catcalls of a Land Riven
LEAD: When Violeta Barrios de Chamorro raised her arms for the first time as President today and looked at a Nicaraguan crowd, she saw a divided family, a nation characterized by bitter divisions.


Bio-Rad Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Rad Laboratories (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
68,117,000
56,342,000
Net inc
3,644,000
3,167,000
Share earns
.47
.42


International Rectifier Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Rectifier Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
61,296,000
48,228,000
Net inc
525,000
b3,489,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo sales
165,238,000
140,441,000
Net inc
69,000
b11,975,000
Share earns
.01
-


Unitrin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unitrin Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
298,600,000
272,100,000
Net inc
25,600,000
34,700,000
Share earns
.46
.63


Davox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Davox Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
9,917,000
9,567,000
Net inc
48,000
237,000
Share earns
.01
.05


Empi Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empi Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,631,882
2,856,413
Net inc
208,373
92,397
Share earns
.11
.05
Shares outst
1,883,785
1,790,949


Telescope Is Orbited After a Tense Delay
LEAD: After a tense tussle with a stubborn solar power wing, the astronauts of the space shuttle Discovery succeeded today in giving astronomers what they had waited years for: placement of the Hubble Space Telescope in a high orbit for the loftiest view ever of the universe.


Suburban Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suburban Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
138,000
b2,210,000
Per share
-
.55
b-Net income


Evolution in Europe;   Bonn Opposition Chief Stabbed at Campaign Rally
LEAD: Oskar Lafontaine, the candidate for Chancellor from the opposition Social Democratic Party, was stabbed in the throat today by a German woman carrying a knife concealed in a bouquet of flowers.


Soviets Buy More Wheat
LEAD: The Soviet Union has bought an additional 149,000 metric tons of United States wheat at subsidized prices for delivery next month, the Agriculture Department said this week.
It said the wheat had been sold by two private companies, which will receive subsidies under the department's Export Enhancement Program.


Power Cut in West as Protest
LEAD: A total of 92,000 Pacific Gas and Electric customers in Santa Cruz County were without power for six hours Sunday and early Monday because of vandalism, and an underground environmental group has claimed responsibility.
Handwritten messages delivered Monday to several news organizations asked for understanding for the action by the Earth Night Action Group.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Jan.-Mar.
Change
1990
From '89
Anheuser-Busch Cos.
$ 182,500,000
+9.2
Baker Hughes Inc.
30,300,000
+106.1
Brunswick Corp.
14,700,000
-14.5
Chiquita Brands International
42,900,000
+342.3
Consolidated Freightways
(33,900,000)
-
Walt Disney Co.


Events: Architecture Of a New Generation


AMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMP Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
764,424,000
712,560,000
Net inc
79,833,000
b77,297,000
Share earns
.75
.72
Shares outst
106,489,945
107,172,199
b-After a pretax charge of $20 million for early termination program and other restructuring costs.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
EMI Music Worldwide, New York, a subsidiary of Thorn EMI P.L.C., London, promoted Philip Rowley to executive vice president.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.12
9.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.80
7.76
8.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.96
7.90
8.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.01
8.98
9.14
30-YR.


Yanks Lose to Mariners; Perez's Shoulder Is Ailing
LEAD: After six years in the major leagues, Pascual Perez has a pretty good handle on the art of pitching, but now that he's in New York, the $5.7 million dollar Yankee righthander has to work on another aspect of the game.


Dexter Gordon Dies at 67; A Charismatic Jazz Figure
LEAD: Dexter Gordon, one of the great tenor saxophonists and a charismatic figure in the jazz world, died of kidney failure yesterday at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 67 years old, and had entered the hospital on March 18 for treatment of cancer of the larynx.
He lived in New York


Gordon McLintock, Admiral, 87; Led Merchant Marine Academy
LEAD: Vice Adm.
Gordon McLintock, who served as Superintendent of the United States Merchant Marine Academy from 1948 to 1970, died of bone cancer on Monday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 87 years old.


Rodgers and His Celtics 'Playing Our Best'
LEAD: When Jimmy Rodgers attended the University of Iowa, he was a pre-dental major.


Genentech's Income Rises
LEAD: Genentech Inc. today reported improved revenues and profits for the first quarter.
But the company said it expected expenses of about $150 million related to its proposed merger with Roche Holdings Inc. and was likely to report a loss for the year.


Samplers Offer Look At History
LEAD: In the 18th and early 19th century, a well-bred young woman was an accomplished seamstress.
She stitched the alphabet on samplers so that when she was married, clothes and linens could be marked with the family's initials.
At finishing school, she made silk embroideries that might have commemorated the death of George


Soviet Old and Disabled Faring Better
LEAD: To the Editor:


Currents;   To Embellish the Lilies
LEAD: A WHIMSICAL assortment of embellishments for the garden, including a dog cottage and a cabbage-shaped ceramic tureen, will be auctioned tomorrow at a benefit party to open the Long Island Antiques and Decorative Arts Show.


Apache Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apache Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
69,013,000
60,723,000
Net inc
11,502,000
5,419,000
Share earns
.26
.16
Shares outst
44,605,000
32,975,000


Republicans Name Donors of $7.1 Million to Party
LEAD: The Republican Party today made public a list of wealthy givers who donated $7.1 million to the party last year.
Democratic Party officials backed away from making a similar disclosure, saying it would interfere with critical negotiations in the Senate over campaign finance legislation.


Former Trader Settles Case
LEAD: A former trader at Marcus Schloss &amp; Company, a New York Stock Exchange specialist firm, has settled Government charges that he traded inside information about possible corporate takeovers, the Securities and Exchange Commission said on Tuesday.


Ferrell to Miss Season For Positive Drug Test
LEAD: The Phoenix Cardinal fullback Earl Ferrell, the team's leading rusher the past two seasons, was informed by the National Football League that he had tested positive for drugs and must miss the 1990 season.


Arctic Alaska Fisheries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arctic Alaska Fisheries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
50,024,068
47,805,693
Net inc
7,521,782
9,377,827
Share earns
.46
.65
Shares outst
16,492,713
14,459,989


Ex-President of American U. Is Hospitalized
LEAD: Richard Berendzen, who resigned as president of American University two weeks ago amid a police investigation of complaints that he had made obscene phone calls from his office, is a patient at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, a hospital spokeswoman said today.


A Big Car-Theft Ring Is Reported Smashed


Palfed Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Palfed Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
364,000
570,000
Per share
.27
.42


Gulf States Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gulf States Utilities (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
380,012,000
365,688,000
Net inc
2,455,000
b10,675,000
b-Net loss
There were no share earnings in latest quarter because preferred dividend requirements exceeded net income.


One Valley Bancorp of W.Va.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Valley Bancorp of W.Va.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,650,000
4,023,000
Per share
.76
.66


To Abortion Foes, Issue Is Ethical, Not Moral;   An Illogical Position
LEAD: To the Editor:


Is Too Tall Too Old?
LEAD: Ed (Too Tall) Jones, the Dallas Cowboys' 39-year-old defensive end, said yesterday that he did not intend to return for a 16th season.
He said yesterday in Dallas that he might consider offers from other N.F.L. teams, but also hinted that he might retire.


Arrow Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arrow Electronics (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
246,749,000
237,890,000
Net inc
2,723,000
2,116,000
Share earns
.12
.07


Community Bankshares (N.H.) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bankshares (N.H.)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
242,000
406,000
Per share
.14
.24
Shares outst
1,674,086
1,691,593
9mo net loss
7,826,000
b1,618,000
Per share
-
.96
Shares outst
1,679,101
1,691,593


Canonie Environmental ServFices reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canonie Environmental ServFices (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
10,784,000
9,047,000
Net loss
677,000
b731,000
Share earns
-
.13
Yr rev
38,212,000
48,004,000
Net inc
431,000
5,415,000
Share earns
.08
.96


Korean Union Pickets in Upstate New York


Electronics Notebook;   Adventures in Never-Never Land    The Revenge of Shinobi. Ninja without the turtles. Magic powers involving floating and fire help in duels over waterfalls, a Detroit junkyard and New York Harbor.    Phantasy Star 2. An epic puzzle game that can take 150 hours to solve. Players collect weapons and clues and negotiate mazes.    NEC TURBOGRAFX-16 The system's list price is $199, and it comes with the game Keith Courage. Other individual games sell for $39 to $67.50, including these:    World Class Baseball. Index-finger batting and pitching aided by strategic planning and statistics.    Blazing Lazers. Breathless arcade battles in space. A suitable companion to Alien Crush, pinball amid alien body parts.
LEAD: FOR the last month I have been the envy of every 8-year-old on my block.
I have played pinball inside an alien's skull, my ball ricocheting against bones and eyeballs.
I have changed from a muscle-bound weightlifter into a werewolf that can throw fire.
And I have found myself, at long last, as a mustachioed


Misguided Missile in Europe
LEAD: President Bush and Prime Minister Thatcher displayed a puzzling shortsightedness in their recent Bermuda meeting.
Bowing belatedly to reality, they finally stopped trying to put new short-range ground-launched nuclear missiles into West Germany.
Those missiles have been made superfluous by revolutionary change in Eastern


Methadone Addicts Are as Far From Recovery as Heroin Addicts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Police Say Drug-Program Profiles Are Not Biased
LEAD: All but 2 of the 210 people arrested last year in a drug-interdiction program at the Port Authority Bus Terminal in midtown were black or Hispanic, the bistate agency said yesterday.


CEM Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CEM Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,833,000
3,992,000
Net inc
674,000
612,000
Share earns
.14
.13
9mo sales
13,562,000
11,457,000
Net inc
1,943,000
1,793,000
Share earns
.41
.39


Reviews/Dance;   Energy and Ritual Rhythm Of Circles Within Circles
LEAD: Circles, though small, are yet complete, as the saying goes, and there is an inevitably finished look to the circular spinning dances that make up Laura Dean's trademark.


Evolution in Europe;   Victory Seen for Nationalists in Yugoslav Republic
LEAD: A conservative nationalist party appears to have swept to victory in the opening round of the first free multiparty elections to be held in the Yugoslav republic of Croatia in more than 50 years.


Knicks Counting on Revised Cast To Come Up With a Different Act
LEAD: Patrick Ewing's and Gerald Wilkins's records against the Boston Celtics during the regular season were 1-4.
Charles Oakley was 1-2; Maurice Cheeks and Kiki Vandeweghe were 0-2.


Outfit Doesn't Suit His Lawyer
LEAD: Joseph Fama brought his trial to a halt yesterday.
But it wasn't because of any evidence.


Neglect and Acceptance Greet Census, Poll Finds
LEAD: As census enumerators begin to go door to door today to complete the 1990 census, they will find a mixed reception from the estimated 35 million households that have yet to be counted, a New York Times Poll indicates.


First Fedl Svgs of Charlotte County, Fla.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fedl Svgs of Charlotte County, Fla.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
832,193
672,656
Per share
.26
.21
9mo net inc
2,374,520
3,025,724
Per share
.73
.94
Year-ago quarter's per share earnings reflected restatement to show 10 percent stock dividend declared on Nov.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday with the continuation of an article about Walter H. Annenberg's art collection misidentified the bottom painting of the two shown.
It was van Gogh's ''Olive Trees,'' not Cezanne's ''Mont Sainte-Victoire.''


Merchants Bank of N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants Bank of N.Y.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,438,430
2,794,121
Per share
1.47
1.69


Korean Shipyard Strike
LEAD: About 20,000 workers at South Korea's largest shipyard went on strike today to protest the arrest of their union leaders, company officials said.
Hyundai Heavy Industries, the scene of a three-month labor dispute last year, is the first important manufacturing company to be hit by a strike this year.


BCE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BCE Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,406,000,000
3,668,000,000
Net inc
265,000,000
b241,000,000
Share earns
.82
.82
b-Included $10 million loss from real estate operations.
Year-ago results are restated.


Envirosafe Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Envirosafe Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,559,000
6,839,000
Net inc
757,000
b219,000
Share earns
.20
.06
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $424,000.


Senate Debates Spending Bill, Delaying a Clash on Abortion
LEAD: Temporarily putting aside a brewing fight over abortion, the Senate today began debate on a $2.3 billion emergency spending bill to provide aid for Panama and Nicaragua as well as money that the Census Bureau needs to complete the 1990 census.


FirstFed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FirstFed Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,043,000
3,974,000
Per share
.81
.46


Saint-Gobain Pushing Worldwide Growth
LEAD: The agreement by Compagnie Saint-Gobain to buy the Norton Company for about $1.9 billion is the latest, and largest, in a recent string of some two dozen acquisitions by the French glass and packaging conglomerate.


University National Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* University National Bank &amp; Trust
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
725,178
826,714
Per share
.56
.66


Pennsylvania Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennsylvania Power &amp; Light (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
634,162,000
613,068,000
Net inc
107,626,000
101,249,000
Share earns
1.27
1.18
Shares outst
75,423,000
75,255,000


Review/Music;   Fractals: A Mystery Lingers
LEAD: Fractal geometry, devoted to the mathematical explication of irregular shapes, has captured the public imagination, which no doubt explains the lively audience that turned out at the Guggenheim Museum last Thursday night for the first of two programs pairing Benoit Mandelbrot, the father of fractals, with the music of Charles


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Msgr.
WILLIAM B. O'BRIEN, the founder and president of Daytop Village, the international drug-rehabilitation program, will visit China in June to help establish a center in Kunming in Yunnan province. ''They are having a drug epidemic,'' he said.
Kunming is near drug-producing centers in Laos, Myanmar and Thailand.


Inter Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b565,000
b529,000
Per share
.55
.51
b-After extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $160,000, or 16 cents a share, for the latest first quarter and $169,000, or 16 cents a share, for year- ago period.


Belding Heminway Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Belding Heminway Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
39,387,000
41,556,000
Net inc
1,351,000
1,722,000
Share earns
.68
.84
Shares outst
1,994,000
2,051,000


Datum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datum Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,827,000
8,530,000
Net inc
70,000
213,000
Share earns
.03
.08
Shares outst
2,714,000
2,726,000


Witco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Witco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
395,248,000
399,546,000
Net inc
14,534,000
b20,254,000
Share earns
.63
.86
b-Included gain of $3,110,000, or 12 cents a share, from the sale of a product line.


Restoration of Ornamental Plaster
LEAD: WHEN an old or historic house is being restored, an interior architectural detail often in need of repair or replacement is plaster, in the form of ceiling medallions, cornices, capitals, pilasters, moldings and brackets.


Parsippany Home of Gustav Stickley Opening This Weekend
LEAD: THIS weekend, a house that may well become a major shrine of the American Arts and Crafts Movement is scheduled to open to the public.
The opening festivities mark the beginning of an ambitious, long-range program for a museum and study center at Craftsman Farms, the family residence of Gustav Stickley, the Arts and


Japan Offers Its Good Offices to U.S. and Iran
LEAD: As Iran and the United States haltingly begin searching for ways to end a decade of hostility, the neutral ground for exchanging messages, providing explanations and coaxing both sides along has cropped up in an unlikely spot: the Japanese Foreign Ministry in downtown Tokyo.


Harleysville Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harleysville Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
83,223,000
75,759,000
Net inc
5,157,000
4,545,000
Share earns
.69
.62
Shares outst
7,473,582
7,314,602


Chariot Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chariot Group (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,103,000
3,197,000
Net inc
7,000
b394,000
Share earns
-
.16
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $127,000.
Year-ago results are restated to reflect discontinued operations.


Spiegel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spiegel Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
389,864,000
325,197,000
Net inc
7,763,000
6,335,000
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
51,946,977
51,945,827


The High Cost of Peace Jolts a Connecticut Factory Town
LEAD: For most of the 1980's, this town 10 miles north of New London was awash in money from the nation's military build-up.
Many of the 17,000 residents commuted to the Electric Boat submarine shipyard in nearby Groton.
Others worked at the local UNC Naval Products plant, which builds nuclear reactors for submarines.


Auberges des Gouverneurs reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Auberges des Gouverneurs
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,820,963
8,190,948
Net loss
b1,363,822
123,231
b-Included a loss of $123,000 from the sale of shares.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Alza Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alza Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
24,010,000
23,362,000
Net inc
5,467,000
4,402,000
Share earns
.16
.13
Shares outst
35,027,000
33,742,000


Angola Expects New Rebel Talks
LEAD: Angola's Foreign Minister said today that the leftist Government of President Jose Eduardo dos Santos will reopen peace talks with its American-backed rebels ''in the next few days.''


Amoskeag Bank Shares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoskeag Bank Shares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
11,298,000
17,583,000


Northern States Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern States Power Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
583,600,000
560,600,000
Net inc
65,900,000
71,000,000
Share earns
.98
1.05


American Medical Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Medical Electronics
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,298,828
2,433,466
Net inc
b198,890
b192,193
Share earns
.05
.04
Shares outst
4,228,706
4,283,387
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $70,855, or 2 cents a share for the latest quarter and $61,834, or 1 cent a share for the year-earlier period.


Tough Anti-Smoking Effort Aims at Cigarette Marketers
LEAD: In Paul Keye's view, the most effective way to combat smoking, especially among teen-agers and the underprivileged, is to undermine the advertising that portrays cigarettes as glamorous or ''cool.''


Car-Bombing Aimed At a Police Vehicle Kills 10 in Colombia
LEAD: A car bomb exploded near a police truck in Medellin today, killing up to 10 people, the police said.
The attack was apparently carried out by Colombia's drug cartels in retaliation for a new state crackdown on their activities, the police said.


BankWorcester Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankWorcester Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
7,832,000
b2,800,000
Per share
-
.38
Shares outst
6,610,000
7,336,000
b-Net income


Brush Wellman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brush Wellman Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
80,800,000
80,900,000
Net inc
b5,500,000
b10,200,000
Share earns
.34
.59
Shares outst
16,143,802
17,332,225
b-Included a nonrecurring charge of 6 cents a share in the latest quarter and a gain of 11 cents a share in the year-ago quarter.


Kidney Researchers Report New Gains for Transplants
LEAD: Two teams of researchers, one French and one American, report that they have developed separate ways to improve the success rates of kidney transplant surgery.


Union Texas Petroleum Holdngs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Texas Petroleum Holdngs Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
311,000,000
307,000,000
Net inc
31,000,000
b50,000,000
Share earns
.23
.45
Shares outst
84,343,746
83,944,486
b-Reflected a gain from its business interruption insurance of $28 million.


Michael Milken's Guilt
LEAD: Michael Milken is a crook.
He admitted that much in U.S.
District Court Tuesday when he pleaded guilty to six felonies and agreed to put up $600 million, $200 million of that in fines, to settle the biggest fraud case in the history of the securities industry.


Evolution in Europe;   A Free-Market Plunge? Gorbachev's Not Ready
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev took his doubts and hesitancy to the people today, visiting the nation's industrial core in the Urals to seek the public's views about the painful problem of how to improve the stagnant economy without compounding the nation's crisis.


Suspension for Myricks
LEAD: Larry Myricks, the world's second-ranked long jumper, has been suspended from American and international competition for three months for testing positive for a stimulant commonly found in an over-the-counter cold medication.


Kelly Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kelly Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
354,974,000
323,706,000
Net inc
15,840,000
15,538,000
Share earns
.53
.52


Adac Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adac Laboratories (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
20,000,000
24,000,000
Net inc
1,200,000
4,100,000
Share earns
.03
.09
6mo rev
37,300,000
46,500,000
Net inc
2,300,000
7,900,000
Share earns
.05
.18


BankNorth Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankNorth Group Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,800,000
5,000,000
Per share
.55
.73
The company said the latest quarter results included a provision for loan losses of $1.7 million.


Dr. Max L. Som, 84, Specialist in Tumors Of Head and Neck
LEAD: Dr.
Max L. Som, a surgeon and leader in the field of otolaryngology whose specialty was the treatment of tumors of the head and neck, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan, after a long illness.
He was 84 years old.


Michener's Random Deal
LEAD: A month after he threatened to abandon Random House, the novelist James Michener has decided to stay with his longtime publisher after all.


4 Years Later, Chernobyl Still Claims Victims


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Fourteen months ago, after singing professionally for only three seasons in European opera houses, SHARON SWEET was set to make her American debut at Carnegie Hall with the Collegiate Chorale.
But the day before she was to have sung the Verdi Requiem, she was dismissed by the chorale's director, ROBERT BASS.


Home Improvements
LEAD: ALMOST all outdoor home maintenance requires working at heights.
For most jobs, an extension ladder is adequate.
But for some work, rented scaffolding is safer and easier to use, and it saves time.


Hibernia Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hibernia Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
127,730
405,872
Per share
.16
.51


NEW RADAR PEERS OVER THE HORIZON
LEAD: A new radar system that will allow observers to look over the earth's horizon and get an earlier warning of enemy aircraft or drug-smuggling planes has been delivered to the Air Force by the system's manufacturer, the General Electric Company.


Freeport-McMoran Resource Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Resource Partners L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
222,191,000
268,931,000
Net inc
b108,957,000
41,355,000
Share earns
1.33
.51
Shares outst
82,061,000
80,504,000
b-Included a gain of $100.9 million on sale of certain nitrogen fertilizer assets.


Weirton Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weirton Steel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
311,900,000
363,700,000
Net inc
4,000,000
6,100,000
Share earns
.18
.30


CCX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CCX Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
19,981,000
13,032,000
Net loss
b1,212,000
c642,000
Share earns
-
.15
9mo sales
48,077,000
31,924,000
Net loss
b3,505,000
c877,000
Share earns
-
.19


Sales Weighed By Harcourt
LEAD: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. has been discussing the sale of all or a part of its huge debt at a discount to book value along with the possible sales of some of its businesses, according to a statement last night by Peter Jovanovich, the publishing company's president and chief executive.


Calnetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calnetics Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,360,000
915,000
Net inc
157,000
65,000
Share earns
.06
.03
Shares outst
2,846,924
2,260,299
9mo sales
8,337,000
2,802,000
Net inc
370,000
169,000
Share earns
.14
.07
Shares outst
2,714,052
2,260,299


Physicians Pin Ulcers on New Suspect: A Germ
LEAD: For centuries doctors have argued over the cause of ulcers.
Stress?
Alcohol?
Smoking?
Genes?
But in the last few years a tiny bacterium that infects the stomach lining has emerged as a prime suspect.


First American Savings-Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Savings-Ohio
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
968,000
1,229,000
Per share
.44
.56
9mo net inc
2,866,000
3,488,000
Per share
1.30
1.59


Paul W. Kayser, 72, Recruiting Executive
LEAD: Paul W. Kayser, senior vice president of Paul R. Ray &amp; Company, an international executive-recruiting concern based in Fort Worth, died of a heart attack Saturday while vacationing in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico.
He was 72 years old and lived in Rancho Mirage, Calif.


Bank of East Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of East Tennessee
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
133,653
125,356
Per share
.07
.07


Consolidated Freightways Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Freightways Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
997,711,000
726,101,000
Net loss
33,886,000
b32,538,000
Share earns
-
.86
Shares outst
34,983,340
37,719,766
b-Net income and included a gain of $11,300,000, or 30 cents a share from an accounting adjustment.


Death Sentence Fuels Japan's Soul-Searching
LEAD: All of Japan was shocked 21 years ago when a teen-ager was arrested in four separate killings within a few months in different parts of the country.
No one was surprised when the man was later convicted and sentenced to be hanged.


First Interstate of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate of Iowa (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,462,000
3,176,000
Per share
.21
.27


No Form? What to Do
LEAD: Those who have still not received census forms should call the Census Bureau hot line, 1-800-999-1990, give a name and an address and report failure to receive a form.


Delvin Miller: Eight Decades In the Sulky
LEAD: While touring Ireland a few years ago, Delvin Miller was invited to visit the Portmarnock trotting track.
But because of traffic and misdirections on the small country roads outside Dublin, he and his friends didn't arrive until well after the first race was scheduled to go off. ''I'm sorry I'm late,'' he said.


PERES IN TROUBLE AS DEADLINE NEARS
LEAD: With Shimon Peres's deadline for forming a new Government just 24 hours away, the Labor Party appears to have given up hope that it can break the deadlock with Likud.


Talking Deals;   Behind the Sale Of Marshall Field
LEAD: THE Dayton Hudson Corporation's $1.04 billion deal to buy Marshall Field &amp; Company, announced last Thursday, shows that despite the recent troubles of several big department stores, a strong economic niche still exists for full-line, broad-based chains, merchants and analysts say.


A Bonfire of Image Worries: The Silly Season in the Bronx
LEAD: Rushing to the defense of Bronx honor, Borough President Fernando Ferrer said yesterday that he might lead a boycott of Warner Brothers for aspersions expected to be cast by the coming film ''The Bonfire of the Vanities.''


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: A 40-year-old man with mysterious symptoms entered the hospital for tests.
A week later, he died.
The cause of his death was never revealed, although the family had reason to believe that one of the tests was responsible.


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,153,084
1,018,228
Per share
.33
.29
Yr net inc
4,411,971
3,946,724
Per share
1.25
1.12


Johnstown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnstown Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
111,000
611,000
Per share
.06
.31


Platinum Prices Plunge; Gold and Silver Fall Again
LEAD: Precious metal futures prices plunged yesterday as a supply-connected collapse of platinum prices prompted selling in the gold and silver markets, which had already been weakened by a lack of investor demand.


Close to Home
LEAD: ON a recent bleary-eyed Sunday morning, I got up early to watch a movie that had played on public television at 4 A.M. (For months after I'd bought a VCR I was drunk on rental movies. Now I realize that true inebriation lies in taping the stuff that's shown when all but muggers and their victims are asleep.) The movie was called ''Kitty,'' starred Paulette Goddard and Ray Milland, and had Sir Thomas Gainsborough among the characters.


Key Centurion Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Centurion Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
6,361,000
6,297,000
Per share
.31
.31
Year-ago figures included a gain of $1.8 million related to a pension settlement.


Diagnostic Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostic Products (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,163,000
14,135,000
Net inc
4,313,000
3,530,000
Share earns
.34
.28


Mickelberry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mickelberry Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
22,405,000
18,757,000
Net loss
151,000
223,000


G.M. Shifting Some Output
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation today annnounced plans to shift production of the Chevrolet Camaro and Pontiac Firebird models to a Canadian plant in Ste.
Therese, Quebec, from its factory in Van Nuys, Calif.


INSIDE
LEAD:
The Door-to-Door Census: Will People Cooperate?
Beginning today, census takers will try to visit people who did not return forms or never got them.


Dollar Off in Light Trading; Swiss Franc and Mark Gain
LEAD: The dollar fell against most primary foreign currencies yesterday in light trading as the Swiss franc and the West German mark rose sharply, traders said.


2 Merrill Executives In Move to Benedetto
LEAD: Jerome P. Greene, foreseeing a big expansion in the market for the private placement of securities, has left as a manager of the private placement group at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets to join Benedetto, Gartland &amp; Company.
He is taking one of his colleagues with him.


Jackson Visits Teaneck And Talks to Students
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson today urged 1,200 Teaneck High School students to rise above the divisiveness caused by the police shooting of a black teen-ager and to ''give justice and peace a chance.''


Angola Railway Attacks Hit the Starving Hardest
LEAD: The train lurched, screeched and shuddered to a halt. ''Bandits!'' a conductor screamed, but a crackle of gunfire from both sides of the track kept the passengers from scattering.


Foundation Clears Plan To Sell Gannett Shares
LEAD: Trustees of the Gannett Foundation today approved the possible sale of some or all of its 10 percent stake in the Gannett Company, one the nation's largest communications companies.


Kinder-Care Learning Centers reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kinder-Care Learning Centers (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
96,323,000
82,725,000
Net inc
b299,000
4,419,000
Share earns
.01
.09
b-Included results of Sylvan Learning Corp., which experienced anticipated seasonal losses, and Mini- Skools Ltd., both of which Kinder- Care acquired in November 1989.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Products &amp; Chemicals (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
713,100,000
668,900,000
Net inc
b60,600,000
c56,700,000
Share earns
1.09
1.04
6mo sales
1,365,600,000
1,309,500,000
Net inc
110,000,000
d117,800,000
Share earns
1.99
2.15


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is the dawn of a new republic.
It has been born not of screams and bullets, but of the deepest silence of the Nicaraguan soul - the conscience.''
- President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro.
[A1:6.]


Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,301,829
7,096,033
Per share
.61
.60


15-MONTH INQUIRY ON FAUNTROY ENDS
LEAD: The Justice Department has ended a 15-month investigation of Walter Fauntroy's employment of the son of a colleague in the House of Representatives, department officials said today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Japan should not again be cited for unfair trading practices, Carla A. Hills, the U.S. trade representative, told Congress, saying the U.S. and Japan had reached an agreement on wood products that could raise U.S exports to Japan by $1 billion a year. [Page A1.]
The House voted to set up a process that would allow the Government to close banks and savings and loans convicted of laundering drug money.


Bill on Penny Stocks Draws Criticism From S.E.C. Chief
LEAD: Richard C. Breeden, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, expressed strong reservations today about key portions of a legislative package intended to strengthen Federal oversight of the nation's penny stock market.


SUSPECT IS NAMED In A STORE BOMBING
LEAD: The authorities have determined that a small bomb that maimed a 5-year-old girl at a K Mart store here a year ago was built by a teen-ager who, apparently despondent over his act, committed suicide two days later.


St. Louis Sun Shuts Down After 7 Months
LEAD: Unable to attract enough readers, Ralph Ingersoll 2d said today that this morning's issue of The St.
Louis Sun was the fledgling tabloid's last.


Amwest Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amwest Insurance Group (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
713,000
995,000
Share earns
.30
.40
Shares outst
2,399,000
2,517,000
The company said first quarter 1990 earnings included a $135,000, or 5 cents a share, negative adjustment due to potential rebates Amwest may incur under Proposition 103, which would roll back rates of certain insurance companies.


Langway Reaches His Goal at Right Time
LEAD: He had no goals all season, not even in the preseason tour of Sweden and the Soviet Union by the Capitals.
Some joked that he not even scored in the team's intrasquad scrimmages, but Rod Langway, the ageless captain of the Capitals, got a big one tonight.


Evolution in Europe;   Bush Defends Lithuania Policies, Saying Americans Support Them
LEAD: Responding to continuing criticism from Lithuania, President Bush declared bluntly today that he needed no defense for his refusal to penalize the Soviet Union for its tightening economic squeeze on the rebellious Baltic republic.


Trumbull Higgins, 70, Historian And Author on U.S. War Strategy
LEAD: Trumbull Higgins, a military historian and an author, died of a heart attack yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.


On the East Coast, It's House-Tour Time
LEAD: DESIGNER show houses and house and garden tours are being offered up and down the East Coast over the next two months.
Here are some of the possibilities for a spring outing.
New York City


Addendum
LEAD: *
Leading National Advertisers has acquired Radio Expenditure Reports Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.


Catherine M. Quigley, Mayor, 59
LEAD: Catherine M. Quigley, the Mayor of this Camden County community of about 5,000 people since 1986 died of cancer on Monday at her home here.
She was 59 years old.


2-Year Notes Get Tepid Reception
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities moved lower again yesterday, as a morning rally was cut short by selling after an auction of $10.5 billion of new two-year Treasury notes received a lukewarm reception.


Civic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Civic Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
650,000
422,000
Per share
.29
.24


Real Estate Feels the Pain Of Tighter Credit Standards
LEAD: The real estate industry, more than any other, is feeling the pinch of the tighter lending standards being applied by banks across the country.





Maxicare Health
LEAD: Maxicare Health Plans Inc. said it had broken off acquisition talks with a suitor, Pacificare Health Systems Inc., a rival health maintenance organization.
The companies said that no further talks were scheduled, but Pacificare, a unit of Unihealth America, said that it would review its options.


Evolution in Europe;   Fighting Dismissal, Diplomat Says F.B.I. Taped Him Illegally
LEAD: Felix S. Bloch is battling efforts to dismiss him from his State Department post, contending that the department has relied on illegal surveillance to make the case that he is a national security risk, according to documents filed in Federal district court.


Baker Hughes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baker Hughes Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
600,879,000
568,554,000
Net inc
30,303,000
b14,722,000
Share earns
.23
.11
Shares outst
125,699,000
118,751,000
6mo rev
1,179,787,000
1,134,845,000
Net inc
55,715,000
b32,085,000
Share earns
.42
.24
Shares outst
123,265,000
118,631,000


Tenneco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tenneco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,602,000,000
3,319,000,000
Net inc
134,000,000
109,000,000
Share earns
1.03
.82
Shares outst
125,700,000
126,900,000


Ameriana Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameriana Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
634,000
520,000
Per share
.33
.27


Reviews/Dance;   Ballet Season Begins
LEAD: The New York City Ballet opened its spring season on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater with three well-danced works by George Balanchine.
It was a program that suggested the remarkable variety of which Balanchine was capable and that showed off the considerable talents of the company's principal dancers and young soloists.


Washington Talk;   Democrats Look to '92 Starting Line
LEAD: A Bob Kerrey boomlet hit the nation's capital not long ago, one more example of the twitching, anxious yearning in some political circles for the start of the 1992 Presidential campaign.


Fun (Some of It Serious) at Kips Bay
LEAD: SAVING the planet and recycling, making the most of small spaces, lots of electronic gadgetry and plenty of humor - these are the lively and surprisingly timely themes at this year's Kips Bay Decorator Show House.


Sun's Work Station Gets More Power
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. said it had raised the performance on its most popular desktop work station, the Sparcstation 1, and lowered prices on various peripheral products.
Depending on configuration, the resdesignated Sparcstation 1+ is priced from $8,995 to $27,695.


Profits Rise At Norfolk
LEAD: The Norfolk Southern Corporation reported today that its first-quarter net income rose 4.8 percent on a 2.7 percent increase in revenue.


Robert L. Finley, 90, Lawyer and U.S. Aide
LEAD: Robert Lawrence Finley, a lawyer in Manhattan and a retired Government official, died of cancer on Sunday at Huggins Hospital in Wolfeboro, N.H.
He was 90 years old and lived in Tamworth, N.H.


Connecticut Debates Stake in Gun Maker It Saved
LEAD: Connecticut rushed in with state pension funds last month to save one of the state's oldest employers, Colt Firearms.
Now, the rejuvenated company's decision to begin making a gun patterned after its old, best-selling assault rifle has ignited a debate about the financial, moral and political implications of a public investment in guns.


Lone Star Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lone Star Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
146,400,000
147,500,000
Net inc
8,300,000
b17,100,000
Share earns
.41
-
b-Net loss and after a loss from discontinued operations of $1.6 million.


Mips Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mips Computer Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
32,227,000
20,462,000
Net inc
3,496,000
b862,000
Share earns
.14
.05
Shares outst
25,479,000
18,681,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $374,000.


American Film Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Film Technologies
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,537,102
2,730,248
Net inc
506,742
249,586
Share earns
.05
.02
Shares outst
10,146,500
9,011,900
9mo rev
12,798,815
7,511,845
Net inc
2,026,651
b133,921
Share earns
.20
-
Shares outst
10,065,500
8,722,200


Suncor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suncor Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
381,000,000
346,000,000
Net inc
19,000,000
8,000,000
Share earns
.34
.15
Suncor is a unit of Sun Co., which reported earnings earlier this morning.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Brunswick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brunswick Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
685,600,000
791,100,000
Net inc
14,700,000
17,200,000
Share earns
.17
.02
Shares outst
88,000,000
86,400,000


Banta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banta Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
153,193,000
136,984,000
Net inc
5,840,000
b5,477,000
Share earns
.46
.43
Shares outst
12,769,237
12,724,937
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $340,000, or 3 cents a share.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a brief Company News article in Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to the role of the Bank of America in a $1 billion loan to the MCI Communications Corporation.
The bank is putting together a group of lenders to make the loan; it is not lending the entire amount.


Rome Journal;   Marcus Aurelius Rides Again, but Behind Glass
LEAD: On this day of Italian liberation, the most unliberated soul in town happened to be a figure often regarded, Shakespeare notwithstanding, as the noblest Roman of them all.


Avery Fisher Grants
LEAD: Two violinists, Gil Shaham and Chee-Yun, both 19 years old, and a cellist, Yosif Feigelson, 35 years old, are the recipients of the 1990 Avery Fisher Career Grants.
Each will receive $10,000 for career needs.


Central Maine Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Maine Power Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
202,000,000
185,000,000
Net inc
18,200,000
15,500,000
Share earns
.67
.64
Shares outst
25,994,659
22,816,032


Spots by Follis &amp; Verdi To Fight Child Abuse
LEAD: The camera first looks down on the basketball player's sneakers, and then, amid chilling music, it pans seven feet up to his head.
He bends toward the camera and says, ''If it makes you nervous to have someone my size in your face, now you know how your kid feels when you're in his.'' In one spot the player is Mark Eaton, the 7-foot-4 center of the Utah Jazz.


Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,550,000
1,544,000
Per share
.31
.43
Shares outst
4,965,000
3,750,000


Economy Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Economy Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
274,000
b628,000
Per share
.32
-
b-Included a one-time gain of $356,600 on the sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. preferred stock.
Per share results for 1989 first quarter not available because the company converted from a mutual to a stock institution on June 28, 1989.


Tax the Toxics Out of the Environment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pitney Bowes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pitney Bowes Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
755,701,000
658,225,000
Net inc
59,721,000
b119,547,000
Share earns
.75
1.51
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $97,000 and an accounting adjustment gain of $66,048,000, or 83 cents a share.


Exxon Votes Down Environmental Plans
LEAD: Under siege by environmentalists for more than a year, Lawrence G. Rawl, the chairman of the Exxon Corporation, won a measure of support today as a series of environmental initiatives were overwhelmingly rejected at the company's annual shareholders' meeting.


Commissioner's Office Is Monitoring Clubhouse Phone Calls
LEAD: Pete Rose is no longer in baseball, but just as his career hits record will live long after him, so apparently will the Pete Rose telephone logs.


Cliffs Drilling Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cliffs Drilling Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
26,184,000
16,027,000
Net inc
1,031,000
61,000
Share earns
.12
-
Shares outst
2,963,079
2,922,279


Cominco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cominco Ltd.  (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
309,600,000
400,500,000
Net inc
17,100,000
70,500,000
Share earns
.20
.86
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Hawthorne Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawthorne Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,356,093
4,400,729
Per share
1.68
1.69


Glade Peterson, Tenor, 61
LEAD: Glade Peterson, a tenor, died of cancer on Saturday.
He was 61 years old.
Mr.
Peterson made his professional debut in 1958 as Pinkerton in Puccini's ''Madama Butterfly'' with the NBC Touring Company in Amherst, Mass.
His European debut was in 1960 in Spoleto, Italy.


Mental Patient and Shootings Puzzle Georgians
LEAD: Georgia officials are trying to sort out why the man accused of shooting five people in a shopping mall here Tuesday had been released from a state mental hospital a day earlier.


Dinkins Promises Shift In Social Service Units
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that the city would move to break down bureaucratic barriers and provide social services to people where they live, rather than have them go to different offices in different areas.


Reviews/Dance;   Blend With Conceptual Art
LEAD: There is a wonderfully theatrical effect toward the end of Jonathon Appels's new ''Crimson,'' presented by the Company Appels on Friday night at the Cooper Union Great Hall.
A line of dancers stretches across the shallow stage space, shifting in almost continuous motion as a floodlight at the back of the auditorium slowly pans the stage.


Roosevelt Island: A 'Wonderful' Experiment Still Building
LEAD: Twenty years after New York City and state officials decided to create a new community on Roosevelt Island, integrated by race and income, the social experiment has been hailed as a success while the housing development is still struggling toward completion.


Off Broadway (Way, Way Off), A Tuneful 'Spider Woman' Is On
LEAD: John Rubinstein and Kevin Gray are sitting at a small table, stage center, in a dimly lighted, somewhat seedy Latin American nightclub.
They are cellmates in a dark and torture-filled prison in a Latin American dictatorship, but their cell has been transformed into the nightclub, which is part of a movie musical unfolding in Mr.


Andover Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andover Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,125,000
1,779,000
Per share
.27
.38


Stocks Rise, With Dow Rebounding 11.94
LEAD: Stock prices yesterday broke a five-day losing streak, with the Dow Jones industrial average advancing 11.94 points, to 2,666.44.
Analysts attributed the momentum to takeover fever.


Western Union Seeks Note Swap
LEAD: The Western Union Corporation told the Securities and Exchange Commission that it would seek to swap new secured notes and common stock for $530 million worth of its outstanding notes.
The company also said in a filing that it would seek to reclassify its preferred stock and class B common shares, which require dividend payments, as regular common shares, which do not require dividend payments.


U.S. Checks Possibility Of Attack on a Judge
LEAD: The rear window of a Federal judge's car was shattered as he drove to work today, and the authorities immediately undertook an investigation to determine whether the incident was related to a mail bomb that killed a judge of the same court four months ago.


A Top Auto Theft Ring Is Reported Smashed
LEAD: The police reported breaking up a major automobile-theft ring yesterday that they said was stealing 15 cars a week from Ozone Park, Queens, and selling the parts through a salvage yard in downtown Brooklyn.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: A 10-YEAR-OLD boy was sent to the principal's office at Belmont Elementary School in Lincoln, Neb., after he came to class with answers to a standardized test written on his hands.
The boy had copied some of the questions from the test booklet the day before the examination.


Geraldine Murphy, 70, A Professor of English
LEAD: Geraldine Murphy, a professor of English at Wesleyan University who was the first female faculty member promoted to a tenured position, died last Friday at a hospital in Florence.
She was 70 years old.
Professor Murphy fell while traveling on a break and lapsed into a coma, the university said.


Iroquois Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iroquois Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
391,000
496,000
Per share
.29
.41
Iroquois became the thrift holding company of Cayuga Savings Bank on March 1 and reports consolidated financial information of Iroquois and Cayuga.


Knowledgeware Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knowledgeware Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
16,842,000
7,187,000
Net inc
2,459,000
1,215,000
Share earns
.20
.15
Shares outst
12,292,000
8,225,000
9mo rev
43,906,000
17,485,000
Net inc
6,164,000
2,591,000
Share earns
.54
.31
Shares outst
11,378,000
8,227,000


Allegheny Power System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Power System (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
628,832,000
590,121,000
Net inc
63,611,000
62,471,000
Share earns
1.20
1.20
The company said net income for the recent periods reflects the continued growth in kilowatthour sales and the elimination in January of the previously reported temporary $20 million reduction in annual revenues in Pennsylvania.


Systems Maker's Net
LEAD: After an internal investigation, Network Equipment Technologies Inc. today reported declining earnings for the quarter and year ended March 31.


Rutgers Students Protest Planned Tuition Increase


Home Resale Rate Lagging
LEAD: Relatively high mortgage rates prevented sales of existing homes in March from improving on their February rate, the lowest in eight months, a real estate trade group said today.


Li Peng Says Soviet Ideas of Change Do Not Apply to China
LEAD: Prime Minister Li Peng of China said today that reports of a rift with Moscow over the waning of Communism had been exaggerated, but he left little doubt that the two neighbors are on different political wavelengths.


Leave Given to Umpire
LEAD: Charged with stealing more than 4,000 baseball cards from a store in Bakersfield, Calif., Bob Engel was put on an indefinite leave of absence from his umpiring duties by the National League yesterday.


Shell Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shell Canada
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,236,000,000
1,215,000,000
Net inc
63,000,000
117,000,000
Share earns
.56
1.04
Figures are in Canadian funds.


United Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Industrial (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
61,987,000
68,948,000
Net inc
3,363,000
b2,923,000
Share earns
.26
-
b-Net loss and included a non-cash charge of $6,595,000, or 50 cents a share, from a court settlement.


Holiday Inns Cuts
LEAD: Holiday Inns Inc. said it would eliminate 600 jobs by reorganizing its hotel management efforts into separate divisions overseeing franchise operations and its company-owned hotels.
The company, purchased by the British brewery and hotel conglomerate Bass P.L.C. in February, plans to concentrate on hotels, its main business.


Rights and Morality
LEAD: When Gov.
Cecil Andrus of Idaho recently vetoed an anti-abortion bill, an article in this space declared the measure ''thoroughly deserving'' of his rejection.
That article also set off a barrage of critical mail, primarily evoked by this paragraph:


Marshall to Rescue For 2d Night in Row
LEAD: With an eighth-inning rally developing last night, Mike Marshall retreated to the Mets' clubhouse.
He stretched, swung a bat, and ran in the bowels of Shea Stadium.
He wanted to prepare for a possible pinch-hitting assignment.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
International
A3-18
Violeta Barrios de Chamorro was inaugurated as Nicaragua's President, ending more than a decade of rule by the Sandinista National Liberation Front.
It was the first democratic transfer of power in the country's history.
Page A1


Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
9,404,000,000
8,674,000,000
Net inc
615,000,000
736,000,000
Share earns
.90
1.03
Shares outst
682,600,000
714,500,000
The company said first-quarter results included non-recurring charges, mostly from business restructurings.


First Harrisburg Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Harrisburg Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
289,700
492,100
Per share
.36
.62
Latest per share earnings adjusted for 10 percent stock dividend paid in the fourth quarter of 1989.


Harvard Law School Torn by Race Issue
LEAD: Professors and students at Harvard Law School have been polarized over the issues raised by a black professor's declaration on Monday that he intended to stay off the job until the school appoints a black woman to its tenured faculty.


People
LEAD: *
Irwin Gotlieb has been promoted to worldwide director of broadcast and programming at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, and Rino Scanzoni to director of national broadcast for the agency's United States division.


For Giants Draftee, Size Is No Deterrent
LEAD: Greg Mark will never be mistaken for a jockey or a gymnast or a featherweight boxer.
He is not exactly tiny.


Prototype of Submarine Reactor Prepared for Tests
LEAD: A prototype for a powerful new nuclear reactor, intended to propel a new generation of submarines at greater speeds and depths, is quietly being prepared for testing at a Government laboratory near Schenectady, experts said yesterday.


Prisoner Tells Of Confession By Defendant
LEAD: A convicted swindler with a long criminal career testified yesterday that Joseph Fama confessed to killing Yusuf K. Hawkins in a jailhouse conversation last September.


CDI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CDI Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
228,949,000
205,267,000
Net inc
b2,771,000
4,595,000
Share earns
.14
.23
Shares outst
19,711,000
19,712,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $1,677,000.


China Scholars Disown Bush's Beijing Policy
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Homely Floor Cloth, With a Touch of Mystery
LEAD: CHARLES GOFORTH, a Manhattan artist, has taken a homely accessory dating from the 18th century and made it exotic.
He paints trompe l'oeil floor cloths: an Oriental rug that seems to be peeled back from a tile floor; a mosaic floor that appears to be worn and stained in one corner.


Bell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
97,201,000
100,810,000
Net inc
1,800,000
897,000
Share earns
.31
.15
9mo sales
292,907,000
312,527,000
Net inc
5,333,000
3,089,000
Share earns
.91
.50
Shares outst
5,853,000
6,145,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: After a bout of pneumonia that nearly killed her last weekend, ELIZABETH TAYLOR was much improved yesterday, her doctors said.
They said they could find no evidence that she had either AIDS or cancer.
Rumors about the health of the 58-year-old screen star have been circulating since she was hospitalized in California on


BancFlorida Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancFlorida Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
6,937,000
b281,000
6mo net loss
5,622,000
b2,052,000
Per share
-
.51
b-Net income and the 6 months included one-time, pre-tax gain of $2.1 million resulting from curtailment of pension benefits under the company's pension plan as of Oct.


In Switch, U.S. Studies Home Test Kits for AIDS
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration said today that it had reconsidered its longstanding opposition to the idea of testing for AIDS in the home and would accept applications for approval of test kits.


Fort Wayne National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fort Wayne National
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,318,000
4,665,000
Per share
.56
.61


Consolidated Imaging reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Imaging
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,279,854
1,501,967
Net loss
577,614
189,335
Yr rev
5,500,919
6,283,774
Net loss
1,269,398
166,926


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Cleaning a Concrete Walk


A Police Officer Is Shot Foiling A Bronx Holdup
LEAD: A 25-year-old police officer was shot in the stomach and seriously wounded last night in a shootout with a robbery suspect on a street in the Bronx, the police said.


New Ballet Theater Dancer
LEAD: Faruk Ruzimatov, a principal dancer with the Kirov Ballet, has joined American Ballet Theater as a principal, effective immediately, Ballet Theater has announced.
Mr.
Ruzimatov, whose Ballet Theater contract runs through November, is to perform in the company's eight-week season, opening on May 7, at the Metropolitan Opera House.


First Citizens Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Citizens Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
7,190,000
6,026,000
Per share
.77
.63


President Is Promoted At Battle Mountain Gold
LEAD: The Battle Mountain Gold Company has named Karl E. Elers as chairman and chief executive.
His mission will be to bring the company successfully through the next few years as its most important gold mine runs out.


Applied Bioscience Internaional Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Bioscience Internaional Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
15,600,000
12,872,000
Net inc
1,403,000
1,112,000
Share earns
.41
.34
Shares outst
3,452,000
3,277,000


Prime Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
933,766
1,153,369
Per share
.68
.84
9mo net inc
2,435,825
2,662,390
Per share
1.76
-
Shares outst
1,380,833
1,380,000
The company did not release per share earnings for the year-ago 9 months because it only became a public company on Nov.


Ampco-Pittsburgh reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ampco-Pittsburgh (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
58,888,000
54,311,000
Net inc
b3,208,000
c1,695,000
Share earns
.34
.18
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $1,040,000, or 11 cents a share.
c-Included income from discontinued operations of $460,000, or 5 cents a share and an extraordinary tax credit of $400,000, or 4 cents a share.


Burritt Interfincl reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burritt Interfincl
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,305,000
1,176,000
Per share
.39
.34


Comedy Channels Likely to Merge
LEAD: Time Warner Inc and Viacom Inc. have agreed in principle to merge Time Warner's Comedy Channel and Viacom's HA!, a rival channel, a person involved in the negotiations said yesterday.


Bic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bic Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
79,304,000
80,410,000
Net inc
6,010,000
6,510,000
Share earns
.50
.54


Panhandle Eastern reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Panhandle Eastern (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,106,400,000
301,800,000
Net inc
b60,300,000
c33,000,000
Share earns
.69
.58
b-Included charge of $9.4 million for planned assets sale.
c-Included gain of $19 million, or 33 cents a share, on sale of investment.


Norfolk Southern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norfolk Southern Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,140,000,000
1,110,000,000
Net inc
140,200,000
133,800,000
Share earns
.84
.75


Baker Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baker Communications
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,117,873
1,496,450
Net loss
109,077
146,081
The company said the loss in the quarter included $147,000 from interest expenses, compared with $39,000 of such expenses in the year-aog quarter.


Tecumseh Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tecumseh Products (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
410,700,000
428,600,000
Net inc
15,800,000
21,700,000
Share earns
2.89
3.97
Year-ago quarter results restated to reflect the acquisition of Tecnamotor S.P.A., on a fully consolidated basis, net of minority interest.


Sun Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,110,000,000
2,650,000,000
Net inc
b71,000,000
81,000,000
Share earns
.66
.76
Shares outst
107,017,427
106,722,340
b-Included a $30 million after-tax benefit resulting from the cumulative effect for prior years of a change in accounting principle related to refinery maintenance shutdowns.


Altos Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altos Computer (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
32,600,000
32,400,000
Net loss
1,700,000
3,600,000
Shares outst
10,828,000
11,624,000
9mo sales
102,600,000
105,000,000
Net loss
3,100,000
b1,400,000
Shares outst
11,127,000
11,624,000


Chicago Journal;   Spawning Smelt and Soaring Spirits
LEAD: From the lakefront office towers and high-rise apartments, the lights along the shoreline look like stars in some new constellation, a string of twinkling points fixed against the Lake Michigan night.


Bhopal Pact Won't Increase
LEAD: Shareholders of the Union Carbide Corporation voted not to increase a $470 million settlement to victims of the 1984 Bhopal disaster at today's annual meeting.


Heart Medicine Appears to Slow Lung Damage in Cystic Fibrosis
LEAD: A preliminary study has found that a new form of a high blood pressure medicine appears to slow the life-threatening lung damage of cystic fibrosis.


Allen Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allen Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
93,514,000
88,880,000
Net inc
3,330,000
b11,313,000
Share earns
.28
1.26
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $8,855,000, or 86 cents a share.


Continental Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Medical Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
59,978,000
43,615,000
Net inc
2,633,000
1,640,000
Share earns
.18
.12
Shares outst
14,673,625
14,222,099
9mo rev
168,131,000
117,900,000
Net inc
6,065,000
b4,474,000
Share earns
.42
.32
Shares outst
14,596,849
14,225,737


Bridge
LEAD: One member of the Victor Mitchell team that won the Regional Swiss Team title in Hempstead, L.I., on Sunday had particular cause for satisfaction.
Seymour Reich, the least-known member of the squad, was the only one of the five players to play in all eight matches en route to a comfortable victory.


Cyprus Minerals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyprus Minerals Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
429,500,000
435,800,000
Net inc
30,100,000
81,000,000
Share earns
.65
1.96


Hannaford Bros.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hannaford Bros.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
393,919,000
348,025,000
Net inc
9,824,000
b10,451,000
Share earns
.50
.54
Shares outst
19,626,102
19,297,546
b-After an extraordinary credit of $1,874,000, or 10 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Evolution in Europe;   'Open Skies' Talks Hit Snag, Cutting Chances of Pact in May
LEAD: A stalemate has emerged at the second round of the the 23-nation ''open skies'' conference, sharply reducing any chance that a treaty allowing mutual aerial inspection of military sites will be signed next month as scheduled, Soviet and United States negotiators said today.


Knicks Look to a Graybeard to Be a Greyhound
LEAD: There are no state secrets in the National Basketball Association.


Clevetrust Realty Investors reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clevetrust Realty Investors (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,582,000
2,987,000
Net loss
452,000
bc66,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
1,972,772
1,970,146
6mo rev
5,161,000
5,503,000
Net loss
924,000
c312,000
Shares outst
1,972,772
1,970,815


Guess Who Doesn't Recycle. Hint: They Run the Country.
LEAD: Since the Sierra Club threatened to sue Federal agencies for not complying with the District of Columbia's recycling law, the State Department and others have begun to separate and sort their trash.


Saab Stock Option
LEAD: An investment house controlled by the Swedish financier Peter Wallenberg said it had an option to buy 13 million shares in the vehicle maker Saab-Scania A.B. at a hefty premium from another Swedish investment firm, Barkman &amp; Company.
The financial daily Dagens Industri reported that the shares would give Mr.


Books of The Times;   America's Best and Worst Night
LEAD:
Saturday Night
By Susan Orlean
258 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Retail Leaders Cautiously Optimistic on Saks Sale
LEAD: New York store and fashion industry executives reacted with surprise and some optimism to the announced sale of Saks Fifth Avenue yesterday.


'The German Question Remains Open'
LEAD: The message from the President of the United States was delivered to me on the Lufthansa plane even before the takeoff for Germany.


Basketball Not the Only Game for Hoyas
LEAD: In terms of success, Georgetown and basketball are synonymous.
But hardly Georgetown and lacrosse.
Dave Urick, however, means to make the Hoyas significant in this sport and he would like to start with the first winning lacrosse team in the university's history.


Rio Algom reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rio Algom
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
355,484,000
512,235,000
Net inc
20,131,000
b41,931,000
Share earns
.44
.94
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $1,824,000, or 4 cents a share.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Goodyear Net Tumbled 77.9% in First Quarter
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings plunged 77.9 percent because of severe price competition, the slowdown in automobile production and higher costs.


U.S. OFFICIAL CITES JAPAN'S PROGRESS ON OPEN MARKETS
LEAD: Japan should not again be cited for unfair trading practices, Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, told Congress today, disclosing that Washington and Tokyo had reached agreement on the last major item on their current trade agenda.


Albany Reaches Accord on Trucking Bills
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders have reached agreement on a broad package of safety measures for the trucking industry, including a ban on the use of radar detectors by truckers and new prohibitions against drinking.


Florida Orders Spraying to Combat Fruit Fly
LEAD: Florida has ordered aerial spraying of the pesticide malathion to protect its $1.4 billion citrus industry from an infestation of Mediterranean fruit flies.


Officials Fear Albany Cuts Will Raise Local Taxes
LEAD: While Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders continue their private negotiations on how to slash state spending, local officials fear that they may be the ones who get bloodied, both fiscally and politically.


Islamic Militants Dominating Sudan, Exiles Assert
LEAD: The execution of 28 officers by firing squad in the Sudan left no doubt that the 10-month-old military Government was totally dominated by the fundamentalist National Islamic Front, Sudanese exiles and human rights monitors say.


A 'Soap Noir' Inspires a Cult and Questions
LEAD: When F.B.I.
Agent Dale Cooper blurted out, ''I know who killed Laura Palmer!'' in a predawn telephone call to Sheriff Harry S. Truman just before the credits rolled at the end of last Thursday's episode of ''Twin Peaks,'' he gave the uncommon soap opera a commonplace soap-opera tease.
Viewers were duly warned: be there (next week) or be square.


HAILS A NEW ERA
LEAD: Ending more than a decade of rule by the Sandinista National Liberation Front, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro was inaugurated today as Nicaragua's President.
In a gesture of reconciliation, she then retained the top Sandinista military leader as the senior commander in the armed forces.


Detective Testifies Mondello Told of Seeing Fama Shoot
LEAD: A police detective testified yesterday that Keith Mondello had admitted seeing Joseph Fama fire the shots that killed Yusuf K. Hawkins last Aug. 23.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Ametek Inc., New York, an industrial manufacturer, named Walter E. Blankley president and chief executive.
He replaces John P. Dandalides, who retired.
The company also named Roger D. Kerr executive vice president and chief operating officer, and Allan Kornfeld executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Culbro Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
232,383,000
230,149,000
Net inc
907,000
1,170,000
Share earns
.21
.27
Shares outst
4,307,000
4,294,000


After Defeat, BTR Sells Norton Stock
LEAD: BTR P.L.C., the British conglomerate that was defeated in its effort to acquire Norton Company, said it had sold its Norton shares for an estimated profit of $12.2 million.
Norton, an abrasives and engineering concern based in Worcester, Mass., has agreed to be acquired by Compagnie de Saint-Gobain, a French conglomerate, for $90 a share, or about $1.9 billion in cash.


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avnet Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
433,800,000
474,900,000
Net inc
16,000,000
b10,700,000
Share earns
.44
.30
Shares outst
38,700,000
35,800,000
9mo sales
1,303,400,000
1,461,800,000
Net inc
49,000,000
b34,200,000
Share earns
1.35
.96
Shares outst
38,600,000
35,800,000


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Wednesday about Dr.
Irving Sarot, a retired New York thoracic surgeon, referred incorrectly to his daughter.
She is Ellin Sarot.


For Children;   Shows, Nature, Museums
LEAD:
''ESPLANADE,'' and other dances will be presented by the Paul Taylor Dance Company in its first family show, 3 P.M. on Sunday (a repeat show is set for May 6), at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
Tickets: $15, $27, $37 and $45.
Reservations: 581-7907.
CHILDREN'S STREET FAIR, with hay wagon rides, games, a visit in a puppet mobile and aboard a fire truck, face painting and a 2:30 P.M.


Teradyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teradyne Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
113,170,000
121,211,000
Net loss
4,651,000
b4,397,000
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net income


New York Bancorp Cites Sale Inquiry
LEAD: New York Bancorp Inc. said it had received a request from Patrick E. Malloy 3d, a director of the company, to discuss the possible acquisition of the company by an entity to be formed by Mr.
Malloy.
The company said it had not received any specific proposal.


USG Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USG Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
530,000,000
538,000,000
Net inc
b8,000,000
c3,000,000
Share earns
.14
.05
b-Included a non-recurring pretax gain of $34 million on the sale of the company's corporate headquarters building.


67 British Barristers, Dressed for Success
LEAD: On Tuesday morning, 67 British barristers put on wigs, gowns, waistcoats, lace cuffs, britches and silver-buckled shoes and went to the House of Lords.


First Source Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Source Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,802,000
2,431,000
Per share
.75
.61
Per share earnings adjusted to reflect 10 percent stock dividend paid in February 1990.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Mexican Specialties


Telecom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telecom Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,548,000
12,557,000
Net loss
26,000
b217,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
3,699,000
3,699,000
b-Net income


Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Research Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,070,600
5,621,200
Net loss
204,900
b173,900
Share earns
-
.15
6mo sales
10,760,900
10,835,200
Net inc
24,200
343,600
Share earns
.02
.25
b-Net income


CHENEY PROPOSES SHARP REDUCTIONS IN NEW WARPLANES
LEAD: Facing intense pressure from Congress to cut more deeply into the Pentagon budget, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney today proposed large reductions in the development and production of new warplanes, including the Stealth bomber.


Wounded Officer Has Surgery
LEAD: A police officer who was shot in the stomach Wednesday night when he interrupted a robbery at a fruit stand in the Bronx was in serious but stable condition yesterday at Jacobi Hospital, the authorities said.
The officer, David Quintana, 25 years old, had liver and intestinal surgery.
The police described the suspect in the shooting as a black man about 18 years old who was seen in a dark jacket and jeans.


Davis on Disabled List With Sprained Knee
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds put Eric Davis on the 15-day disabled list yesterday after Michael Lawhon, the team physician, confirmed that Davis had suffered a sprain of the medial collateral ligament in his right knee.


Citizens &amp; Southern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens &amp; Southern Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
41,640,000
57,768,000
Share earns
.64
.90
Shares outst
59,268,000
61,605,000


Judge Orders Arraignments In 24 Hours
LEAD: A State Supreme Court justice ruled yesterday that suspects in New York State must be arraigned within 24 hours of their arrest, rather than the current maximum of 72 hours.


Abortion Foes Gird for Rally to Display Strength
LEAD: The anti-abortion movement is hoping for a huge rally in the nation's capital on Saturday to demonstrate its strength and to counter the critics who say the political momentum has shifted to the cause of abortion rights since a Supreme Court decision reopened the struggle over the issue last year.


Carolco Deal On Europe TV
LEAD: Carolco Pictures Inc. said today that it had signed deals worth more than $50 million granting German and French companies the television broadcast rights to 34 feature films.


Beaux Arts Trio
LEAD: The Beaux Arts Trio - Menahem Pressler, pianist; Isidore Cohen, violinist, and Peter Wiley, cellist - is to play Haydn's Trio in E flat (Hob XV:29), Ravel's Trio in A minor and Beethoven's ''Archduke'' Trio at the Metropolitan Museum of Art tonight at 8.
The program is to be repeated tomorrow evening at 8.


Data General reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data General (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
314,800,000
342,700,000
Net loss
8,600,000
bc7,000,000
Share earns
-
.23
6mo rev
605,500,000
651,300,000
Net loss
29,100,000
c12,500,000
Shares outst
29,800,000
29,200,000


Healthcare Services Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthcare Services Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
15,002,975
13,037,036
Net inc
1,229,726
955,447
Share earns
.25
.20


Leslie Fay Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leslie Fay Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
222,878,000
203,384,000
Net inc
9,660,000
9,570,000
Share earns
.51
.50


A Talk on Design
LEAD: Maya Ying Lin, the sculptor who designed the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington and the Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Ala., will give a slide lecture, ''Design Processes: Recent Work,'' on Sunday at 3 P.M. in the Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The talk is free with museum admission of $5; $2.50 for students and the elderly.


2 Airlines Post Losses; Delta Slips
LEAD: Citing higher fuel costs, the parent companies of USAir and United Airlines yesterday reported first-quarter losses, while Delta Air Lines said its earnings fell 63 percent.


Perkins Family Restaurants L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perkins Family Restaurants L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
38,587,000
36,307,000
Net inc
2,532,000
2,075,000
Share earns
.25
.20


What Alice Neel Did In Her Final 7 Years
LEAD: Alice Neel, known for her fierce yet sympathetic portrayals of family, friends and art-world figures in slightly hallucinatory shades of oil paint, was not a dedicated maker of prints.
But in the last seven years of her life, the artist, who died in 1984 at the age of 84, set her hand to two etchings, seven lithographs and one color lithograph and silk-screen.


Study Finds Frequent Cheating at the Gas Pump
LEAD: American motorists are cheated out of as much as $150 million a year because the gasoline that is pumped into their cars' tanks by many service stations is of a lower grade than is posted on the pump, according to a Congressional report issued yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-8
France and West Germany jointly urged Lithuania to suspend its parliament's moves toward independence and to seek early negotiations with Moscow with a view to finding ''a solution acceptable to all parties.''
Page A1


They Had the Thrill of Being Published
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shawmut National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shawmut National Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
40,600,000
64,700,000
Per share
.55
.85
Shares outst
73,200,000
75,600,000
In a comprison with the 1989 quarter, the latest first quarter results reflected a substantially larger provision for loan losses, an increase in the level on non-performing assets and expenses associated with the recently completed regulatory examination of the corporation.


Constellation Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constellation Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
558,000
7,643,000
Per share
.07
.89
Year-ago per share earnings are pro forma--calculated as if 1,495,000 shares issued in conjunction with the New Brunswick Savings Bank transaction dated Sept.


Stiff Sentences? Listen to This
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quaker State Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quaker State Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
208,950,000
194,893,000
Net inc
2,326,000
580,000
Share earns
.09
.02


Gulf Canada Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gulf Canada Resources (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
227,000,000
215,000,000
Net inc
18,000,000
b21,000,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $6 million.


Blockbuster Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Blockbuster Entertainment (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
139,150,000
77,009,000
Net inc
13,449,000
7,389,000
Share earns
.17
.10
The company said 1989 figures reflect the 2-for-1 stock split in May 1989 and the pooled acquisition of Video Superstore Master Limited Partnership in August 1989.


U.S. Reaches Trade Deal With Moscow
LEAD: The United States announced today that it had reached broad agreement with the Soviet Union on a trade pact that should be ready for President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to sign when they hold their next summit meeting in Washington in late May.


Georgia's Way of Electing Judges Is Overturned by U.S. as Biased
LEAD: In a sweeping decision that could signal widespread changes for judicial elections throughout the South, the Department of Justice has thrown out Georgia's system for electing judges on the ground that it discriminates against blacks.


California Pushing the Limits With Environmental Plan
LEAD: The stage was set today for one of the toughest national political battles of 1990, drawing the environmental movement directly into hardball politics over a measure that would impose on California the most sweeping controls in the country.


United Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Bankshares Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,800,000
2,900,000
Per share
.36
.38


Hall (Frank B.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hall (Frank B.) (N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
111,897,000
100,234,000
Net inc
3,048,000
b3,069,000
Shares outst
31,686,000
25,514,000
b-Net loss
There were no share earnings in the latest first quarter after payment of preferred stock dividends.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Jan.-Mar.
Change
1990
From '89
Alco Standard Corp.
$ 28,700,000
-1.0
Allied-Signal Inc.
129,000,000
+2.4
Black &amp; Decker Corp.
10,000,000
-61.4
Comdisco Inc.
19,000,000
-24.0
Compaq Computer Corp.
92,200,000
+10.8
Delta Air Lines Inc.


Review/Art;   Latin-Born Painters, Abstract but Diverse
LEAD: ''Beyond the Surface'' does not set out as its primary goal to undo a stereotype about the art of contemporary Latin American-born painters.
The show is a tribute to three very different and very fine abstractionists, all of whom have lived in New York for more than a decade - Alicia Creus, Raquel Rabinovich and Francisca


Progressive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progressive Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
27,400,000
22,500,000
Share earns
1.01
.80
Shares outst
24,900,000
26,900,000


Leslie J. A. Lang, 81, An Episcopal Priest
LEAD: The Rev.
Leslie John Alden Lang, an Episcopal priest and an honorary assistant at St.
Thomas Church on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


Review/Theater;   Whodunit With Secrets For Audience to Keep
LEAD: In Rupert Holmes's last Broadway whodunit, ''The Mystery of Edwin Drood,'' the audience was invited to vote on the murderer at the end of the second act.
In ''Accomplice,'' Mr.
Holmes's new whodunit at the Richard Rodgers Theater, the audience should be allowed to vote on the beginning, middle and end of the second act.


Univar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Univar Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
317,267,000
315,630,000
Net inc
5,417,000
4,649,000
Share earns
.31
.26
Yr sales
1,378,864,000
1,307,865,000
Net inc
21,545,000
19,973,000
Share earns
1.22
1.13


Another Kind of Peace Dividend?
LEAD: Peace is breaking out in Central America -and maybe north of the border, too.


Comex Chief Reportedly Resigns
LEAD: After only eight months on the job, Arnold F. Staloff, the president and chief executive of the Commodity Exchange Inc., or Comex, resigned under pressure last night, people at the exchange said.


Wisconsin Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
391,327,000
419,961,000
Net inc
53,644,000
57,875,000
Share earns
.80
.86


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the March of Dimes Walk America fund-raiser, Lexington Avenue from 23d Street to 96th Street will be closed on Sunday from 7 A.M. to 2 P.M.


Olsten Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olsten Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
146,600,000
140,624,000
Net inc
4,010,000
3,977,000
Share earns
.26
.26


19% in New York Poll Didn't Get Forms
LEAD: Almost one-fifth of the households in New York City did not receive census forms, a survey released yesterday by the Mayor's office showed.


Commercial Bancorp of Colo.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Bancorp of Colo.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
215,000
294,000
Per share
.13
.19


Legent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legent Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
40 005,000
32,405,000
Net inc
7,567,000
2,400,000
Share earns
.35
.11
Shares outst
21,840,000
21,570,000
6mo rev
80,750,000
65,435,000
Net inc
15,455,000
9,720,000
Share earns
.71
.45
Shares outst
21,820,000
21,510,000


Pennzoil Plans Cut in Work Force
LEAD: The Pennzoil Company is set to announce an unspecified reduction in its work force to cut costs, its president told shareholders today at the company's annual meeting.
James Pate, Pennzoil's president and chief operating officer, told reporters after the meeting that the company would first seek cuts through an early retirement program.


Enron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enron Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,068,700,000
2,535,100,000
Net inc
b101,000,000
c89,000,000
Share earns
1.88
1.69
Shares outst
50,400,000
48,800,000
b-Included $21.2 million gain from cost reduction of certain benefit plans.


Colombia Presidential Candidate Slain by Gunman Aboard Airliner
LEAD: A former leftist guerrilla leader who joined the presidential race last month was killed today by an assailant who opened fire with a machine gun aboard a crowded airliner.


Review/Film;   Black Mastermind for a Bigoted Candidate
LEAD: Leon Hunter, a hot-shot black advertising executive, is called in to mastermind the New York mayoral campaign of Carl Rydell, who is white, conservative and bigoted.
To the consternation of his friends, Leon accepts, but for private reasons that only another chess player as shrewd and far-sighted as


2 Police Officials Seized As Part of a Drug Ring
LEAD: A narcotics task force raided police headquarters here early today in a sweep that led to the arrest of a police lieutenant and sergeant on charges of being part of a cocaine and marijuana distribution ring.


Citizens Savings Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Savings Financial (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,033,000
2,618,000
Per share
.90
.85


Review/Art;   The Galleries of TriBeCa and What's in Them
LEAD: SoHo and TriBeCa may be right next door to each other, but in terms of art scenes, they are miles apart.
Compared with SoHo's gallery saturation and increasingly blue-chip slant, TriBeCa's art-viewing opportunities are scattered, low key and casual.
The area has long been a neighbornhood where artists love to live, work and eat out.


Keystone International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
102,385,000
87,077,000
Net inc
9,959,000
b8,522,000
Share earns
.30
.26
Shares outst
33,592,000
33,393,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $332,000, or 1 cent a share.


Studies Tie Disorder to Maker of Food Supplement
LEAD: Studies in New York and two other states have strongly linked a single Japanese maker of the dietary supplement L-tryptophan with United States cases of a sometimes fatal blood disorder that has been associated with use of the food supplement, researchers have reported at a scientific meeting.


Peres Gives Up Bid to Form Cabinet; Shamir Will Try
LEAD: The Labor Party leader, Shimon Peres, formally surrendered his mandate to form a new Government today after five dismal weeks of fruitless bargaining that united the country in anger while never enabling Mr.
Peres to break his party's deadlock with Likud.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Showtime Satellite Networks, to Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss for its consumer and trade advertising.


Grain and Soybeans Climb; Precious Metals Mostly Fall
LEAD: Prices of grain and soybean futures closed higher yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as speculation about low soybean exports from South America spurred interest in the United States crop.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Brightening Up Soviet Buses
LEAD: Transportation Displays Inc., an outdoor advertising company based in New York, said yesterday that it had acquired the right to advertise on buses in large Soviet cities.


Released Hostage Returns to U.S.


Rangers Stay Hopeful Amid Signs of Collapse
LEAD: There is, of course, no remaining margin for error for the Rangers, a state of affairs that raises the question of whether there is any serious room for optimism.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Pro Bono
LEAD: *
The National Urban League has chosen the Mingo Group for a marketing and communications program to mark the civil rights group's 80th anniversary, which is this year.


Bank of Boston reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Boston (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
43,600,000
89,100,000
Per share
.56
1.23
The latest quarter's results included pre-tax gain of $33 million on settlement of a portion of the company's pension obligations.


Review/Film;   Peter Brook's Retelling Of India's National Epic
LEAD: ''The Mahabharata'' was shown as part of the 1989 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 28, 1989.
The film opens today at the 57th Street Playhouse, 110 West 57th Street.


Westcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westcorp Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,912,000
3,192,000
Per share
.18
.19
Westcorp reported a provision for securities losses of $3,979,000 for the latest first quarter, compared with $188,000 for year-ago period.


Losing Bidder From Japan Still Seeks a Role in Saks
LEAD: The Tobu Department Store Company indicated today that although it was somewhat stunned that its bidding group finished second in the contest to acquire Saks Fifth Avenue, it remained interested in becoming a minority investor or possibly buying the use of the Saks name in Asia.


UAL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UAL Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,516,429,000
2,327,860,000
Net loss
b36,424,000
c65,437,000
Share earns
-
3.03
b-Included one-time, non-operating charge of $77.5 million for settlement of several lawsuits associated with United's operation of its computer reservation system, partially offset by $47.5 million gain on dispositions of property, principally aircraft.


3 Killed as Thunderstorms and Tornadoes Hit Texas and Oklahoma


McMahon Is Released
LEAD: Jim McMahon was released yesterday by the San Diego Chargers, less than a year after the team used a second-round draft choice to acquire the former Super Bowl hero from the Chicago Bears.


Businessland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Businessland Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
323,405,000
293,295,000
Net loss
1,679,000
b8,479,000
Share earns
-
.27
Shares outst
30,456,000
32,718,000
9mo sales
1,014,290,000
866,188,000
Net inc
1,375,000
25,469,000
Share earns
.04
.85
Shares outst
31,707,000
31,292,000


Piper Jaffray Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Piper Jaffray Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
49,460,000
47,157,000
Net inc
2,106,000
2,590,000
Share earns
.52
.65
Shares outst
4,068,000
3,977,000
6mo rev
98,264,000
87,728,000
Net inc
5,289,000
4,204,000
Share earns
1.31
1.06
Shares outst
4,041,000
3,966,000


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
PASOLINI RETROSPECTIVE


Hycor Biomedical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hycor Biomedical (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,561,000
2,275,000
Net inc
202,000
156,000
Share earns
.03
.03
Shares outst
6,102,000
5,760,000


Books of The Times;   A Journey Through Time, Space and Imagination
LEAD:
Sexing the Cherry
By Jeanette Winterson
167 pages. Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.


MAF Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MAF Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b932,000
c3,647,000
Per share
.28
-
9mo net inc
b3,062,000
c6,880,000
Per share
.90
-
b-After extraordinary tax credits of $13,000 for the quarter and $353,000 for the 9 months.


Dodgers Fear Hershiser Out
LEAD: Orel Hershiser, who won the 1988 National League Cy Young Award and most valuable player awards in the playoffs and World Series, will undergo surgery on his right shoulder Friday and is almost surely out for the season.


Give Gorbachev Benefit of Doubt on Lithuania;   Forcibly Occupied
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chemed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
143,929,000
141,876,000
Net inc
4,196,000
5,320,000
Share earns
.41
.57
Shares outst
10,246,000
9,389,000
The company said latest quarter net included loss of $668,000related to a divestiture, and a gain of $918,000, or 9 cents a share, from the sale of leased plant facilities.


TV Weekend;   A Time for Ratings, and Biographies
LEAD: Another sweeps period, another burst of what the networks consider big programming guns: it all gets under way again this Sunday.
The hot item is television biography, with music yet.


Report of Abduction Of Chinese Doubted
LEAD: The Port Authority police continued to search yesterday for seven Chinese farmers who were reported abducted outside the Pan Am terminal at Kennedy International Airport Wednesday night.
But people familiar with the Chinese community in New York City said the incident may have been orchestrated by the men so they could remain in the country after their temporary visas expire.


Michel Morin; Psychiatrist, 55
LEAD: Dr.
Michel Morin, a psychiatrist who specialized in the emotional problems of deaf children, died yesterday at Doylestown (Pa.) Hospital.
He was 55 years old and lived in Pipersville, Pa.


Terex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Terex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
266,308,000
103,058,000
Net inc
4,304,000
3,586,000
Share earns
.54
.46


Betz Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Betz Laboratories (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
143,325,535
124,377,681
Net inc
15,397,949
13,159,221
Share earns
.99
.85
Shares outst
14,235,556
15,453,704


Cincinnati Milacron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Milacron Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
190,631,000
188,322,000
Net inc
2,507,000
b10,038,000
Share earns
.10
.41
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $642,000 and an extraordinary tax credit of $4,489,000, or 18 cents a share.


Britain Revokes Rule Barring Irish-American From Entry
LEAD: The Government has revoked an order barring an Irish-American campaigner, Martin Galvin, from entering the country, the Home Office said today.


20th Century Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* 20th Century Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b12,774,796
27,613,662
Share earns
.50
1.08
b-Attributed to an increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses, which rose to $155 million from $120.7 million a year ago.


Major League Pride Runs in Griffey Family
LEAD: Ken Griffey played a little hooky yesterday.
Breaking away from the traveling party of the Cincinnati Reds, the 17-year major league veteran took advantage of a day off to watch his son play ball.


Long-Term Citicorp Ratings Reduced Slightly by S.&amp;P.
LEAD: Long-term debt ratings for Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, were reduced slightly yesterday, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation announced.


Kidnapped Woman Is Rescued by Police
LEAD: A 23-year-old Bronx woman who was kidnapped last Saturday and held for an $800,000 ransom was rescued last night by the police after she slipped a note past two of her abductors, the police said.
The kidnappers were then arrested.


Review/Comedy;   Skits of Sid Caesar and Imogene Coca
LEAD: In ''At the Movies,'' the classic comic skit that is the centerpiece of Sid Caesar and Imogene Coca's reunion show at Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street) for an open-ended run, Mr.
Caesar, without saying a word, turns himself into the movie patron of one's nightmares.
Toting a box of popcorn, he makes a conspicuous arrival in the darkened theater, stepping on people's feet to reach his seat.


Diversified Energies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Energies (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
276,641,000
335,398,000
Net inc
18,590,000
b39,915,000
Share earns
1.16
2.50
b-After a loss of $827,000 from an adjustment in accounting, and included $17.8 million of after-tax income from settlement of take-or-pay disputes.


Mexico Detains 4 Officers in Abduction of Doctor Accused in U.S.
LEAD: Mexico has detained four Mexican state policemen and two other people believed to have been involved in the abduction of a Mexican doctor accused of helping to kill a United States Drug Enforcement Adminstration agent in 1985, officials here said today.


Mariners' Outburst Sinks Yanks
LEAD: Coasting behind a five-run second inning and the strong pitching of Randy Johnson, the Seattle Mariners beat the Yankees, 6-2, last night at Yankee Stadium.
The loss was the seventh in eight games for the Yankees, who got two home runs from Jesse Barfield.


Some Savings Fraud Cases Will Slide By, Official Says
LEAD: The Federal Government is unlikely to prosecute all the major savings and loan fraud cases that are pending or to recover most of the assets of failed institutions, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said today.


Ipsco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ipsco Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
104,000,000
121,000,000
Net inc
2,000,000
6,200,000
Share earns
.14
.44
Results are in Canadian funds.


First Federal Savings Bank- Tenn.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank- Tenn.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
291,035
b127,259
Per share
-
.25
9mo net inc
247,362
c704,580
Per share
.49
1.38
b-Net income
c-Included $165,331, or 32 cents a share, from after-tax gains on the sale of a portion of the bank's Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.


Carolyn Ferriday, Philanthropist, 87, Who Aided Poles
LEAD: Carolyn Wolsey Ferriday, a philanthropist who helped to bring some Polish women who had been used by the Nazis for medical experiments, to the United States for treatment, died Tuesday at her home in Bethlehem, Conn., after a long illness.
She was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan and at Bellamy House in


Nucor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nucor Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
348,168,314
309,946,012
Net inc
14,994,320
15,969,401
Share earns
.70
.75


Dofasco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dofasco Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
876,000,000
991,900,000
Net inc
10,000,000
b13,000,000
Share earns
.05
.10
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $46.2 million.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Outdoors;   Northeast Attracting Black Bass Tourneys
LEAD: The superb black bass fishing to be had in many lakes and rivers in the Northeast continues to attract major tournaments for the species.


Give Gorbachev Benefit of Doubt on Lithuania;   Ancient Declensions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tompkins County Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tompkins County Trust
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,109,557
986,721
Per share
.39
.35


First Constitution Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Constitution Fincl (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
39,384,000
b5,125,000
Per share
-
.47
b-Net income and after a credit of $730,000, or 7 cents a share.


Santa Fe Energy Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Energy Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
96,100,000
79,100,000
Net inc
5,100,000
b30,300,000
Share earns
.09
.58
Shares outst
55,300,000
52,100,000
b-Included income from a change in accounting for income taxes of $24,500,000, or 47 cents a share.


A $600 Million Landfill Cleanup Is Set by New York City and State
LEAD: New York City and state officials announced an agreement yesterday to spend $600 million in the next seven years to clean up five leaking or contaminated garbage dumps, including the world's largest landfill at Fresh Kills on Staten Island.


Doctors Stage a One-Day Walkout at a Bronx Hospital


Guggenheim Museum Closing for 18 Months
LEAD: The Guggenheim Museum closes on Sunday night for a year and a half to complete its $40-million renovation and expansion.
The restoration of the landmark Frank Lloyd Wright building and the construction of a 10-story tower with new galleries and office space are to be completed by the fall of 1991.


Debate on Phone System: Is U.S. Falling Behind?
LEAD: In Congressional hearings and a closed-door conference of top Federal and state regulators this week, a bitter debate has flared over whether the nation's telephone system is being modernized quickly enough.


Our Towns;   Group Homes Face New Battles On Old Fears
LEAD: There is such desperate need for group homes for the mentally ill on Long Island, the waiting lists grow and grow.
Delia Rivas, who suffers from manic depression, has been free to leave Pilgrim State Psychiatric Hospital for four months, but stays, in Building 45, waiting for a group home bed. ''It's not good to stay in a circumstance where other people around you are very sick,'' she says.


Review/Concert;   Philadelphians' Gallic Side
LEAD: Charles Dutoit has been the music director of the Montreal Symphony since 1977 and continues to conduct it regularly and to make distinguished recordings with it.
But he also wanders the world, as the guest conductor of its finest orchestras.
He has now signed on as director of the Philadelphia Orchestra's summer activities.


In Showdown, Celebrity Can Hurt, Liman Finds
LEAD: Arthur L. Liman may be the most visible lawyer in New York City.
In recent years he took center stage at dramatic legal showdowns involving big Wall Street names like Michael R. Milken, the GAF Corporation and Time-Warner.
Three summers ago, the nation was captivated by his televised exchanges with Oliver L.


Ryan Strikes Out 16 In One-Hit Victory
LEAD: Nolan Ryan, at 43 off to his best start in 15 years, tied Bob Feller's major-league record of 12 one-hitters tonight as the Texas Rangers beat the Chicago White Sox, 1-0.


John W. Oliver; Federal Judge, 75
LEAD: John W. Oliver, a senior Federal district judge, died of an aneurysm on Wednesday.
He was 75 years old.


Interlake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interlake Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
198,570,000
210,387,000
Net loss
b2,318,000
c8,183,000
Share earns
-
.81
b-After a loss of $1,444,000 from discontinued operations.
c-Net income and after income from discontinued operations of $844,000, or 9 cents a share.


Georgia Bonded Fibers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Bonded Fibers
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
10,630,000
10,276,000
Net loss
286,000
78,000
9mo sales
30,225,000
26,788,000
Net loss
85,000
434,000


Stone Container reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone Container (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,453,700,000
1,127,400,000
Net inc
36,800,000
86,800,000
Share earns
.61
1.45
Latest period's earnings results reflected softening prices for newsprint, linerboard and market pulp.


Acme United Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme United Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
10,854,458
9,375,561
Net inc
411,350
32,155
Share earns
.13
.01


Stocks Gain Despite Fears of Rate Rise
LEAD: Stocks edged slightly higher yesterday despite rising bond yields and concern that the Federal Reserve would soon raise interest rates to dampen inflation.


Saks Is Expected to Feel A Subtle Push on Profits
LEAD: Despite the impressive financial position that helped the 45-store chain capture a high purchase price on Wednesday, Saks Fifth Avenue is expected to come under pressure from its Mideast purchaser, Investcorp, to improve its profit performance.


Soviet Conductor
LEAD: The Soviet conductor Yuri Temirkanov will conduct the New York Philharmonic in Shostakovich's Symphony No. 7 (''Leningrad'') today at 2 P.M. and tomorrow evening at 8 at Avery Fisher Hall.
Tickets are $10 to $40.
Information: 580-8700.


Velobind Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Velobind Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
10,608,000
10,431,000
Net inc
415,000
386,000
Share earns
.09
.08


Heartfed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heartfed Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,001,000
1,745,000
Per share
.45
.40


Raychem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raychem Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
291,693,000
270,138,000
Net loss
b107,916,000
c2,354,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
35,815,378
34,887,440
9mo sales
819,722,000
782,218,000
Net loss
b97,808,000
c23,379,000
Share earns
-
.67
Shares outst
35,567,082
34,892,997


Haverty Furniture Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Haverty Furniture Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
60,096,000
57,761,000
Net inc
1,537,000
1,562,000
Share earns
.27
.27


Restaurants
LEAD: With bistromania raging through New York City like a winter flu, it may be time to consider what constitutes a real bistro.
A struggling French restaurant that knocks 20 percent off entree prices certainly does not.
Nor does a place that simply adds cassoulet to the menu and hires a svelte hostess with a French accent.


Comdisco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comdisco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
471,000,000
437,000,000
Net inc
19,000,000
25,000,000
Share earns
.45
.60
6mo rev
712,000,000
584,000,000
Net inc
44,000,000
48,000,000
Share earns
1.05
1.15


More Officers Ordered to Streets
LEAD: Taking the first of what he said would be a series of steps to increase police visibility on the streets, New York City's Police Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, yesterday ordered officers and detectives who work inside station houses to go on patrol one shift a week.


CUNY Says Budget Cut Affects Open Admission
LEAD: Officials of the City University of New York have told the Dinkins administration that a major reduction in financing from New York City would threaten the university's 20-year-old open admissions policy.


Allied Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Products (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
161,823,000
159,586,000
Net inc
3,891,000
4,811,000
Share earns
.61
.80


Columbia Savings Is Pessimistic
LEAD: The Columbia Savings and Loan Association, one of Michael Milken's biggest allies in the ''junk bond'' market, acknowledged for the first time that it might be seized by the Government because of steep losses in high-risk junk bonds.
The savings institution, based in Beverly Hills, Calif., was once one of the nation's most profitable because of its huge stake in junk bonds.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''All I'm asking here is that the state keep its hands off my truck.''
- Vinnie Gramuglia, owner of a truck stop on the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway.[B2:3.]


Natec Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Natec Resources (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
673,166
649,872
Net loss
1,152,259
183,177
Shares outst
24,996,221
13,712,721


Compaq Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compaq Computer (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
872,153,000
682,863,000
Net inc
92,172,000
83,201,000
Share earns
2.13
1.96
Shares outst
44,180,000
43,521,000


New Boeing Order
LEAD: The Intercredit Corporation, an Atlanta-based leasing company, has ordered seven 737-500's for its expanding fleet, the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group said.
The order is valued at about $200 million.
Last year, Intercredit placed its first orders for new aircraft, ordering four of the 737-500's in December.


Corroon &amp; Black reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corroon &amp; Black (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
117,096,000
122,274,000
Net inc
9,130,000
12,902,000
Share earns
.49
.72
The year-ago quarter restated for pooling of interests.


Pacific Aqua Foods reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Aqua Foods
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,748,362
773,383
Net loss
131,318
b139,431
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Daily News Says Profits Must Rise To Build Plants
LEAD: Charles T. Brumback, chairman of the Tribune Company, which owns The Daily News, said here today that The News would not immediately build color printing plants even if it won the concessions it has been seeking from the paper's unions.


Two Top Executives Leaving Marshall Field
LEAD: The two executives who guided Marshall Field &amp; Company to prosperity said today that they would resign when the Dayton Hudson Corporation completes its takeover of the retailer.


Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
486,600,000
537,600,000
Net loss
6,700,000
7,000,000


Vincenzo Lamanna; Restaurateur, 78
LEAD: Vincenzo Lamanna, a restaurateur, died of a pulmonary embolism on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rochester Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
240,807,000
244,933,000
Net inc
24,084,000
28,114,000
Share earns
.72
.86


Papp Rejects $50,000 Federal Grant
LEAD: Joseph Papp, the director of the New York Shakespeare Festival, rejected a $50,000 grant from the National Endowment for the Arts yesterday because he could not ''in all good conscience'' accept the agency's restrictions on obscenity.


Connecticut Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Connecticut Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
64,436,000
66,034,000
Net inc
5,749,000
8,408,000
Share earns
.93
1.38
Shares outst
6,178,556
6,088,461


No Alcohol in Pilot Who Balked, Tests Show
LEAD: Blood and urine tests found no alcohol in the Northwest Airlines pilot who refused to fly last week after a passenger questioned his sobriety, the airline says.


Xerox Reports a Deficit Of $254 Million in Quarter
LEAD: Citing real estate losses and a sharp drop in earnings from its insurance subsidiary that overwhelmed gains in its office copier business, the Xerox Corporation yesterday reported a $254 million loss in the first quarter.
That was in contrast to a profit of $158 million, or $1.47 a share, in the comparable quarter a year earlier.


Blackhawks Top Blues
LEAD: Jocelyn Lemieux's unassisted breakaway goal started a three-goal flurry in the second period tonight that carried the Chicago Blackhawks to a 3-2 victory over the St.
Louis Blues and a three-games-to-two advantage in their four-of-seven-game second-round playoff series.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:
Another Clancy


Archive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Archive Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
52,069,000
45,248,000
Net inc
3,981,000
3,667,000
Share earns
.30
.28
Shares outst
13,405,000
13,167,000
6mo rev
99,087,000
81,218,000
Net inc
7,508,000
6,886,000
Share earns
.55
.53
Shares outst
13,585,000
13,027,000


Order in the Court? What Lawyers Consider a Splash of Color Judges View as Making Waves.
LEAD: Most trial lawyers seem to know precisely how much they can mouth off to judges and get away with it.
But the line between advocacy and abusiveness can be subtle, particularly if one factors in the tender feelings of some of those on the bench.


Computer Sciences Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Sciences Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
417,762,000
360,167,000
Net inc
b24,006,000
b16,642,000
Share earns
1.49
1.05
Shares outst
16,115,000
16,051,000
Yr rev
1,500,443,000
1,304,414,000
Net inc
b65,532,000
b52,482,000
Share earns
4.07
3.28
Shares outst
16,114,000
16,011,000


Rorer Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rorer Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
279,923,000
241,169,000
Net loss
b7,688,000
c9,771,000
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
36,006,000
31,825,000
b-After one-time transaction-related costs totaling $26.9 million; $11.9 million in connection with the pending combination of the worldwide human pharmaceutical business of Rhone- Poulenc S.A.


Span-America Medical SysFtems reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Span-America Medical SysFtems (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,499,294
5,325,983
Net inc
460,636
299,661
Share earns
.14
.09
6mo rev
11,911,100
9,580,848
Net inc
686,207
531,814
Share earns
.21
.16


Reviews/Film;   The Nanny Is a Druid? Uh-Oh.
LEAD: When seeking professional child-care help, never hire anyone who thinks she is a tree.
This is the lesson of ''The Guardian,'' and it's hard to find fault with, although that cannot be said for the film otherwise. ''The Guardian,'' directed by William Friedkin and based on Dan Greenburg's novel ''The Nanny,'' is a confused horror film custom-designed for those who prefer their scares set in a clean, comfortable, architecturally correct atmosphere, rather than the usual Gothic settings.


Howell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howell Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
93,572,000
62,971,000
Net inc
b17,991,000
c4,516,000
Share earns
3.75
.94
Shares outst
4,799,000
4,794,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $17,333,000, or $3.61 a share, from refund of Federal income taxes and interest.


76ers Rally Past Cavs For a 111-106 Victory
LEAD: Charles Barkley scored 38 points and had 21 rebounds and Hersey Hawkins scored 35 points as the Philadelphia 76ers rallied late in the fourth period tonight to beat the Cleveland Cavaliers, 111-106, in the opener of a first-round National Basketball Association playoff series.


Vice Chairman Named New Chief at Fairchild
LEAD: The Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation has named Richard E. Brackeen as chairman and chief executive to succeed Richard D. DeLauer, a well-known aerospace executive and former Pentagon official who died Sunday at age 71.


Southwest Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest Airlines (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
260,579,000
229,387,000
Net inc
5,094,000
19,644,000
Share earns
.18
.64
Shares outst
29,087,000
30,716,000
Latest quarter results had pretax gains of about $2.3 million, as compared to pretax gains of $9.5 million in the year-ago quarter.


Contel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Contel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
797,000,000
748,000,000
Net inc
54,000,000
64,000,000
Share earns
.34
.40


Days of Rage: Florio and the Taxpayers
LEAD: ''Whoa, don't even mention higher taxes here!'' yelped Veronica Woodruff, assistant manager of a cosmetics shop at the Woodbridge Center mall.
Her eyes squinted as if she were being force-fed a lemon when she heard the name of her new Governor, the recent bearer of bad news, Jim Florio.


Torchmark Finds Takeover Allies
LEAD: Institutional investors and banks have embraced the Torchmark Corporation's takeover bid for the American General Corporation, giving the company confidence it will win a proxy fight for five places on the board of its larger insurance rival, Torchmark said yesterday.


Sequa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sequa Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
534,290,000
447,681,000
Net inc
18,323,000
b20,416,000
Share earns
1.78
1.88
Shares outst
9,772,000
10,365,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $1,152,000.


A Tough Test for the Regents
LEAD: New York's Board of Regents, which concludes its regular monthly meeting today, faces a critical test of its ability to rescue an important and sensitive education issue from the distorting passions of politics.


Construction Contracts Up
LEAD: Contracts for new construction rose 3 percent nationwide in March, reversing a five-month slide in building activity that had been concentrated in the Northeast, the F. W. Dodge division of McGraw-Hill Inc. reported yesterday.


Old National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,950,000
5,654,000
Per share
.44
.48
Per share earnings adjusted for a 5 percent stock dividend on Jan. 31, 1990.
The year-ago period restated.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about CS-First Boston's Asian operations misstated the ownership of CS-First Boston Inc.
It is 44.5 percent owned by CS Holding, which also owns Credit Suisse, the large Swiss bank.
The remaining shares in CS-First Boston are held by management and by institutional investors.


A Week After Closing, 7 Days Wins a Magazine Award
LEAD: The two-year-old weekly magazine 7 Days, which closed down last week, yesterday won a National Magazine Award for general excellence in magazines with circulations of less than 100,000.


H. Paulin &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* H. Paulin &amp; Co.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
44,788,000
47,305,000
Net inc
291,000
1,310,000
Share earns
.28
1.25
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Mets Get Silent And Strong Relief
LEAD: There has been a lot of talk about starting pitchers and when they were going to get started, opposing base-stealers and when they were going to be caught, and hasty fielders and when they were going to make routine plays look routine.
But one component of the Mets has been as steady as Kevin Elster's glove and as unassuming as Kevin M


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Dean W. Proctor Jr. has resigned as executive vice president and account service director at BBDO Chicago.


First Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Mississippi (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
116,896,000
118,241,000
Net inc
1,297,000
8,582,000
Share earns
.07
.42
9mo sales
350,930,000
296,511,000
Net inc
3,580,000
19,102,000
Share earns
.18
.94


New Image Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Image Industries
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,053,000
1,846,000
Net inc
435,000
189,000
Share earns
.14
.09
Shares outst
3,220,000
2,044,000
9mo sales
9,497,000
4,717,000
Net inc
1,077,000
442,000
Share earns
.38
.21
Shares outst
2,840,000
2,044,000


Jason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jason Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
31,570,000
24,094,000
Net inc
1,229,000
982,000
Share earns
.22
.17
The latest first quarter included results of operations of Braden Manufacturing effective June 2, 1989.


For Starters, Knicks No Match for Celtics
LEAD: Despite their contention to the contrary, the Boston Celtics still prevail or perish with their starters.
Tonight, they prevailed.


Franklin Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
69,600,000
62,800,000
Net inc
21,800,000
18,800,000
Share earns
.56
.48
Shares outst
39,289,450
39,285,843
6mo rev
138,700,000
122,100,000
Net inc
43,800,000
36,900,000
Share earns
1.12
.94
Shares outst
39,276,536
39,275,133


WINING, DINING AND STARGAZING
LEAD: Only eight years ago, most restaurants in the brooding industrial landscape of TriBeCa were identifiable by neon beer signs in the windows.
Today, Budweiser is eclipsed by Bordeaux and Barolos as stylish restaurants sprout all over this eccentrically delineated neighborhood.
Underscoring the fervid renaissance is the recent opening of Robert De Niro and company's dream restaurant, TriBeCa Grill, which, for those who follow the stars, could rank second only to the Hayden Planetarium.


Koger Equity reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Koger Equity (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,000,000
6,000,000
Net inc
5,800,000
4,300,000
Share earns
.41
.43
Shares outst
14,312,500
10,000,000


Intelligence Fiasco
LEAD: The central mission of U.S. intelligence is to gather and evaluate data on the economic and military strength of the Soviet Union in comparison with the U.S.
We are now discovering how the C.I.A. has botched that assignment.


In Lithuania, on Its Own, Determination and Doubt
LEAD: At the sun-splashed farmers' market on Calvary Street, the asking price for a pound of tomatoes today was half a day's wages.
The taxis parked outside demanded astronomical fares to make up for black-market gasoline costing $20 a gallon, and the driver might well have been a newly laid off factory worker.


Royal Nedlloyd Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Nedlloyd Group
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
120,300,000
121,100,000
Net inc
132,100,000
80,400,000
Share earns
6.91
4.21
United States dollar equivalents have been provided for at the Dec. 31, 1989 rate of Dfl 1.9085 equaled $1.00.


Genus Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genus Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
21,205,000
17,537,000
Net inc
b174,000
c2,107,000
Share earns
.02
.24
Shares outst
11,420,000
8,950,000
b-After an extraordinary utilization of operating loss carryforwards of $22,000.


Leggett &amp; Platt reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leggett &amp; Platt (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
266,916,000
237,114,000
Net inc
12,317,000
11,401,000
Share earns
.71
.67


200 Bug Repellents Are Being Recalled, E.P.A. Announces
LEAD: Two leading brands of insect repellent and scores of others, which make up about 25 percent of the market, are being recalled because an ingredient damaged reproductive organs and caused tumors in test animals, the Environmental Protection Agency said today.


Xerox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xerox Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,300,000,000
4,100,000,000
Net loss
b254,000,000
c158,000,000
Share earns
-
1.47
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $375,000,000 stemming directly from the previously announced pretax provision of $400 million ($375 million after taxes) taken in the period in connection with Xerox investments in VMS Realty Partners, a Chicago real estate investment firm.


Spending Being Cut By Covenant House
LEAD: Covenant House, shaken by allegations of financial and sexual wrongdoing, announced yesterday that it was cutting its spending on programs for homeless and runaway youths by $10 million after a falloff in donations.


Ogden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ogden Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
382,109,000
317,568,000
Net inc
28,016,000
16,531,000
Share earns
.66
.39
Latest quarter results included a pretax gain of $25,107,000 from the sale by an Ogden unit.


Don't Punish the Wrong China
LEAD: President Bush, justly criticized for failing to distance himself from Beijing's bloodstained leaders, can now best serve freedom by asking Congress to maintain China's status as a most favored nation.
Congress, which has honorably resisted other Bush accommodations to the Chinese leadership, can go along in good conscience.


Du Pont of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Du Pont of Canada
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
359,800,000
342,600,000
Net inc
20,900,000
b33,200,000
Share earns
.68
1.06
b-Included special gain of $7.9 million.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Paris Business Forms reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paris Business Forms (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
12,154,000
12,632,000
Net inc
718,000
713,000
Share earns
.19
.19
Shares outst
3,822,821
3,839,555
6mo sales
25,182,000
24,046,000
Net inc
1,409,000
1,268,000
Share earns
.37
.33
Shares outst
3,834,911
3,832,074


Thomaston Mills Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomaston Mills Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
52,212,148
50,389,885
Net inc
1,159,774
745,265
Share earns
.36
.24
9mo sales
149,826,126
131,445,009
Net inc
4,215,730
b1,030,786
Share earns
1.31
.32


Insteel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insteel Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
67,023,000
53,203,000
Net inc
1,200,000
1,380,000
Share earns
.25
.29
6mo rev
122,727,000
98,381,000
Net inc
1,553,000
2,669,000
Share earns
.33
.57


Problems Plague Testing of Space Telescope
LEAD: Ground controllers activating and testing the delicate systems on the Hubble Space Telescope today encountered repeated trouble communicating through the spacecraft's main antennas, but finally established a link and found nearly everything aboard functioning normally.


New Jersey Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Jersey Resources Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
120,431,000
131,907,000
Net inc
9,691,000
13,469,000
Share earns
.71
1.19
Shares outst
13,332,000
11,073,000
6mo rev
232,389,000
221,779,000
Net inc
18,000,000
20,403,000
Share earns
1.32
1.81
Shares outst
13,292,000
11,031,000


Dollar Moves Up as Traders Await Information on G.N.P.
LEAD: After falling in Europe, the dollar finished mostly higher yesterday in dull trading in the United States.
The trading was limited, analysts said, as those in the market waited for today's release of first-quarter data on the gross national product.


USAir Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USAir Group (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,537,334,000
1,484,982,000
Net loss
37,965,000
b15,528,000
Share earns
-
.35
Shares outst
44,155,000
43,862,000
b-Net income
Several factors affected its latest quarter results compared with net in the year-ago period.


Clark Equipment Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clark Equipment Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
385,770,000
313,655,000
Net inc
b20,045,000
c14,034,000
Share earns
1.16
.82
b-Included loss from discontinued operations of $42,000 and an extraordinary credit of $4,325,000, or 25 cents a share.


Crown Central Pete reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Central Pete (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
458,328,000
284,305,000
Net inc
1,144,000
b2,817,000
Share earns
.12
.22
Shares outst
9,832,598
6,344,574
b-Included $3 million pre-tax gain from sales associated with the company's withdrawal from exploration and production operations.


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DPL Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
272,625,000
283,166,000
Net inc
50,305,000
53,508,000
Share earns
1.11
1.29
Shares outst
68,273,000
62,139,000


Foxboro Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foxboro Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
154,241,000
137,908,000
Net loss
3,739,000
b2,981,000
Share earns
-
.24
b-Net income


Arrow Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arrow Bank Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,494,000
1,345,000
Per share
.62
.56


Pharmakinetics Labs reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pharmakinetics Labs (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,024,418
8,214,620
Net inc
66,320
748,697
Share earns
.01
.08
9mo rev
20,558,860
19,958,592
Net loss
b689,733
c1,975,919
Share earns
-
.21


Graziano Is Improving
LEAD: The former world middleweight champion Rocky Graziano was removed from the intensive care unit yesterday at New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center where he is recovering from a stroke.
A hospital spokesman said Graziano remained in serious condition but that his vital signs were stable.(AP)


Newspaper Executives See Falling Profits
LEAD: Executives at some of the nation's largest communications companies said here today that a broad and deep slump in newspaper advertising would hurt profits this year.


Hein-Werner Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hein-Werner Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
26,867,000
31,443,000
Net inc
488,000
1,067,000
Share earns
.25
.47


Harcourt Brace Jovanovich reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harcourt Brace Jovanovich (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
276,897,000
241,598,000
Net loss
71,968,000
b116,093,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $18,465,000.


Nalco Chemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nalco Chemical Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
284,817,000
249,499,000
Net inc
29,667,000
25,148,000
Share earns
.75
.65
Shares outst
36,193,000
38,706,000


Southington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southington Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
508,000
766,000
Per share
.28
.42


Fairfield First Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairfield First Bank &amp; Trust
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
344,220
b152,850
Per share
-
.21
b-Net income


Stravinsky Variations
LEAD: Robert Craft will conduct the 20th-Century Classics Ensemble in ''Story of a Soldier,'' an adaptation of Stravinsky's ''Histoire du Soldat'' with a new English text by Frank Corsaro, at Alice Tully Hall Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
The cast includes George Hearn as the Devil, Mark Sellers as the Soldier, Maria Magana as the Princess, and Mr.


Vuitton's Chief Quits, Ending a Bitter Feud
LEAD: The venomous, long-running board-room battle at LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton, the luxury-goods group, appeared to have ended today as Henry Racamier resigned as chairman of the company's Louis Vuitton leather goods subsidiary.


Interest Rates Rise Above 9%
LEAD: Long-term interest rates moved above 9 percent yesterday for the first time in nearly a year, continuing a rise that will crimp certain sectors of the economy.


Europe Sales Help Raise Compaq Net
LEAD: Buoyed by strong European sales that offset a slump in the domestic personal computer market, the Compaq Computer Corporation reported earnings today that exceeded Wall Street estimates.
But Businessland Inc., a leading PC retailer, reported a loss, as expected.


Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
87,094,000
90,533,000
Net inc
8,682,000
10,533,000
Share earns
.60
.72


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Busch-ESPN Pact
LEAD: The Anheuser-Busch Companies and the cable sports network ESPN said yesterday that they had agreed to a five-year contract worth ''in excess of $100 million.'' The companies' last five-year contract was reportedly worth $70 million.
Anheuser-Busch became ESPN's first advertiser in 1979, when it signed a one-year agreement for $1.4 million.


Castle (A.M.) &amp; Co.  (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Castle (A.M.) &amp; Co.  (A)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
128,634,000
141,293,000
Net inc
2,478,000
3,597,000
Share earns
.34
.50


Bindley Western Indus reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bindley Western Indus (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
432,881,000
362,200,000
Net inc
1,606,000
901,000
Share earns
.25
.15


J.P.  Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* J.P.  Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
110,641,000
108,374,000
Net inc
2,648,000
3,242,000
Share earns
.25
.30


Villanova Women Win Medley Once More
LEAD: On the hottest April 26 ever in this historic city, with the temperature at 91 degrees, the 96th annual Penn Relays began with a stunning victory by Villanova in the women's distance medley relay.


Review/Dance;   Balanchine's Virtuosity, Concentrated
LEAD: The dancing was polished - and fresh - in the program presented by the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.
But the star of the evening was George Balanchine, who was represented by three of his best-known ballets.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: West German Chancellor HELMUT KOHL will be the principal speaker at Harvard University's 339th commencement on June 7, DEREK BOK, Harvard's president, announced yesterday. ''Chancellor Kohl has emerged as one of the world's most influencial world political figures and has contributed significantly to redrafting the political and economic map of Europe,'' Mr.


Review/Photography;   From the Rectangle Into the 3d Dimension
LEAD: The urge to make images move off the wall into three-dimensional space has recently preoccupied painters as distinctive and distinct as Elizabeth Murray and Frank Stella.
But except for a brief ''photography into sculpture'' movement in the late 1960's and early 70's, few artists allied with photographic imagery have systematically attempted to violate its two-dimensional, rectangular norm.


Mel Allen: Seventh Decade
LEAD: He surrounded you in stereo at the beach or in the parks, from car windows and apartment houses.
In the days of the humble portable radio, Mel Allen was his own boom box.
How about that!


Child-Pornography Bill Stays Mired in Albany
LEAD: To the Editor:


Columbia U. Orchestra
LEAD: George Rothman will conduct the Columbia University Orchestra in Debussy's Nocturnes, Webern's Passacaglia (Op. 1) and the Beethoven Seventh Symphony, tonight at 8 at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University, 116th Street at Broadway.
Admission is free.
Information: 854-3825.


Chamorro, Naming Cabinet, Bypasses Her Coalition Allies
LEAD: After a burst of last-minute discord and reshuffling, President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro took full control of the Government today with a 13-member Cabinet of businessmen and technocrats with few links to traditional Nicaraguan politics.


Arms-Control Adviser to Bush Steps Down
LEAD: A conservative expert on arms control who had found himself edged out of key discussions in recent months resigned today as a senior arms adviser to President Bush.


President Is Leaving Western Publishing
LEAD: The Western Publishing Group announced the resignation yesterday of its president and chief operating officer, Michael A. Pietrangelo, who after nine months on the job in New York decided to quit and return to Memphis.


Reviews/Art;   Figure in Northern European Prints
LEAD: ''Figurative Inventions,'' at the Museum of Modern Art, is a minor show that raises a major subject.
It includes around 75 prints of the human figure, spanning roughly 75 years, from the Modern's collection.
The approach is expressionist, the focus Germany and Northern Europe, where, the wall text says, the ''figure was often manipulated and distorted to evoke visions of the fantastic, the grotesque, the impassioned and the comical.


Marcos Feels Ill and Trial Is Halted by Judge
LEAD: The racketeering trial of Imelda Marcos was halted yesterday after she complained of high blood pressure and left the courthouse in tears.
Her lawyer said she would be able to return to court this morning.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Edberg Eliminated by Aguilera
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden was eliminated from the $1 million Monte Carlo Open yesterday when Juan Aguilera of Spain beat him in two tie breakers and won the third-round match, 7-6, 7-6.
Boris Becker advanced to the quarterfinals, but not without a battle from Haiti's Roland Agenor.


On Stage
LEAD:
Reviving Grand Guignol


Allied-Signal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied-Signal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,055,000,000
2,942,000,000
Net inc
129,000,000
126,000,000
Share earns
.90
.85
Shares outst
142,796,876
148,346,140


Pioneer Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
501,978
b34,678
Per share
-
.02
Shares outst
1,741,421
1,812,127
6mo net loss
169,323
b360,933
Per share
-
.20
Shares outst
1,741,421
1,812,882


INSIDE
LEAD:
Peres Comes Up Short
The Labor Party leader, Shimon Peres, gave up trying to form a new government in Israel, opening the way for the conservatives aligned with Yitzhak Shamir.
Page A3.
German on the Mend
Oskar Lafontaine, the West German Social Democratic Party leader, was reported much improved a day after being stabbed in the neck by a deranged woman.


LITHUANIA IS ASKED BY PARIS AND BONN TO HALT DECISIONS
LEAD: France and West Germany jointly urged Lithuania today to suspend its Parliament's moves toward independence and to seek negotiations with Moscow with a view to finding ''a solution acceptable to all parties.''


Lincoln Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Telecommunications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
42,845,000
41,384,000
Net inc
6,031,000
5,474,000
Share earns
.36
.32


Court in Capital Bars Forced Surgery to Save Fetus
LEAD: An appeals court here ruled today that a pregnant woman, even one who is terminally ill and whose fetus is probably viable, may not be forced against her will to undergo a Caesarean delivery in an effort to save the fetus.


Battle Mountain Gold reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Battle Mountain Gold (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
30,670,000
34,960,000
Net inc
7,001,000
10,820,000
Share earns
.10
.16
Shares outst
72,339,000
65,602,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   When an Ad Takes Off but Product Stalls
LEAD: IT is one of the best-known advertising campaigns in the country and yet the product it sells has experienced a slide in market share since the effort began four years ago.


Israel Against Itself
LEAD: King Lear, in Shakespeare's play, destroys himself by acts of willful folly.
The audience, wanting to cry out against the self-destruction, watches in pain.


Global Marine Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Global Marine Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
59,900,000
41,800,000
Net loss
11,100,000
14,300,000


'Junk Bond' Changes Proposed
LEAD: The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission has asked a securities group to explore the development of an electronic pricing system for the high-yield ''junk bond'' market, industry executives said yesterday.


Holyfield Back in Ring
LEAD: Evander Holyfield, awaiting a possible shot at the heavyweight championship against James (Buster) Douglas, will fight Seamus McDonagh for the World Boxing Council Continental Americas title on June 1 in Atlantic City.(AP)


Pogo Producing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pogo Producing Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
33,857,000
32,868,000
Net inc
938,000
b568,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
24,344,000
24,073,000
b-Net loss


New Boeing Order
LEAD: The Intercredit Corporation, an Atlanta-based leasing company, has ordered seven 737-500's for its expanding fleet, the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group said.
The order is valued at about $200 million.
Last year, Intercredit placed its first orders for new aircraft, ordering four of the 737-500's in December.


Finnigan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Finnigan Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
30,319,000
31,151,000
Net loss
1,093,000
b309,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


Review/Dance;   Freedom Within Order To Laura Dean's Beat
LEAD: Everything was the same, but different.
When Laura Dean Dancers and Musicians presented its second program of works with choreography and percussion scores by Ms.
Dean at the Joyce Theater on Wednesday night, the dancing was as vigorous as ever.
As for Ms.
Dean's choreography, it has rarely changed in style over the years.


Alico Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alico Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
11,900,000
9,300,000
Net inc
2,644,499
2,704,972
Share earns
.38
.38
6mo rev
15,700,000
14,400,000
Net inc
3,054,190
3,911,201
Share earns
.44
.55


Canadian Readings
LEAD: Four prominent Canadian novelists will read from their works and answer questions tonight at 8 during a one-night ''Festival of Canadian Authors'' at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street.
The program, part of the Writer's Voice series of the West Side Y, will feature Barbara Gowdy, Mordecai Richler, Michel Tremblay and Guy Vanderhaeghe.


International Totalizator Sysems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Totalizator Sysems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,072,000
5,117,000
Net inc
1,016,000
210,000
Share earns
.12
.03
Shares outst
8,238,000
7,160,000


St. Paul Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Paul Cos. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b76,914,000
b90,231,000
Share earns
1.55
1.87
b-Included a capital loss of $11,425,000 for the latest quarter and a capital gain of $18,259,000, or 37 cents a share, for the year-ago period.


First Inter-Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Inter-Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
507,000
934,000
Per share
.22
.40


Sun Microsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Microsystems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
632,212,000
497,420,000
Net inc
36,694,000
31,031,000
Share earns
.40
.38
Shares outst
94,751,000
85,348,000
9mo rev
1,766,089,000
1,334,170,000
Net inc
62,076,000
81,103,000
Share earns
.70
1.00
Shares outst
93,191,000
83,663,000


Home Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,149,000
6,072,000
Per share
.34
.50


15 Likely Starters for the Derby
LEAD: The best bet in horse racing each year might be an ''over/under'' proposition on the number of starters in the Kentucky Derby.


Stabbed German Candidate Alert and Joking
LEAD: Oskar Lafontaine, the opposition Social Democratic Party's candidate for Chancellor, awoke joking and alert today after an assassination attempt Wednesday night, and officials of his party said he would continue the race against Chancellor Helmut Kohl after a few weeks of rest.


Campeau Set to Buy Back Assets
LEAD: Robert Campeau, the founder and chairman of the Campeau Corporation, agreed today to buy back assets that the National Bank of Canada had seized from him after he failed to make interest payments on a $150 million loan.


Carolina Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
364,000
362,000
Per share
.22
.21
6mo net loss
1,752,000
b692,000
Per share
-
.41
b-Net income


Dodging South Africa Sanctions
LEAD: The Bush Administration has powerful reasons to be meticulous about observing Congressional sanctions against South Africa.
President Bush, after all, was part of the Reagan Administration, whose efforts to circumvent a Congressional prohibition of aid to the Nicaraguan contras led to the Iran-contra scandal.


Prenor Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prenor Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
43,000,000
29,100,000
Net inc
2,600,000
1,200,000
Share earns
.16
.08
Shares outst
16,300,000
15,600,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column on April 19 about a media conference in Moscow sponsored by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon included an erroneous report about the agenda, provided by The New York City Tribune, a newspaper founded by Mr.
Moon.
A spokesman for former Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of West Germany said Mr.


Utilicorp United Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Utilicorp United Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
278,192,000
220,234,000
Net inc
b22,990,000
17,640,000
Share earns
.92
.82
b-Included an after-tax gain of $6.6 million at its PSI subsidiary from the sale of oil and gas properties.


Weak Link on Fluoride and Cancer Is Backed
LEAD: A panel of scientific experts today endorsed the findings of a Federal investigation showing that a compound widely used to fluoridate public water supplies may cause bone cancer in male rats.


Transactions
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CALIFORNIA (AL) - Extended the contract of Bert Blyleven, pitcher, through 1991 and added two option years.
CHICAGO (NL) - Signed Pat Sheridan, outfielder, and assigned him to Iowa of American Association.
CINCINNATI (NL) - Placed Eric Davis, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 25.


Delta Air Lines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delta Air Lines (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,120,000,000
2,038,100,000
Net inc
31,314,000
85,019,000
Share earns
.48
1.73
9mo rev
6,342,000,000
5,778,000,000
Net inc
228,690,000
270,139,000
Share earns
4.15
5.49


Chernobyl Rally Attended by Thousands
LEAD: Tens of thouands of people attended an open-air service in Kiev today and workers in the Byelorussian city of Gomel went on strike as the Soviet Union marked the fourth anniversary of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster.


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (N)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
724,591,000
707,635,000
Net inc
43,545,000
40,760,000
Share earns
.56
.52


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Mutual Tourney Set
LEAD: With Mark Talbott, the four-time champion, among the entries, the 58th annual Mutual Benefit Life tournament, the official championship for the World Professional Squash Association, will begin a seven-day run today at 10 A.M. the Winter Garden pavilion near Battery Park.


Temporary Census Army Begins Door-to-Door Count Nationwide
LEAD: A temporary army of students and homemakers, laid-off coal miners and between-jobs executives swept down on their neighbors yesterday as the Government began its most complex effort ever to count people door-to-door.


Imex Medical Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imex Medical Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,192,500
1,827,625
Net loss
98,467
b202,457
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
6,246,625
6,164,083
9mo rev
4,627,139
4,566,144
Net inc
159,131
310,969
Share earns
.03
.05
Shares outst
6,246,625
6,164,083


Review/Film;   Nick Nolte as a Corrupt Detective
LEAD: His friends know Mike Brennan (Nick Nolte) as a colorful Manhattan character, a New York Police Department detective who is proudly Irish, dependably tough, as lethal as a night stick, a great, crudely funny storyteller and a gargantuan drinker.
He's a man of mythical proportions.
Time, however, has overtaken the myth.


John Hanson Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Hanson Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
1,911,000
b254,000
Per share
-
.04
9mo net inc
273,000
658,000
Per share
.05
.11
b-Net income


Armor All Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armor All Products (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
61,375,000
62,010,000
Net inc
3,726,000
9,996,000
Share earns
.18
.48
Yr rev
165,447,000
162,780,000
Net inc
18,821,000
27,113,000
Share earns
.90
1.30


Joslyn Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Joslyn Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
49,281,000
55,281,000
Net inc
b2,600,000
2,746,000
Share earns
.55
.58
Shares outst
4,724,000
4,757,000
b-Contained $1.8 million of pension curtailment gains.


Auctions
LEAD:
Latin Records Likely


In Battle Over Sign, All Roads Lead to Albany
LEAD: Vinnie Gramuglia is very fond of his giant road sign - a retired 18-wheeler perched 65 feet up in the sky over the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway.
The sign, the local truck-stop owner says, ''is to trucks what a lighthouse is to ships.''


TRIBECA ART:
LEAD: Pamela Lin's ''Grope,'' at Art in General.
A look at the galleries, page C22. (The New York Times/Jack Manning)


Market Place;   Home Building Is Good for Some
LEAD: ALTHOUGH these are certainly not the best days for the home building industry, stocks of certain home builders are finding favor with securities analysts.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Triple Tribute


Somerset Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Somerset Bankshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
10,829,000
7,293,000
Yr net loss
8,240,000
2,297,000


Fairfield County Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairfield County Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
59,876
b701,433
Per share
-
.31
Shares outst
2,150,568
2,268,311
b-Net income


Rochester Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rochester Telephone (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
142,426,000
135,806,000
Net inc
11,598,000
13,661,000
Share earns
.43
.51


Hunter Leads the Way as Capitals Take Charge of Series
LEAD: The Capitals run out of superlatives when they talk about Dale Hunter, their tenacious center, who has been in the middle of everything the Capitals have accomplished thus far in the playoffs.


Magma Copper reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magma Copper (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
181,607,000
122,564,000
Net inc
b11,707,000
b8,327,000
Share earns
.35
.75
b-Included tax credits of $381,000 and $8,327,000 for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


American Bancorp of Nevada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bancorp of Nevada
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
390,345
477,000
Per share
.34
.46


Irma Seeman Goldberg; Hospital Volunteer, 95
LEAD: Irma Seeman Goldberg, a longtime hospital volunteer and the widow of Rube Goldberg, the Pulitzer-Prize winning cartoonist, died of a heart attack yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 95 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Black &amp; Decker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Black &amp; Decker Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
1,003,300,000
570,700,000
Net inc
10,000,000
25,900,000
Share earns
.17
.44
Shares outst
60,000,000
59,100,000


Review/Music;   The Debut of a Violinist of 18
LEAD: Scott Yoo, an 18-year-old violinist who won first prize at the Joseph Gingold International Violin Competition in 1988 and was a winner of the Young Concert Artists Auditions last year, gave a formidable debut performance on Tuesday evening at the 92d Street Y. Mr.
Yoo is a versatile player with good musical instincts, and he displayed those qualities in three works that make very different kinds of technical, coloristic and interpretive demands.


Economic Scene;   A Global Program For Environment
LEAD: WITH the ebbing of the cold war, the environmental issue is moving up on the international agenda.
And it is also moving up on the corporate agenda, as demonstrated by this week's Exxon stockholders' meeting in Houston at which a series of environmental initiatives were defeated even as top management insisted upon its commitment to environmental protection.


Cross &amp; Trecker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cross &amp; Trecker Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
116,070,000
121,405,000
Net loss
976,000
5,530,000
6mo rev
215,033,000
232,597,000
Net loss
4,760,000
13,035,000
The 1989 figures included results from three operations put up for sale in a reorganization last year.


Panel Rejects a Social Security Tax Cut
LEAD: In the first test of Congressional sentiment on Senator Daniel P. Moynihan's proposal to cut Social Security taxes, the Senate Budget Committee today overwhelmingly rejected the measure.


A BID FOR SCRAP, TO CUT POLLUTION
LEAD: For years clean air experts, from government officials to academics, have suggested half in jest that the cheapest way to cut pollution was to scrap old cars that do not meet today's emission standards.
Yesterday a California oil company said it would spend $5 million to do just that.


115 Killed in Quake in China
LEAD: An earthquake rocked China's western region of Qinghai late Thursday, killing 115 people and flattening more than 1,000 homes, officials said today.
Officials from Qinghai's seismological bureau said by telephone from the provincial capital, Xining, that the quake, measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale, also damaged a labor camp and that more than 200 convicts had escaped in the confusion.


Review/Film;   22d 'Tournee' Ventures Beyond the Cartoon
LEAD: Every cartoon is animated, but not every animated work is a cartoon. ''The International Tournee of Animation,'' an annual collection of short works, usually suggests everything the word ''cartoon'' does not.
Instead of the commercially driven superheroes that own Saturday mornings, or even the sophisticated story-telling of features like ''The Little Mermaid'' and ''Who Framed Roger Rabbit,'' these shorts demonstrate widely varied and often nonnarrative uses of animated techniques.


Europeans Set Copter Venture
LEAD: France, West Germany, Italy and the Netherlands have agreed to build a military helicopter together, the French Defense Ministry said today.
The ministry said the West


Franklin's Gift, Compounded
LEAD: Benjamin Franklin left $:2,000 in his will for loans to young apprentices in Boston and Philadelphia, providing also that part of the principal be given away for ''public works'' after 100 years, and the rest after 200 - which is now.
The 1890 distribution took 14 years to settle.
Now starts the scrapping over the $6.5 million that remains today.


Loss Narrows at Harcourt
LEAD: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. today reported a smaller loss in the first quarter than a year earlier.
Its revenue rose 14.6 percent.


Provident Life &amp; Accident InFsurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Life &amp; Accident InFsurance Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
36,800,000
26,100,000
Share earns
.79
.56
Results included investment losses of $3,000,000 and $1,600,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


The Budget? Albany Waits For Decisions
LEAD: Three weeks ago, when New York State's April 1 budget deadline was still fresh in official memory, budget talks here had a bit of drama.
All-night meetings were followed by angry recriminations, then by stirring scenes of reconciliation.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When JOSEPH FUCHS stepped out of his studio in room 451 at the Juilliard School shortly after 5 P.M. yesterday, the legendary violin professor was greeted by his 15 students, other faculty members and his wife, Doris, serenading him with ''Happy Birthday.'' After a ''What's going on ?'' he joined in the rendition on his violin, blew out candles and cut a cake to celebrate his 90th birthday.


Business Digest
LEAD:
Markets


VTX Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VTX Electronics Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
12,008,000
11,177,000
Net inc
161,000
69,000
Share earns
.07
.03
9mo sales
34,389,000
30,393,000
Net inc
343,000
282,000
Share earns
.14
.12


Newport Pharmaceuticals (O( reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newport Pharmaceuticals (O(
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
13,326,000
9,543,000
Net loss
401,000
b267,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income and included an extraordinary credit of $165,000, or 1 cent a share.


Eastern Routes' Sale Approved
LEAD: The Department of Transportation yesterday approved the sale by Eastern Airlines of its Latin and South American routes to American Airlines for $349 million.
The sale could prove crucial to Eastern's plans to reorganize and emerge from bankruptcy.


Whirlpool Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whirlpool Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,638,200,000
1,576,100,000
Net inc
29,500,000
40,700,000
Share earns
.42
.59
Shares outst
69,400,000
69,300,000
The company's equity interest in Brazilian operations was a loss of 26 cents a share in the first quarter, compared to a loss of 2 cents a share in the year-ago first quarter.


Gorbachev Urges New Economy, Otherwise 'Our Society Will Die'
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his chief advisers resorted to the ultimate warning today and said the life of the nation would be at stake in the coming attempt to reverse the decline of the Soviet economy.


Ames Stores Files for Bankruptcy
LEAD: Unable to recover from the setbacks it suffered after taking over the Zayre discount department stores in 1988, Ames Department Stores Inc. said yesterday that it had filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The divorce of a candidate running for governor is hardly considered a campaign plus.
But in Connecticut, two gubernatorial candidates have announced their divorces this week.
Representative BRUCE A. MORRISON, whose Third Congressional District is centered in New Haven and who is considered the front-runner for the Democratic nomination, announced that he and his wife, JANE MORRISON, had divorced.


Augat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Augat Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
71,786,802
80,390,220
Net inc
3,378,000
3,000,000
Share earns
.19
.17
The company noted that an early retirement incentive program in the first quarter of 1990 resulted in a net cost of $200,000.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about the Metropolitan Opera debut of the soprano Sharon Sweet tonight gave an incorrect date for her appearance in ''Il Trovatore'' next week.
It is Wednesday night, not Tuesday, and again at the Saturday matinee.


Ex-Official Is Contrite in Obscenity Furor
LEAD: Dr.
Richard Berendzen, who has been in seclusion since he was forced to resign as president of American University two weeks ago amid complaints that he had made obscene telephone calls, broke his silence today and said he was tormented and embarrassed by the events surrounding him.


Alice Lake; Writer, 73
LEAD: Alice Lake, a writer whose specialty was health and education issues, died Wednesday at New York Hospital from complications following surgery for lung cancer.
She was 73 years old and lived in Harrison, N.Y.


Cabot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabot Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
445,052,000
540,925,000
Net inc
26,252,000
29,039,000
Share earns
1.03
1.05
Shares outst
24,608,000
26,791,000
6mo rev
851,677,000
1,021,009,000
Net inc
44,649,000
51,822,000
Share earns
1.74
1.86
Shares outst
24,617,000
26,874,000


Concurrent Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concurrent Computer (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
85,700,000
83,000,000
Net inc
200,000
b8,800,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
261,719,000
192,398,000
Net loss
3,695,000
24,022,000
Shares outst
18,147,000
17,026,000


The Wake of the Cup
LEAD:
Sept. 26, 1983: Dennis Conner, skipper for the New York Yacht Club, loses the America's Cup to Australia, ending a 132-year winning streak by American yachtsmen.
Feb. 4, 1987: Conner wins back the America's Cup from Australia in his 12-Meter sloop Stars &amp; Stripes.
Conner sailed as a challenger for the San Diego Yacht Club.


Hawaii Tourism Off 2.5%
LEAD: A 22-day strike by hotel workers cut the number of tourists in Hawaii by 2.5 percent last month, compared with March of last year, the Hawaii Visitors Bureau said today.
As publicity surrounding the strike increased, so did cancellations, the bureau said.
About 582,000 people visited Hawaii last month, a decline of 15,000 from the year before.


Hitox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hitox Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,412,000
4,028,000
Net inc
b134,000
610,000
Share earns
.04
.18
b-Reflected $500,000 provision for loss from discontinued zinc oxide operations in Spokane, Wash., and also reflected $11,000 equity in loss from foreign operations.


Coca-Cola Bottling Co. Conolidated reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Bottling Co. Conolidated (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
93,264,000
84,745,000
Net loss
1,979,000
2,558,000


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Michelle Shocked Michelle Shocked, Poi Dog Pondering and John Wesley Harding, the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street (956-3731 or 541-8900).
Here's a triple bill of 1990's folk-rockers, equipped with acoustic guitars but determined not to be as credulous or effete as previous folkies.
Michelle Shocked writes about plain folks with a wry understanding that makes her odd tangents seem downright plausible.


Boston Edison Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Edison Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
309,664,000
296,253,000
Net inc
b30,595,000
11,813,000
Share earns
.68
.19
b-After income of $15,824,000, or 41 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of accrual for unbilled revenues, after tax.


Consuelito Journal;   Sugar Harvest's Bitter Side: Some Call It Slavery
LEAD: Just off National Highway 3, in the gently rolling green countryside best known for producing major league baseball players, thousands of dirt-poor Haitians work 15-hour days in vast sugar-cane fields.


U.S. PANEL WARNS ON CHILD POVERTY
LEAD: Poverty and despair facing many American children are not only personal tragedies but also ''a staggering national tragedy'' that threatens America's future, a Federal commission reported today.


Correction
LEAD: An April 19 article by Eugene Kennedy on Roman Catholic bishops' use of Hill &amp; Knowlton to design their anti-abortion campaign said Baxter International, a onetime client of the public relations firm, makes intrauterine devices.
According to a company spokesman, Baxter has never made them.


Brookfield Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brookfield Bancshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
392,092
630,610
Per share
.81
1.31


Wicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wicor Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
251,000,000
260,000,000
Net inc
17,100,000
22,200,000
Share earns
1.25
1.64
Shares outst
13,670,000
13,559,000


Enron Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enron Oil &amp; Gas (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
96,260,000
74,568,000
Net inc
11,223,000
b718,000
Share earns
.15
-
Shares outst
75,900,000
64,000,000
b-Net loss


Sun's Profits Up 18 Percent
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. today reported unexpectedly strong third-quarter earnings, which it attributed to strong sales of its newest products.


Ex-Queens School Board Chief Guilty of Job Fraud
LEAD: A former president of a school board in Queens pleaded guilty yesterday to coercion and fraud for having illegally pressured school administrators to give jobs to people he favored.


2 New England Banks Report Quarterly Profits
LEAD: The Bank of Boston Corporation and the Shawmut National Corporation, two New England banking companies that were recently hit hard by losses from real estate loans, yesterday announced profits for the first quarter, despite continuing loan problems.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Feb 24
1990
1989
Sales
2,567,724,000
2,433,417,000
Net inc
34,509,000
30,590,000
Share earns
.90
.80
Yr sales
11,147,997,000
10,067,776,000
Net inc
146,698,000
127,582,000
Share earns
3.84
3.34


Alco Standard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alco Standard Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
865,664,000
786,185,000
Net inc
28,734,000
28,996,000
Share earns
.69
.67
Shares outst
41,425,000
48,415,000
6mo rev
1,652,444,000
1,551,149,000
Net inc
47,237,000
b107,946,000
Share earns
1.14
2.38
Shares outst
41,436,000
45,360,000


Murphy Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Murphy Oil Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
459,645,000
386,576,000
Net inc
b21,998,000
6,405,000
Share earns
.65
.19
b-Included a tax credit of $4,065,000, or 12 cents a share.
First quarter earnings included a $2.9 million gain from sales of a jointly owned jack-up rig and designs for another rig.


India Is Expected to Remain On U.S. Trade 'Hit List'
LEAD: As President Bush's Cabinet-level Economic Policy Council met today to consider which countries to target for reprisal under 1988 trade legislation, Administration officials said that India was likely to remain on their ''hit list'' but that Brazil, like Japan, had worked its way off.


UAL Chairman Plans to Leave
LEAD: Stephen M. Wolf, chairman of the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, said today that he would leave if a planned $4.4 billion employee buyout was completed.


Puroflow Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Jan. 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puroflow Inc.
Year to Jan. 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,926,920
6,771,117
Net inc
555,592
295,943
Share earns
.18
.10


U.S. Home Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Home Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
152,931,000
153,769,000
Net inc
b126,000
b421,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $501,000 and $762,000 for the latest and year-ago quarters, respectively, and a gain from early extinguishment of debt of $276,000 and $940,000, or 2 cents a share, for the same periods, respectively.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Alcan Aluminum Ltd., Montreal, said its shareholders had approved a shareholder rights plan.


SOLEMN TRIBECA'S HIDDEN SMILES
LEAD: At night, TriBeCa's tall, heavy industrial buildings and warehouses somehow make it seem darker than the rest of the city.


Kerr-McGee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kerr-McGee Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
811,800,000
717,100,000
Net inc
27,100,000
b63,900,000
Share earns
.54
1.32
Shares outst
50,188,000
48,333,000
b-Included a gain of $30 million, or 62 cents a share, realized from the completion of the sale of discontinued uranium operations.


Afoot Amid the Cultural Landmarks
LEAD: TriBeCa has changed a good deal in the 15 or so years since it started to become a fashionable place to live.
But in many ways the district has kept its distinctive profile.
That is due in part to the fact that its history has not been as much attended to as SoHo's, say, or the neighboring Chinatown's or financial district's.


Hooper Holmes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hooper Holmes Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
23,007,000
18,823,000
Net inc
591,000
472,000
Share earns
.19
.15


Atlantic Southeast Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Southeast Airlines (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
44,445,000
38,832,000
Net inc
5,877,000
4,633,000
Share earns
.50
.38
Shares outst
11,779,059
12,326,762


Putnam Trust Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Putnam Trust Co.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,062,000
1,241,000
Per share
.37
.43


Sun Energy Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Energy Partners (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
336,000,000
303,000,000
Net inc
57,000,000
b170,000,000
Share earns
.15
-
Shares outst
378,900,000
356,100,000
b-Net loss and included an extraordinary loss of $199,000,000 relating to the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


International Flavors &amp; Frarances reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Flavors &amp; Frarances (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
241,477,000
227,205,000
Net inc
41,588,000
38,485,000
Share earns
1.09
1.01


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 509 money market mutual funds decreased by $816.60 million, to $387.89 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 161 institutional funds increased by $299.8 million, to $90.64 billion.
The assets of the 246 general-purpose funds were up by $563.30 million, to $133.62 billion.


Killer of 4 in '79 Spree Executed in S. Carolina
LEAD: A rare-coin thief who went on a murderous rampage that left four people dead and another maimed for life was executed this morning in the state's electric chair.


Transamerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transamerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,628,870,000
1,589,266,000
Net inc
b70,300,000
c70,900,000
Share earns
.88
.89
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $5,200,000, or 7 cents a share.


No Release of Muslims by Israel Now
LEAD: In a departure from its usual custom, Israel declined this week to release groups of Islamic prisoners in celebration of the Muslim holiday Id al-Fitr, apparently in an effort to dampen speculation that it was involved in a prisoner exchange.


It's Final: San Diego Regains America's Cup
LEAD: The New York Court of Appeals yesterday ended, once and for all, a three-year legal battle over yachting's most renowned prize, the America's Cup, by awarding the 139-year-old silver trophy to the San Diego Yacht Club.


Anadarko Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anadarko Petroleum (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
104,100,000
126,600,000
Net inc
20,000,000
26,100,000
Share earns
.38
.50
Shares outst
52,300,000
52,100,000


Review/Dance;   Innocence And Loss: A Vision From Blake
LEAD: ''Of Bright &amp; Blue Birds &amp; the Gala Sun,'' which received its world premiere on Wednesday night, is a major dance work, the second eveninglong dance piece choreographed by Paul Taylor and his most tormented meditation on human existence.


Talmud Gala: Ancient Law for 1990's Issues
LEAD: Despite the demands of his law firm, his five children, summer vacations and seven tax seasons, Jacob I. Friedman has set aside one hour every day for the last seven and a half years to study the Talmud, the veritable library of Jewish law, ethics, mysticism and folklore.


Scana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scana Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
287,438,000
285,814,000
Net inc
33,782,000
33,909,000
Share earns
.84
.84


Capital Court's Ruling on Fetal Status
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the 7-to-1 decision today by the District of Columbia Court of Appeals that a pregnant woman cannot be forced to undergo a Caesarean delivery to save her fetus.
Judge John A. Terry wrote the opinion for the majority.
Judge James A. Belson wrote a dissenting opinion.


Sealy Holdings Agrees To Financing Terms
LEAD: Ending a year of struggle that bruised the First Boston Corporation, Sealy Holdings Inc., formerly the Ohio Mattress Company, announced yesterday that it had agreed with a series of lenders on terms for permanent financing for the company.


Pancanadian Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pancanadian Petroleum
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
226,600,000
195,800,000
Net inc
44,300,000
37,200,000
Share earns
.35
.30
Figures are in Canadian funds.


A Livery-Cab Driver Is Attacked in Queens
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was assaulted Wednesday night in Queens by a man who stole his wallet and slashed his neck before escaping when the cab collided with another car at 120th Street and Atlantic Avenue in Kew Gardens, the police said.


Abraham Taub; Chemistry Professor, 88
LEAD: Abraham Taub, a retired chemistry professor, died of pnuemonia on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A black student will run the University of Mississippi newspaper for the first time.
LEE ERIC SMITH, 20 years old, was named editor of The Daily Mississippian on Wednesday by a selection committee set up last month after protests by campus journalists.


Johnson &amp; Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson &amp; Johnson (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
2,838,000,000
2,445,000,000
Net inc
b244,000,000
317,000,000
Share earns
.73
.95
b-Reduced by $125 million due to the previously announced non-recurring charge as a result of unprecedented economic distress in Latin America, primarily Argentina.


Citicorp Offering Totals $250 Million
LEAD: Citicorp is offering $250 million in certificates backed by Mastercard and Visa loan receivables through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.


Give Gorbachev Benefit of Doubt on Lithuania
LEAD: To the Editor:


Celtics Win Opener as Knicks Fade in 2d Half
LEAD: The Knicks found a new way to lose tonight in the Boston Garden, which has turned into their own house of horrors.


Sonat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonat Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
449,658,000
411,156,000
Net inc
32,485,000
26,416,000
Share earns
.76
.65


Nerco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nerco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
174,100,000
156,900,000
Net inc
19,600,000
16,300,000
Share earns
.50
.49
Shares outst
38,900,000
33,400,000
Pacificorp owns 82 percent of Nerco's common shares.


Tobacco Foes Lose Philip Morris Vote
LEAD: Stockholders of the Philip Morris Companies, the giant food and tobacco concern, overwhelmingly rejected two resolutions aimed against the company's core cigarette products, but supporters of the proposals claimed a symbolic victory. ''We feel we accomplished a great deal getting that kind of a vote,'' the Rev.


Grim Contractors Ready For Cutbacks on Arms
LEAD: The Pentagon's plan to scale back and stretch out its purchases of aircraft in the coming decade confirms what many arms makers have come to expect: a period of painful consolidation.


Rio Algom reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rio Algom
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
355,484,000
512,235,000
Net inc
20,131,000
b41,931,000
Share earns
.44
.94
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $1,824,000, or 4 cents a share.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Musecology
LEAD: New works by Lynn Wilson, David Hollister and Richard Hoyt are to be featured in Musecology, a program of works about nature and the environment, at the Emanu-El Midtown Y, 344 East 14th Street, tomorrow evening at 8.
The program includes the world premieres of Ms.
Wilson's ''Dead Seal at McClure Beach''; Mr.


Dance Workshop
LEAD: A free workshop in ethnic dance forms, open to the public, is to be held on Sunday at 1 P.M. at the Picnic House on Prospect Park West in Brooklyn.
The workshop is one of nine free events in four boroughs celebrating National Dance Week, offered through May 6 by Dance Giant Steps, a presenting and service organization and the publisher of Attitude, a dance magazine.


Perkins Papers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perkins Papers
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,516,000
16,463,000
Net inc
735,000
36,000
Share earns
.12
.01
Figures are in Canadian funds.
The company said year-earlier results reflected mechanical problems at its Candiac, Que., facility.


Deficits Are No Bar to Universal Day Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


Downey Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Downey Savings &amp; Loan (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
13,156,000
b21,007,000
Share earns
.81
1.30
b-Included about $11 million, or 68 cents a share, from a one-time earnings credit representing cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Raymond James financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raymond James financial (NYSE)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
59,362,000
55,236,000
Net inc
3,334,000
2,846,000
Share earns
.59
.51
Shares outst
5,699,000
5,582,000
6mo rev
121,694,000
100,175,000
Net inc
7,400,000
4,955,000
Share earns
1.30
.89
Shares outst
5,695,000
5,546,000


J.&amp;J.'s Profit Plunges 23.2%
LEAD: Johnson &amp; Johnson, the health-care products giant, said today that its profit declined 23.2 percent in the first quarter because of repayment of a loan in Argentina.
The company said sales increased 16.1 percent in the quarter.


Fast-Moving Lava Is Threatening To Engulf Rural Hawaiian Town
LEAD: Despite their best efforts, the residents of Kalapana may be fighting a losing battle to preserve their town from the lava flow from Kilauea volcano.


Cade Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cade Industries Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,808,000
12,963,000
Net inc
558,000
338,000
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
16,910,583
16,966,106


CHRONICLE
LEAD: DARLENE GILLESPIE, one of the original Mouseketeers, wants to see Walt Disney Productions in court.
Why?
Because she says the company cheated her of royalties from the original ''Mickey Mouse Club'' television show.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Thursday headed ''Credit Tightens in New England,'' comparing growth of commercial and industrial loans at large commercial banks in the United States and New England, miscalculated the quarter-to-quarter percent changes.
This corrected chart shows the change in the dollar values of business and real estate loans.


Outlet Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Outlet Communications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,855,000
22,479,000
Net inc
b4,917,000
c16,850,000
Share earns
.75
2.57
b-Included a pretax gain from dispostion of broadcast properties of $16.5 million.


Carol Burnett's Back With Something Different
LEAD: About a year ago, Carol Burnett got a call from Michael Eisner, the chairman of the Walt Disney Company and one of Hollywood's most persuasive behind-the-scenes matchmakers.
Mr.
Eisner suggested that she get together with Matt Williams, a television writer and producer who had recently signed on at Disney after creating the hit ABC series ''Roseanne.


BC Gas Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BC Gas Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
119,183,000
119,752,000
Net inc
44,570,000
41,215,000
Share earns
2.60
2.61
Shares outst
16,098,000
15,670,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.
The company is listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange.


Brandevor Enterprises reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brandevor Enterprises
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,200,000
5,400,000
Net loss
1,130,000
b37,000
b-Net income


Hearns Sets Out to Gain Bigger Share of Spotlight
LEAD: Angelo Dundee, a veteran fight trainer, was impressed.


Oakwood Homes Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oakwood Homes Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
24,431,000
15,089,000
Net inc
1,319,000
221,000
Share earns
.25
.04
6mo sales
45,420,000
31,449,000
Net inc
1,933,000
267,000
Share earns
.37
.05
Shares outst
5,201,000
5,226,000


Japanese Still Fear Trade Tensions With U.S.
LEAD: A flurry of recent trade accords between the United States and Japan appears to have arrested a deterioration in the two countries' relationship.
But the sense of relief in Tokyo is diminished by deep worries about the future.


Patents;   An Electric Guitar With Flexible Neck
LEAD: Robert Kunstadt, a New York patent attorney by day and amateur rock musician by night, recently merged his two interests by patenting a guitar with a flexible neck.


Elmwood Federal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elmwood Federal
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
178,000
399,000
Per share
.12
.27


Unrelated Amendments Snag Bill on Emergency Spending
LEAD: Senate efforts to complete action on an emergency spending bill that includes money for domestic programs and aid for Panama and Nicaragua slowed to a crawl today as lawmakers battled over scores of unrelated amendments on everything from abortion to the death penalty.


Dahlberg Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dahlberg Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
16,693,000
15,416,000
Net inc
b573,000
284,000
Share earns
.20
.09
Shares outst
2,815,838
3,188,500
b-Included after-tax gain of $116,000, or 4 cents a share, on sale of the Golden Valley Manufacturing facility.


Nicaragua Devaluation
LEAD: Nicaragua's new Government announced today that it would slash the value of its currency by 50.9 percent against the dollar in state-controlled exchange houses.
The devaluation of the currency, the cordoba, appears aimed at making the exchange houses competitive with black-market rates for the dollar and at adjusting the overvalued currency.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the first-quarter earnings of the Xerox Corporation referred incorrectly to the discontinued operations of the company's Crum &amp; Forster subsidiary.
It has stopped selling personal auto insurance and homeowner's insurance, but it continues to sell life insurance.


Astronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astronics Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,781,000
5,681,000
Net inc
1,000
b417,000
b-Net loss


Rogers Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rogers Communications
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
184,629,000
142,905,000
Net loss
18,339,000
b18,000
6mo rev
358,058,000
287,539,000
Net loss
22,834,000
b7,024,000
b-Net income and included an extraordinary credit of $5,469,000 or 5 cents a share, and $6,843,000, or 7 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months.


Richard W. Camp, Antiques Dealer, 67
LEAD: Richard W. Camp, an antiques dealer and former actor, died of lung cancer on Thursday at his home in Wainscott, L.I.
He was 67 years old.


USlico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USlico Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
107,900,000
100,400,000
Net inc
b6,500,000
b8,600,000
Share earns
.60
.79
b-Included capital gains of $200,000 in the 1990 quarter and $2.9 million in the 1989 quarter.


Freeport McMoran Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport McMoran Oil &amp; Gas (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
57,094,000
76,503,000
Net inc
1,102,000
15,184,000
Share earns
.01
.15
Shares outst
117,515,000
101,626,000
Year-ago quarter restated to reflect restructuring.


Brown &amp; Sharpe Manufacturng reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brown &amp; Sharpe Manufacturng (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
50,050,000
46,023,000
Net inc
456,000
372,000
Share earns
.10
.08


Dollar Ends Mostly Down As Mark and Yen Dominate
LEAD: The dollar declined against most major currencies yesterday in trading dominated by the West German mark and Japanese yen.
News that inflation picked up this year initially caused heavy dollar buying but it tapered off by late morning.


Paccar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paccar Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
658,709,000
834,551,000
Net inc
25,072,000
47,309,000
Share earns
.72
1.33


Carolco Advances De Laurentiis Bid
LEAD: Carolco Pictures Inc. said the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Central District of California had confirmed a plan under which Carolco would acquire the troubled De Laurentiis Entertainment Group Inc.


Social Security Administration Has Improved
LEAD: To the Editor:


Call to Remove Addicts' Children
LEAD: William J. Bennett, the nation's chief anti-drug official, said today that orphanages and youth camps might ultimately have to be employed as sanctuaries for children facing ''systematic child abuse'' in drug-plagued homes and neighborhoods.


Electronic Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Associates (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
8,994,000
9,536,000
Net inc
b960,000
175,000
Share earns
.34
.06
b-Included net gain of $909,000 from sale of a subsidiary.


Patents;   A Process to Extend Carrot Sticks' Shelf Life
LEAD: The DNA Plant Technology Corporation of Cinnaminson, N.J., a young company working on ways to make better-tasting vegetables, obtained the latest in a series of patents this week on methods to extend the shelf life of fresh carrot sticks.


Michael Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michael Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
112,543,000
53,609,000
Net inc
4,685,000
2,571,000
Share earns
.42
.23
Shares outst
11,140,192
11,361,483


Taxi Court Anonymity Only in Violence Cases
LEAD: To the Editor:


Druce's Overtime Goal Finishes the Rangers
LEAD: James Patrick had referred to it as a buzz in the air.
The not-entirely-unrealistic current of excitement concerned a run by the Rangers at the Stanley Cup, and it both lighted up people's imaginations and crackled inside Madison Square Garden.


Anti-Takeover Law Signed
LEAD: Gov.
Robert P. Casey signed the nation's toughest anti-takeover law today in hopes of cooling the threat of corporate raiders aiming at Pennsylvania companies.
The law, which took effect immediately, has been the center of a national debate that pitted leading members of the investment community against state labor and business groups.


General Trustco Cda reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Trustco Cda
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
176,400,000
149,000,000
Net inc
3,700,000
4,500,000
Share earns
.07
.10
Results are in Canadian funds.


Federal Judge Strikes Illinois Law Against Fetal Research
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Chicago has struck down an Illinois law barring fetal research, saying it was so broad that it prohibited a woman from getting advanced treatments for infertility and genetic screening of the fetus.


Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,597,006
4,951,705
Net inc
279,152
412,822
Share earns
.43
.59
Shares outst
644,346
704,336


Harmon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harmon Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
17,293,000
16,591,000
Net loss
896,000
b63,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Tanzania Has Provided A Haven for Refugees
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.N.P. Rate Up by 2.1% For Quarter
LEAD: The economy grew at a moderate 2.1 percent annual rate in the first three months of the year while inflation took its biggest quarterly jump since 1981, the Commerce Department reported today.


South Carolina Federal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina Federal
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b749,000
c545,000
Per share
.32
.24
6mo net inc
b1,276,000
c2,204,000
Per share
.55
.96
Shares outst
2,312,000
2,307,000
b-After extraordinary tax benefits of $44,000, or 2 cents a share, for the quarter and $80,000, or 4 cents a share, for the 6 months.


KCS Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KCS Group
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
19,674,000
20,858,000
Net inc
620,000
b1,337,000
Share earns
.36
.74
6mo sales
37,287,000
36,990,000
Net inc
1,610,000
b1,754,000
Share earns
.92
.97
b-After income from discontinued operations of $1,047,000, or 58 cents a share, for the quarter and $1,589,000, or 88 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Consolidated-Tomoka Land reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated-Tomoka Land
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
10,347,351
11,118,344
Net loss
429,781
b362,100
Share earns
-
.12
b-Net income


Wellman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wellman Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
208,600,000
91,800,000
Net inc
17,800,000
13,300,000
Share earns
.55
.46
Shares outst
32,646,000
19,034,000
The company said the results reflect the first full quarter of operating with Fiber Industries Inc., which Wellman acquired Nov.


Middlesex Water Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Middlesex Water Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,343,152
5,511,403
Net inc
772,265
611,600
Share earns
.45
.40
Shares outst
1,713,033
1,524,261


Columbia First Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia First Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
987,000
b325,000
Per share
.24
-
6mo net inc
2,924,000
584,000
Per share
.79
-
b-Net loss
The per share earnings for the latest periods included a provision for annual income payments on permanent income capital certificates of 10 cents a share for the quarter and 21 cents a share for the 6 months, compared with 12 cents a share and 24 cents a share for same year-ago periods, respectively.


REGENTS APPROVE PANEL ON NEW ETHNIC STUDIES
LEAD: The Regents today authorized creating a panel to draft changes in school curriculums to add weight to the influence of non-white cultures on American society.


AIDS Virus and Its Stigma Plaguing Women in Zambia
LEAD: Rhoda Banda, a thin 20-year-old woman with an occasional broad smile and lively laugh, is one of only two people in her village who made it to secondary school.


Champion Parts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion Parts Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
32,227,000
27,846,000
Net inc
467,000
b42,000
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss and after income of $510,000, or 14 cents a share, from an accounting adjustment.


Equimark Halts Savings Deal
LEAD: The proposed recapitalization of the National Bancshares Corporation of Texas fell through when the Equimark Corporation pulled out, laying the basis for the Federal takeover of the largest remaining insolvent bank in Texas.
Equimark, a $3.7 billion financial services company based in Pittsburgh, agreed last July to take over the ailing San Antonio bank holding company, providing $31 million of its own money along with $250 million from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


Former Judge Afoul of Law
LEAD: Walter L. Nixon Jr., whom Congress removed from office as a Federal judge in an impeachment proceeding last year, has been arrested along with a state wildlife officer on a hunting violation.
Mr.
Nixon, paroled five months ago after serving a prison term for perjury, was released on $100 bond early Thursday after being charged with hunting game birds by using bait, a misdemeanor.


DQE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DQE Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
285,030,000
270,028,000
Net inc
33,337,000
27,722,000
Share earns
.60
.49


Central Louisiana Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Louisiana Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
69,500,000
68,478,000
Net inc
5,605,000
7,011,000
Share earns
.48
.57
Shares outst
11,243,500
11,230,571


Broadcast International Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Broadcast International Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,710,735
4,207,555
Net inc
692,704
240,152
Share earns
.06
.02


Preferred Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preferred Savings Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
3,000,000
483,000
9mo net loss
7,700,000
771,000
The company said the primary reason for the quarterly loss was the recording of additional loss provisions on loans, real estate, and investment securities totaling $2 million.


Peruvian Bars Drug Accord Unless U.S. Helps on Crops
LEAD: President Alan Garcia has declared that he will not sign an agreement with the United States to combat the cocaine trade if the accord does not include economic compensation for losses from growing coca leaf.


G.E. and Lockheed Set Layoffs at Subsidiaries
LEAD: Bowing to the continued pressures of Defense Department budget cuts, subsidiaries of the General Electric Company and the Lockheed Corporation both said today that they would eliminate thousands of jobs through layoffs and attrition.


Bally Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bally Manufacturing (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
551,273,000
516,709,000
Net inc
7,587,000
11,849,000
Share earns
.21
.37


Cadmus Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadmus Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
41,448,000
40,894,000
Net inc
1,025,000
803,000
Share earns
.17
.13
9mo sales
123,535,000
119,133,000
Net inc
3,077,000
2,866,000
Share earns
.51
.47


Detrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detrex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
25,538,551
27,557,711
Net inc
894,689
861,558
Share earns
.57
.55


Raymond Bernstein; Oil Executive Was 62
LEAD: Raymond Bernstein, retired president of Northville Industries of Long Island, a heating oil distributor, died on Thursday after he was struck by an automobile while riding a bicycle in Miami.
The 62-year-old Miami resident lived for many years in Sands Point, L.I.


Alliant Computer System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alliant Computer System (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
20,336,000
15,704,000
Net inc
998,000
b102,000
Share earns
.07
.01
Shares outst
14,252,000
12,584,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $25,000.


Review/Theater;   Dynastic Musical Of Harlem
LEAD: It is not every day that one runs across a show as ambitiously conceived as ''Sugar Hill,'' a new musical drama presented by Musical Theater Works at the Theater at St.
Peter's Church.
Set in the late 1920's to 1970 in the upscale Sugar Hill section of Harlem, the show is a teary-eyed dynastic saga that focuses on the strife between three generations of talented, self-motivating women.


Circon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
13,127,000
12,186,000
Net inc
278,000
56,000
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
5,561,000
5,289,000
The company said it has restructured its debt by changing its primary bank and repurchasing its $9 million convertible debenture.


Vickers to Keep Rolls-Royce Unit
LEAD: Stockholders of Vickers, the British industrial company, defeated a bid by its largest shareholder, the New Zealand entrepreneur Ron Brierley, to make Rolls-Royce Motor Cars an independent company.
Mr Brierley had argued that Rolls-Royce would be worth more on its own.
He has a 20.5 percent stake in


American Steel &amp; Wire reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Steel &amp; Wire (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
48,843,000
53,581,000
Net inc
970,000
1,133,000
Share earns
.12
.14
9mo sales
131,060,000
151,436,000
Net loss
b313,000
c4,502,000
Share earns
-
.62
Shares outst
8,371,000
7,247,000


Far Above Earth, Telescope Opens Its Aluminum Eyelid
LEAD: Out where stars have no twinkle, beyond Earth's thick and turbulent atmosphere, the Hubble Space Telescope opened its huge aluminum eyelid today and let in the first light from the heavens.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Archive Corp., Costa Mesa, Calif., a maker of tape drives for computer systems, completed the acquisition of Cipher Data Products Inc., San Diego, a maker of magnetic tape drives, for about $120 million.


First Financial Savings (Pa.) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Savings (Pa.)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
319,000
374,000
Per share
.28
.33
9mo net inc
1,033,000
1,079,000
Per share
.90
.94


Bell &amp; Howell reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell &amp; Howell
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
147,567,000
135,724,000
Net loss
5,690,000
20,819,000
Year-ago figures included results from Merrill Publishing business, which was sold in November 1989.


Applied Biosystems reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Biosystems (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
42,617,000
43,242,000
Net inc
2,211,000
5,511,000
Share earns
.16
.39
9mo sales
120,206,000
118,421,000
Net inc
6,775,000
15,062,000
Share earns
.48
1.08
Shares outst
14,132,000
13,876,000


Review/Film;   Martians Mix It Up On Earth
LEAD: ''Spaced Invaders,'' a sci-fi comedy of preteen manners, has a kind of bumbling sweetness to it that matches the behavior of its less than ferocious Martian characters.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the art collection of Walter H. and Leonore Annenberg referred incorrectly to his position with the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
He is a trustee emeritus, not an active trustee.


Bruno's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 7
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bruno's Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 7
1990
1989
Sales
640,889,000
581,033,000
Net inc
15,468,000
12,699,000
Share earns
.19
.16
Shares outst
81,585,000
81,533,000
9mo sales
1,814,983,000
1,618,209,000
Net inc
b43,506,000
c38,607,000
Share earns
.54
.47
Shares outst
81,575,000
81,531,000


Adia Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adia Services (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
160,948,000
141,920,000
Net inc
4,990,000
b6,444,000
Share earns
.40
.52
b-Included a gain of $1,472,000, or 12 cents a share, from an accounting adjustment.


Review/Theater;   Two Desperate Women, Living Life on the Edge
LEAD: The characters in Richard Caliban's ''Rodents and Radios'' are desperately seeking self-realization but settle for a kind of futile escape.
At the center of this kaleidoscopic collage are two compulsive young women.
One is an athlete who has defected from Romania - a Nadia Comenici of the tennis courts.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD


Acme Steel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme Steel Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
115,346,000
109,149,000
Net inc
812,000
5,486,000
Share earns
.15
1.01
Shares outst
5,366,073
5,408,737


Broad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Broad Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
9,946,000
8,131,000
Share earns
.30
.25
6mo net inc
13,216,000
b11,232,000
Share earns
.40
-
b-Net loss
The company said the 1989 quarter included a gain of $675,000 from corporate restructuring while the 1989's 6 months included a loss of $27,010,000 from the restructuring.


Two Bronx Elections
LEAD: Next Tuesday the Bronx will hold two special elections to fill state legislative vacancies.
Special elections rarely generate much excitement, but since the winners will have an automatic advantage if they run in the fall for full terms, voters would do well to take note of the campaigns - and vote.


Loblaw reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loblaw
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,835,600,000
1,710,600,000
Net inc
16,000,000
12,300,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Results are in Canadian funds.
The company is listed on the Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver stock exchanges.


Galveston-Houston reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galveston-Houston (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,460,000
14,635,000
Net inc
1,587,000
828,000
Share earns
.09
.04
Shares outst
16,988,899
11,505,131


G.N.P. Rises 2.1%
LEAD: The economy grew at a moderate rate in the first quarter, while the inflation rate jumped to 6.5 percent.
But unusual weather affected both figures.
Page 33.


Wendy's International reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wendy's International (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
241,312,000
259,490,000
Net inc
b3,476,000
b6,344,000
Share earns
.04
.07
b-Included extraordinary credits due to a gain from the early extinguishment of debt of $499,000 and $339,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Great-West Lifeco reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great-West Lifeco
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,408,018,000
1,359,320,000
Net inc
b27,050,000
c24,673,000
Share earns
.34
.32
b-After an extraordinary loss of $4,037,000, representing a $12,628,000 realized and unrealized loss on assets, a $3,012,000 tax credit and a $4,456,000 release of prior years' premium tax provision.


Social Security Administration Has Improved;   No One Spoke Up
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patents;   A Syringe to Prevent Accidental Needle Sticks
LEAD: An associate professor of dentistry at the State University of New York at Stony Brook has invented a syringe designed to protect nurses and doctors from accidental needle sticks.


Graham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Graham Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
16,152,000
14,196,000
Net inc
332,000
58,000
Share earns
.33
.06


Computer Language Research reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Language Research (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
43,534,000
43,280,000
Net inc
5,566,000
6,128,000
Share earns
.41
.45
Shares outst
13,736,000
13,710,000


News Summary
LEAD:
International
3-6
The political impasse in Lithuania appeared to be moving closer to compromise after the intervention of the French and German leaders and a wave of backstage contacts between Moscow and the rebellious republic, officials in Vilnius said.
Page 1
President Bush's Lithuanian policy was attacked by nine Republican Senators, the first serious break in Congressional support for the Administration's handling of the Baltic situation.


Southern Indiana Gas &amp; ElecFtric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Indiana Gas &amp; ElecFtric Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
90,803,489
86,596,682
Net inc
12,787,591
12,638,576
Share earns
1.01
.99


SPORTS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: The butterflies were early.
In the first part of his career, Larry Bird was saying, the butterflies arrived during the ''shootaround,'' in the morning of the day of the game.
As years went on, that funny little flutter in the pit of his stomach was felt later, not until he got to the arena for the game itself.


Doctors in Debt
LEAD: To the Editor:


5 Charged With Enslaving Mexican Workers
LEAD: A flower grower and four of his overseers were arrested north of Los Angeles today and charged with enslaving Mexican farm workers.


UnionFed Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UnionFed Fincl
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
4,171,000
5,093,000
Per share
.56
1.00
Shares outst
7,514,000
5,081,000
9mo net inc
12,795,000
12,441,000
Per share
1.90
2.48
Shares outst
6,739,000
5,024,000


Bruins Bump Canadiens
LEAD: The Boston Bruins advanced to the Stanley Cup semifinals as Glen Wesley's 25-foot slap shot with 1 minute 13 seconds left broke a 1-1 tie and lifted them to a 3-1 victory over the Montreal Canadiens tonight.
Boston won the Adams Division final by four games to one.


Filtertek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Filtertek Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
11,345,000
9,726,000
Net inc
876,000
b1,629,000
Share earns
.13
.24
b-Included an after-tax gain of $820,000 on the sale of the company's French facility.


SPS Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SPS Technologies (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
104,622,000
110,194,000
Net inc
b253,000
4,254,000
Share earns
.05
.85
Shares outst
5,016,634
4,988,066
b-Reflected a change in valuing inventories that decreased earnings by $231,000, or 5 cents a share.


Rumors Lift Paramount
LEAD: The share price of Paramount Communications Inc. rose yesterday on rumors that the chairman of Chris-Craft Industries, Herbert J. Siegel, had been accumulating stock in the entertainment and publishing company.


Aydin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aydin Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
35,017,000
40,464,000
Net inc
1,906,000
1,797,000
Share earns
.38
.36
Shares outst
4,996,123
5,050,357


Eastchester Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastchester Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,203,000
1,458,000
Per share
.31
-
There were no per share earnings for the year-ago quarter because the bank converted from a mutual to stock form in April 1989.


Three Students From St. John's Face Indictment
LEAD: A grand jury yesterday indicted three students at St John's University in Queens on sexual-assault charges in a case in which another student charged that she had been sodomized at an off-campus residence, law-enforcement officials said.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Everyone you talk to is telling you that every time they look the situation is worse than before.
I don't think anyone there is saying they've seen the full extent of the problem.''
- Dr.
Anthony Robbins of Boston University, on the effects of the Chernobyl nuclear accident. [1:5.]


National Steel reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Steel
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
611,700,000
654,500,000
Net loss
4,200,000
b9,800,000
b-Net income and included gain of $2.6 million from tax-loss carryforwards.


Bliss &amp; Laughlin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bliss &amp; Laughlin Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
28,491,000
29,989,000
Net loss
495,000
b607,000
Share earns
-
.25
6mo rev
50,748,000
54,253,000
Net loss
782,000
b1,064,000
Share earns
-
.50
Shares outst
2,410,000
2,119,000


Pennzoil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennzoil Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
553,178,000
576,264,000
Net inc
b32,693,000
c52,537,000
Share earns
.85
1.34
Shares outst
38,261,000
36,183,000
b-Due to investment income decrease due to lower reported book income as a result of the conversion of $2.1 billion from short-term marketable securities into a long-term investment in Chevron Corp.


Atico Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atico Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b1,006,000
b199,000
Share earns
.18
.03
b-Included extraordinary credits of $129,000, or 2 cents a share, for the latest quarter and $103,000, or 2 cents a share, for the year-earlier period.


Evolution in Europe;   ROMANIANS SPLIT INTO RIVAL CAMPS
LEAD: An increasingly divisive election campaign split Bucharest into two camps today, as vociferous groups gathered separately to demonstrate for and against the ruling National Salvation Front.


F.T.C. Studies Farley Unit
LEAD: West Point-Pepperell Inc. disclosed this week that the Federal Trade Commission had begun investigating whether the company complied with the Government's order to divest itself of certain assets of J. P. Stevens &amp; Company, when West Point acquired the rival textile company for $1.2 billion in May 1988.


Data I/O Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data I/O Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 29
1990
1989
Sales
13,827,000
14,571,000
Net inc
641,000
651,000
Share earns
.10
.10


Shoulder Injury Ends Hershiser's Season
LEAD: Orel Hershiser of the Los Angeles Dodgers, one of baseball's best pitchers since the mid-1980's, had extensive surgery on his right shoulder yesterday and will be out for the rest of the season.


Honor for Robinson
LEAD: David Robinson, the Naval Academy graduate who joined the San Antonio Spurs two years late because he was finishing a Navy commitment, was unanimously named the National Basketball Association rookie of the year yesterday.
He was the first rookie to receive all the votes since Ralph Sampson in 1984.


Atlantic Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
166,700,000
160,800,000
Net inc
15,100,000
12,600,000
Share earns
.67
.63
Shares outst
22,649,000
20,080,000


Thatcher Said to Weigh Changes in Disputed Tax
LEAD: The British press reported today that the Government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher was considering major changes in an unpopular new Government tax.


PHM Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PHM Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
144,565,000
164,027,000
Net inc
12,233,000
10,769,000
Share earns
.46
.41


Shared Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shared Medical Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
97,113,000
95,514,000
Net inc
5,334,000
b6,341,000
Share earns
.24
.28
Shares outst
22,442,000
22,981,000
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $5,000,000, or 22 cents a share, from the cumulative effect on prior periods of an accounting change.


About New York;   Pros' Noses Turn To 'Royal Family' Of Eye-Catchers
LEAD: ''They are nasty things.
Their flesh is too much like the flesh of men.
And their perfume has the rotten sweetness of a prostitute.''


First Atlantic's Chief Ousted
LEAD: The president of the First Atlantic Savings and Loan Association of South Plainfield, N.J., was removed from his position today by Federal regulators and barred permanently from working for a federally insured financial institution.


Teck Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teck Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
119,551,000
101,793,000
Net inc
23,959,000
28,535,000
Share earns
.29
.35
Results are in Canadian funds.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MICHAEL CRAWFORD, star of ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' will don his mask and sing a last anguished love song tomorrow at the Ahmanson Theater in Los Angeles.
For weeks, fans of the British actor have been camping out at the theater hoping to get last-minute tickets.
Some seats have sold for more than $1,000 through classified ads.


California Legislator Draws 6 1/2 Years in Extortion Case
LEAD: Joseph Montoya, one of the most powerful members of the State Senate until he was convicted of extortion, racketeering and money laundering three months ago, has been sentenced to six and a half years in prison.


Manitowoc Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manitowoc Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
49,455,487
48,532,722
Net inc
4,360,856
3,097,630
Share earns
.42
.30
9mo rev
154,023,957
132,257,314
Net inc
b13,240,830
10,392,836
Share earns
1.28
1.01


Silcorp Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silcorp Ltd.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
169,940,000
168,741,000
Net loss
4,816,000
2,945,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


BEEF FOR THE BARBECUE
LEAD:
With the outdoor griling season here, barbecue fans will be taking to the decks, patios and picnic grounds.
Fish and chicken are increasingly popular choices, but beef continues to be the mainstay of the backyard barbecue.
Some people shy away from it because of its fat content.
But if you choose lean cuts and keep the portion size down you can control fat intake.


Lawter International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lawter International (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
38,206,000
33,867,000
Net inc
5,800,000
5,020,000
Share earns
.24
.21


Sale by Cineplex to SKS
LEAD: The Cineplex Odeon Corporation, one of the largest theater chains in North America, said today that it would sell the Virginia theaters of its wholly owned Plitt Theatres Inc. to SKS Enterprises Inc. of Richmond.
The price is $18 million (United States) for 80 screens at 18 sites.


Mycogen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mycogen Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,066,000
1,831,000
Net loss
675,000
735,000
Shares outst
8,248,156
6,840,311
The company changed to a calendar year, from a fiscal year ending Sept. 30.


Italy Ends Its Controls On the Lira
LEAD: Italy removed the last of its controls on capital movements today, freeing Italians to send money overseas but also potentially shrinking the captive pool of savings the Government has tapped to finance its huge budget deficits.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a calculation error in editing, a chart in Business Day on Thursday headed ''Credit Tightens in New England'' plotted quarter-to-quarter percent changes incorrectly for the value of business and real estate loans at large commercial banks in the last two years.
A corrected chart appears today on page 39.


Sturm, Ruger &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sturm, Ruger &amp; Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
42,729,000
38,399,000
Net inc
6,196,000
6,481,000
Share earns
.92
.96


Adobe Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adobe Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
37,455,000
39,907,000
Net inc
b3,389,000
b656,000
b-Included extraordinary credits of $1,007,000, or 3 cents a share for the latest quarter and $576,000, or 2 cents a share for the year-earlier period.


Mohawks Ask Cuomo to Join A Peace Effort
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo faced growing calls from Mohawk leaders today to intervene at the troubled St.
Regis Indian Reservation, where heavily armed rival Mohawk factions are fighting over the issue of allowing casino gambling.


Apple to Cut Computer Price
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. said today that it would cut prices in the United States on its Macintosh Portable.
Effective immediately, the basic Macintosh Portable will be cut $1,000, or 17.2 percent, to $4,799, and the hard disk version will be cut $1,000, or 15.3 percent, to $6,499.


Moto Photo reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moto Photo (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,451,264
8,257,815
Net loss
935,417
1,385,503


Expansion at the Brooklyn Museum
LEAD: Construction will begin Monday on the first phase of a master plan that would more than double the size of the Brooklyn Museum.
The museum, one of the largest in the United States, has already raised most of the $31 million for the first stage, confounding skeptics who doubted the project would ever get off the ground.


Shamir Accepts Mandate to Form a New Government
LEAD: Acting Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir accepted an official mandate to form a new Likud government today, and he quickly dismissed the Labor Party's suggestion that a new short-term ''national unity'' government be formed to revise the nation's electoral system.


Digi International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digi International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,488,251
3,719,604
Net inc
1,255,771
797,535
Share earns
.30
.27
Shares outst
4,131,615
2,989,313
6mo sales
10,066,920
6,727,724
Net inc
2,200,234
1,299,387
Share earns
.54
.43
Shares outst
4,072,195
2,989,313


Teradata Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teradata Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
61,696,000
26,922,000
Net inc
b6,199,000
c80,000
Share earns
.42
.01
9mo rev
159,282,000
86,868,000
Net inc
b13,957,000
c5,825,000
Share earns
.94
.41


First Federal of Western Pa.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal of Western Pa.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
293,000
418,000
Per share
.22
.32


Herbert W. Karr, 64, A Defense Contractor
LEAD: Herbert W. Karr, a founder and chairman of CACI International, which specializes in information services and market analysis, much of it for the Pentagon, died Wednesday at Stanford University Medical Center in Palo Alto, Calif., after a long illness.
He was 64 years old and lived in Palm Springs, Calif.


Allegheny International reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny International (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
253,714,000
268,276,000
Net loss
b7,428,000
4,613,000
Shares outst
10,919,000
10,909,000
6mo sales
467,507,000
495,267,000
Net loss
b10,533,000
2,829,000
Shares outst
10,919,000
10,889,000


Bird Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bird Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
25,799,000
27,575,000
Net inc
811,000
b235,000
Share earns
.12
-
Shares outst
3,623,241
4,371,293
b-After income from discontinued operations of $414,000, or 9 cents a share.


American Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Federal Bank
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
527,000
402,000
Per share
.13
-
The year-ago per share earnings were not available since the bank did not become public until Jan. 26, 1989.
American Federal is based in Greenville, S.C.


A Glitch in the System Halts Five New York Exchanges
LEAD: Trading was halted for more than three hours yesterday at five New York futures and options exchanges because of a communications glitch that was believed to have been caused by an electrical short in some damaged cables.


Electro-Sensors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro-Sensors Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,179,024
1,256,384
Net inc
84,317
99,487
Share earns
.05
.05


Evolution in Europe;   LITHUANIA REPORTS PROMISING CONTACT WITH SOVIET AIDES
LEAD: The political impasse over Lithuania's independence appears to be moving closer to a resolution after the intervention of the French and German leaders and backstage contacts between Moscow and the rebellious republic, officials here said today.


Beliefs
LEAD: For decades Alcoholics Anonymous groups routinely met in church basements, but not much except their cigarette smoke seeped upstairs to the congregations.


Pacific Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Telecom (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
159,249,000
156,955,000
Net inc
28,205,000
14,280,000
Share earns
.73
.37
Latest quarter results reflected a $13.8 million after-tax gain from the sale of a subsidiary providing satellite-based cellular telephone and private line communications services in the Gulf of Mexico.


Hate Crimes Found Aimed at Blacks in White Areas
LEAD: Vandalism and violence aimed primarily at blacks moving to white neighborhoods accounted for about half the nation's racial hate crimes last year, a survey conducted by a group that monitors such activity shows.


Deal in Booby-Trap Death
LEAD: A man who had been beset by burglaries and rigged a shotgun booby trap that killed a teen-age intruder in his warehouse two weeks ago will get a deferred sentence for reckless manslaughter under a plea bargain announced Thursday.
The 46-year-old defendant, Philip Connaghan, will spend no time in jail and his record will be cleared of the conviction if he has no further run-ins with the law, District Attorney Norm Early said.


Investors Savings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Investors Savings Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
552,000
275,000
Per share
.24
.12
The company changed its year-end in December to correspond with the calendar year.


Vie de France reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vie de France (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
30,111,470
28,798,611
Net loss
717,672
1,095,354
9mo sales
76,517,611
71,436,685
Net loss
1,194,521
2,064,175


Johnston Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnston Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
31,807,000
29,890,000
Net inc
40,000
1,779,000
Share earns
.01
.35
Shares outst
5,069,547
5,097,132
9mo sales
84,294,000
85,252,000
Net inc
910,000
5,916,000
Share earns
.18
1.16
Shares outst
5,076,889
5,107,387


Consumers Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consumers Packaging
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
137,900,000
88,700,000
Net loss
11,900,000
b3,800,000
Share earns
-
.24
b-Net income
Results are in Canadian dollars.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: In a telephone interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation's Radio 4, SALMAN RUSHDIE said he found it odd that no one in Britain has been prosecuted for making threats against his life for writing ''The Satanic Verses.'' The British author has been in hiding since February 1989, when the Iranian leader Ayatollah RUHOLLAH KHOMEINI condemned the novel as blasphemous and called on


Metro-North Plans $400 Million Grand Central Renewal
LEAD: Grand Central Terminal, a premier landmark in New York City, would undergo sweeping changes to restore its majestic interior and transform the vaulted terminal into a major center for retail, civic and cultural activities under a plan introduced yesterday by the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.


Wackenhut Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wackenhut Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
125,079,000
106,355,000
Net inc
1,273,000
873,000
Share earns
.33
.23


Evolution in Europe;   Europe United?
LEAD: With France and West Germany leading the way, the European Community is about to set off down the road toward political union, but its 12 member nations are still far from agreement over how much sovereignty they are willing to surrender.
The very concept of


Mesa L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mesa L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
96,484,000
105,035,000
Net loss
b18,241,000
c14,613,000
Share earns
-
.15
b-Included marketable securities gains of $3,752,000.
c-Net income and included marketable securities gains of $41,855,000.


Keithley Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keithley Instruments (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
26,409,000
21,292,000
Net inc
1,057,000
721,000
Share earns
.30
.21
6mo sales
50,395,000
41,498,000
Net inc
1,855,000
2,272,000
Share earns
.53
.65


Chittenden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chittenden Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,020,000
2,090,000
Per share
.22
.45


Chemdesign Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemdesign Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
10,403,000
9,800,000
Net inc
1,598,000
888,000
Share earns
.18
.13
Shares outst
8,959,000
7,008,000


Making the Best of a Bad Trade Law
LEAD: President Bush's decision to threaten only one country for maintaining ''unfair'' trade barriers this year won't satisfy protectionists who have their eyes on Japan.
But it should minimize the backlash against America's bullying.
Of the three he named last year - Japan, Brazil and India - only India was named again and, wisely, no more were added.


Midway Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midway Airlines (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
157,160,000
117,263,000
Net loss
22,920,000
b2,899,000
Share earns
-
.26
Shares outst
10,034,174
10,354,011
b-Net income and after an extraordinary tax loss carryforward $1,066,000, or 9 cents a share.


U.S. Drops Japan From Target List
LEAD: President Bush dropped Japan today from a list of countries subject to reprisal tariffs because of what the United States regards as unfair trading practices.


Review/Music;   Shostakovich's Leningrad Revisited: Siege or No, High Drama
LEAD: One of the most impressive musical elements of the New York International Festival of the Arts in 1988 was a stunning performance of Shostakovich's Seventh Symphony by Leonard Bernstein and the Chicago Symphony in Avery Fisher Hall.
Memories of that performance (aided by the Deutsche Grammophon recording made by Mr.


Aetna Life &amp; Casualty reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aetna Life &amp; Casualty (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,773,800,000
4,575,600,000
Net inc
179,800,000
173,600,000
Share earns
1.61
1.52
Latest quarter included realized capital gains of $20 million, or 18 cents a share, compared with $21 million, or 18 cents a share, a year-ago.


Home Federal Savings (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal Savings (Ga.)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
191,577
270,680
Per share
.11
.15


Philadelphia Transit Wincing Over Faked Injuries
LEAD: When there is an accident involving the mass transit system here, people for miles around start limping, holding their necks and calling lawyers who advertise ''no win, no fee'' for personal injury suits.


'Twin Peaks' Clouded By Decline in Viewers
LEAD: Far from achieving the blockbuster status that seemed likely after the show's initial high-rated broadcasts, ''Twin Peaks'' now faces some serious questions at ABC about its long-range prospects.


Judge Rules Patient Can Have Her Wish To Die Carried Out
LEAD: A judge has ruled that a paralyzed, pain-stricken woman who blinked once to tell a judge she wanted to be allowed to die can be taken off the respirator that is keeping her alive.


What Crime Victims Need
LEAD: Many Americans remember a time when there seemed to be no reason for a crime victims' movement.
Now there is plenty, and this is National Victims Rights Week.
It's a good time to reflect on what society can do for victims - and what it should not do.


Mack Trucks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mack Trucks Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
393,017,000
493,640,000
Net loss
33,925,000
b1,203,000
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
29,753,012
29,677,025
b-Net income and included an extraordinary tax benefit of $546,000, or 2 cents a share.


'I'm Sorry,' Says a Killer of 4 Just Before He's Put to Death
LEAD: A thief who killed four people and left another maimed for life in a 1979 rampage was executed today.


Delta Woodside Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delta Woodside Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
117,263,000
147,285,000
Net loss
934,000
b8,623,000
Share earns
-
.46
9mo sales
347,406,000
404,967,000
Net inc
1,589,000
20,369,000
Share earns
.08
1.11


Your Money;   Insuring 2 Lives With One Policy
LEAD: A relatively new form of life insurance, commonly known as a second-to-die policy, can play a significant role in estate planning.
But this insurance is not for everybody.
The policies insure two lives, normally a husband and wife, but do not pay a death benefit until the second death.
Because that is likely to occur several years after the first death, substantially more coverage can be purchased for the same annual premium than under single whole-life policies.


Questar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Questar Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
200,985,000
203,409,000
Net inc
28,973,000
28,195,000
Share earns
1.45
1.47


Miller Building Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller Building Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
8,733,519
9,157,130
Net inc
224,873
301,410
Share earns
.06
.08
9mo sales
31,799,679
31,774,529
Net inc
1,337,992
1,352,362
Share earns
.34
.34


Revco Set to Sell 221 Drugstores
LEAD: Revco D.S.
Inc., the pharmacy chain struggling to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy, agreed to sell 221 of its retail drugstores to a Texas investor group for undisclosed terms.
In January, privately held Revco said it planned to sell 712 of its drugstores in the Midwest and Southeast to focus on its other 1,100 more profitable stores in the


Drug Traffickers in Colombia Condemn Candidate's Killing
LEAD: Colombia's major drug traffickers today condemned the assassination of a leftist presidential candidate, Carlos Pizarro Leon-Gomez, and said the killing could only have been done with ''official participation.''


American President Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 6
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American President Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to April 6
1990
1989
Revenue
586,600,000
570,700,000
Net loss
2,500,000
b5,800,000
Share earns
-
.14
Shares outst
19,900,000
16,800,000
b-Net income


Caci International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caci International (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
38,569,456
36,242,123
Net inc
1,022,068
311,608
Share earns
.09
.03
9mo rev
108,965,980
110,145,490
Net inc
2,734,530
2,561,208
Share earns
.24
.22


Trump Says He Might Sell Shuttle
LEAD: Donald J. Trump said yesterday that he might sell the shuttle he bought from Eastern Airlines as part of a drive to build up his cash so that he could take advantage of new deals.


Airlease Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airlease Ltd.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,114,000
4,405,000
Net inc
2,268,000
2,188,000
Share earns
.49
.47


Evolution in Europe;   Four Years Later, Soviets Reveal Wider Scope to Chernobyl Horror
LEAD: Four years after the explosion and fire at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, the Soviet Union is acknowledging that the medical, environmental and political consequences of the disaster have been much greater than the Kremlin has ever frankly discussed.


Greatbanc Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greatbanc Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,409,301
b1,267,688
Per share
.93
1.00
Shares outst
1,176,859
915,766
b-After an extraordinary credit of $268,272.


Cliburn Winner to Perform
LEAD: Alexei Sultanov, the Soviet musician who won the 1989 Van Cliburn International Piano Competition, will make his Carnegie Hall debut at 8 P.M.
Thursday.
Mr.
Sultanov, 20 years old, is a student at the Moscow State Conservatory.
He will play works by Mozart, Beethoven, Scriabin, Liszt and Prokofiev.


New England Bank Has Loss
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation yesterday announced a loss of $46.6 million for the quarter ended March 31, compared with a profit of $42.3 million, or 60 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.


EAB reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EAB
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
79,211,000
b20,050,000
b-Net income


M. D. Wolf Wed To Ann Weltchek
LEAD: Ann Elizabeth Weltchek, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Weltchek of New York, was married yesterday to Mathew Davis Wolf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Erving Wolf of Houston.
Rabbi Burt Siegel officiated at the Burden mansion in New York.


Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
62,764,000
44,273,000
Net inc
1,467,000
1,011,000
Share earns
.24
.17


Jordan Sparks the Bulls
LEAD: Michael Jordan scored 38 points and Scottie Pippen had a triple-double tonight as the Chicago Bulls used a 13-2 fourth-quarter run to defeat the Milwaukee Bucks, 111-97, in the opener of a first-round National Basketball Association playoff series.


Plymouth Five Cents Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plymouth Five Cents Savings
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
1,478,000
50,000


Capitals Reach May Without a Mayday
LEAD: The Capitals will be playing hockey in May for the first time in their history thanks to yet another deflection by John Druce.


Vandalized Rembrandt To Go Back on Display
LEAD: Rembrandt's ''Night Watch'' is to go back on display at the Rijksmuseum on Tuesday , less than a month after it was sprayed with sulfuric acid by a man who was believed to be mentally disturbed.


Public Service Co. of N.C.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Co. of N.C.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
82,735,000
89,023,000
Net inc
11,271,000
12,436,000
Share earns
1.16
1.32
Shares outst
9,656,000
9,386,000
6mo rev
142,676,000
147,340,000
Net inc
15,310,000
16,407,000
Share earns
1.59
1.75
Shares outst
9,601,000
9,334,000


La Quinta Motor Inns Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Quinta Motor Inns Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
52,701,000
45,183,000
Net loss
717,000
673,000
Shares outst
13,145,000
13,063,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about Harvard Law School students' views of faculty diversity misattributed two statements.
The assertions that Prof.


Wesley Rose, Music Publisher, 72
LEAD: Wesley Rose, a music publisher and co-founder of the Country Music Hall of Fame, died Thursday.
He was 72 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
Rose started his career in 1945 at Acuff-Rose Publishing, Nashville's first music publishing company.
It was established by his father, Fred Rose, and the country music star Roy Acuff.


Foes of Abortion See Protest As Crucial to Bid for Support
LEAD: Early Wednesday morning Helen Urban, 55, packed up her clothes and a lunch of apples and a turkey sandwich, and she climbed aboard a chartered bus in Green Bay, Wis., for a 24-hour trip to Washington.


Bancorp New Jersey reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp New Jersey
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
723,000
894,000
Per share
.27
.33


Williams Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
548,200,000
515,200,000
Net inc
32,000,000
30,000,000
Share earns
.71
.79
Shares outst
41,196,000
38,097,000
Year-ago quarter results restated to reflect a change in accounting for income taxes.


Concord Computing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concord Computing (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,568,316
6,902,732
Net inc
1,049,855
790,171
Share earns
.30
.23
6mo rev
17,413,242
13,880,624
Net inc
2,172,739
1,580,300
Share earns
.62
.45


Basic Petroleum International Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Basic Petroleum International Ltd.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
13,874,917
9,635,932
Net inc
2,381,553
b113,123,119
Share earns
1.30
-
b-Net loss and included a $115.4 million writedown of investment in Petroleum Properties.


Basking in a Bit of Summer on a Spring Day


Delphi Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delphi Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
71,310,000
64,652,000
Net inc
3,808,000
212,000
Share earns
.38
.01


Knicks Hear Questions After Loss
LEAD: The Knicks and the Boston Celtics added a familiar line on Thursday night to the National Basketball Association rivalry between the only franchises still in their original cities.


As Bugs Arrive, A Warning On Insecticides
LEAD: Just as the insect season begins, consumers are being stung by the news that an ingredient in some of the most popular bug sprays may pose a health threat.


Check Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Check Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,131,000
4,280,000
Net inc
629,000
244,000
Share earns
.13
.05
6mo sales
9,270,000
8,794,000
Net inc
1,051,000
595,000
Share earns
.22
.12


At Least 3 Injured in Blast At Bar in Greenwich Village
LEAD: An explosion, possibly caused by a pipe bomb, injured at least three people early this morning at a bar in Greenwich Village, the police said.


American Heritage Life Inestment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Heritage Life Inestment Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
3,351,245
3,072,353
Share earns
.56
.51
Shares outst
9,573,559
8,528,030


A Nuclear-Free Zone Is Ruled to Be Invalid
LEAD: A Federal district judge today struck down an Oakland ordinance that proclaimed that city a nuclear-free zone.


AFP Imaging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AFP Imaging Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
12,206,285
10,846,926
Net inc
328,087
b110,356
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
5,253,000
4,680,000
9mo sales
34,931,722
33,914,473
Net inc
106,670
b165,323
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
5,257,000
4,680,000


Viola Goes 4-0 Despite Leaving in 5th With Muscle Spasms
LEAD: The Astros were happy to see Frank Viola leave the game after five innings tonight even though they had nothing to do with his exit.
Viola limited the Astros to two bunt singles and left only because of a muscle spasm on his right side.


Cincinnati Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Microwave Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
18,571,000
13,078,000
Net loss
1,763,000
b100,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
10,382,000
10,344,000
b-Net income


Guns and Lodging Await Prairie Dogs and Tourists
LEAD: A prairie dog shooting contest is being looked on as a possible tourist attraction for this ranching town of 1,000 people, and the Mayor has told the Governor and others who did not like the idea to ''buzz off.''


Athlone Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Athlone Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
68,951,000
83,910,000
Net inc
b3,097,000
c6,908,000
Share earns
.50
1.21
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $1,067,000, or 18 cents a share, and an extraordinary charge of $133,000.


After the Scandal: Revisiting Covenant House - A Special Report:   Reeling From Its Own Crisis, Covenant House Scales Back
LEAD: Since Covenant House was shaken by allegations of sexual and financial impropriety four months ago, the charity has been cutting back some programs and reassessing its system of crisis shelters that serve 25,000 runaway and homeless young people across the country.


Slaying at Bronx Dry-Cleaner
LEAD: A man who worked in his brother's dry-cleaning store in the Parkchester section of the Bronx was found stabbed to death there yesterday, apparently with a nail and a broom handle during a robbery, the police said.
The man was identified as Felix A. Jiminez, 56 years old, of 370 Willis Avenue in the Mott Haven section.


Prophet Visit to Ghana Didn't Support Dictator
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soybeans at High Levels; Grain, Pork and Oil Mixed
LEAD: The prices of soybean futures surged yesterday to their highest levels since last summer, extending a rally linked to the rain-slowed Brazilian harvest and fears that the recent hot, dry Middle Western weather might be a harbinger of drought.


Concorde Career Colleges reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concorde Career Colleges (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
10,122,000
9,638,000
Net inc
1,312,000
1,160,000
Share earns
.19
.18


Community Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bankshares
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
242,000
406,000
Per share
.14
.24
9mo net loss
7,826,000
b1,618,000
Per share
-
.96
b-Net income


Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
57,032,000
55,416,000
Net inc
b4,040,000
4,551,000
Share earns
.38
.31
b-After an extraordinary tax loss carryforward of $232,000, or 2 cents a share.


Information Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Information Resources Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
38,795,000
32,015,000
Net inc
851,000
b3,103,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss and after loss from discontinued operations of $1,333,000 and income from an adjustment in accounting of $1.5 million, or 9 cents a share.


Ferro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ferro Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
279,705,000
271,466,000
Net inc
6,003,000
12,369,000
Share earns
.26
.60
Shares outst
19,593,713
20,707,134


Dow Off 31.53 as Bonds Offer Competition
LEAD: Stocks sank yesterday in the wake of further uneasiness in the bond market, signs of rising inflation, heavy computerized selling and a move by many investors to higher-paying investments.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


10,000 Policemen Break Up Korean Strike
LEAD: More than 10,000 riot police stormed South Korea's largest shipyard early today to break up a three-day wildcat strike.


Lawson Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lawson Products Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
45,218,103
42,080,616
Net inc
5,096,704
4,220,092
Share earns
.38
.31


Evolution in Europe: Prague Journal;   The Restaurant That Beat the Revolt
LEAD: While 10,000 applications to open private businesses in Bohemia and Moravia have poured into Prague since the year began and the new non-Communist Government proclaimed its intention to convert to a market economy, Miroslav Ruzicka is smiling even more broadly at his head start.


Sun Distributors L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Distributors L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
146,000,000
134,000,000
Net inc
4,500,000
2,000,000
Share earns
.40
.18
The company said Sun Distributors class A limited partnership interests and class B limited partnership interests, which previously traded as a unit, began trading separately on April 15.


Datascope Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datascope Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
32,000,000
30,800,000
Net inc
b4,906,000
3,373,000
Share earns
.95
.65
Shares outst
5,164,000
5,190,000
9mo sales
84,500,000
82,250,000
Net inc
b7,388,000
7,633,000
Share earns
1.43
1.53
Shares outst
5,168,000
4,988,000


Policy Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Policy Management (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
80,341,000
60,096,000
Net inc
8,611,000
5,787,000
Share earns
.45
.37


Berkley (W.R.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Berkley (W.R.) (O)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
136,605,000
135,087,000
Net inc
14,190,000
15,878,000
Share earns
1.20
1.34


Patents;   A Quiet Alarm Clock: It Vibrates the Pillow
LEAD: A New Jersey inventor has developed what seems like a contradiction in terms: a quiet alarm clock.
Instead of waking people with a buzz or a bell, it sets off vibrations in their pillows.


Keystone Camera Prod reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Camera Prod (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,242,000
11,409,000
Net loss
b3,215,000
d8,756,000
9mo sales
40,467,000
46,482,000
Net loss
c4,324,000
d8,840,000
b-After an accounting adjustment loss of $66,000 from a third quarter extraordinary gain of $1,614,000, originally stated as a gain of $1.68 million.


Wang Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wang Laboratories Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
583,100,000
721,400,000
Net loss
b146,600,000
c63,700,000
9mo rev
1,817,600,000
2,127,500,000
Net loss
b219,200,000
c49,600,000
b-Included losses of $55,700,000 and $60,700,000 from discontinued operations for the quarter and nine months, respectively.


Evolution in Europe;   9 G.O.P. Senators Attack Bush on Lithuania
LEAD: President Bush's policy of seeking not to damage relations with the Soviet Union during the Lithuanian crisis came under sharp attack today by nine Republican senators, marking the first serious break in Congressional support for the Administration's handling of the Baltic situation.


Trenton Panel Suggests Ouster Of School Aide
LEAD: The State Commission of Investigation has sharply criticized the executive director of the New Jersey School Boards Association for misuse of taxpayers' money and called for his dismissal.


Clean Up New York, but Help the Homeless Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Facts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Market Facts Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,703,600
8,164,200
Net inc
227,500
198,800
Share earns
.13
.11
Shares outst
1,750,960
1,826,514


Empire District Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire District Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
33,766,000
33,393,000
Net inc
3,976,000
4,454,000
Share earns
.66
.76


Noranda Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noranda Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,446,000,000
2,274,000,000
Net inc
59,000,000
158,000,000
Share earns
.26
.82
The company said the higher value of the Canadian dollar and the higher interest rates in the latest quarter reduced earnings by $6 million and $6 million, respectively.


Peoples Energy Corp. reports earnings for 12mo March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Energy Corp. (NYSE)
12mo March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,177,392,000
1,186,130,000
Net inc
72,853,000
87,030,000
Share earns
2.23
2.67


More I.R.A. Cash in Stock Funds
LEAD: Stock mutual funds had their best season for individual retirement accounts in three years, several fund officials said yesterday, as new industry figures showed that investors have become more willing to put cash into the stock market.


Camreco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Camreco Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
181,823
148,959
Net loss
71,823
126,311
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Zygo Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zygo Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,410,000
6,016,000
Net inc
277,000
b298,000
Share earns
.11
-
9mo sales
18,686,000
17,669,000
Net inc
466,000
b497,000
Share earns
.18
-
b-Net loss


Basic American Medical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Basic American Medical (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
110,600,000
90,200,000
Net inc
5,700,000
b5,200,000
Share earns
.73
.66
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $1,500,000, or 19 cents a share.


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Best Buy Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
89,100,000
105,762,000
Net inc
89,000
b2,358,000
Share earns
.01
-
Yr rev
512,850,000
506,674,000
Net inc
5,683,000
2,060,000
Share earns
.69
.25


Number of Holding Cells In Manhattan to Double
LEAD: Plans to double the number of holding cells in the Manhattan Criminal Courts Building to reduce the time between arrest and arraignment were disclosed yesterday by city officials.


Inside
LEAD:
Nebulous European Unity


Villanova Women Set Relay Mark
LEAD: The Villanova women ran fast and the Georgetown men ran comparatively slowly, but the outcome for the two teams was the same.
They won the two major races today as the 96th annual Penn Relays continued in 89-degree sunshine.


Prices of Treasury Issues Rise a Bit
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities finished with slight gains yesterday after a brief advance early in the session gave way to profit taking.


Broadway Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Broadway Financial
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
1,631,000
b923,000
Per share
-
.55
b-Net income


Called On in Pinch, Sanders Delivers
LEAD: Deion Sanders isn't certain where he'll be on May 1, but if he has any significant value to the Yankees, it was demonstrated clearly last night at the Stadium.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.18
9.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.77
7.83
8.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.93
8.01
8.54
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.04
9.04
9.08
30-YR.


Bank of New England reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New England (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
46,612,000
b42,280,000
Per share
-
.60
Shares outst
69,413,000
69,217,000
b-Net income


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Vacation-Picture Blues
LEAD: Vacation slide shows presented by family and friends can be interminable, excruciating affairs.
But that never stops anyone from taking vacation photographs.
Now, more likely than not, those vacation pictures take the form of color prints or - judging from the number of tourists toting camcorders - video images on a television set.


PSI Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PSI Resources
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
255,000,000
266,000,000
Net inc
38,000,000
40,000,000
Share earns
.70
.74


Digital Offers New Severance Package
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation, which has been slashing its work force, announced another round of voluntary cutbacks and said its overall payroll should be reduced by 2,000 employees by July.
Digital has been hurt by weak United States computer sales.


FB&amp;T Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FB&amp;T Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,320,000
1,119,000
Per share
.68
.58
Shares outst
1,954,000
1,933,000


Cross (A.T.) Co.  (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cross (A.T.) Co.  (A)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
48,731,000
53,102,000
Net inc
3,680,000
6,048,000
Share earns
.22
.36
Shares outst
16,793,000
16,690,000


Artistic Greetings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Artistic Greetings
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
11,230,000
4,737,000
Net inc
559,000
291,000
Share earns
.25
.13
The company said of the $6.5 million sales increase in the latest quarter approximately $2.5 million were accrued to it due the expiration of a joint venture agreement with Target Mailing Lists Inc., which expired on Dec.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL Lions Rehire Rohan
LEAD: Jack Rohan, the most successful basketball coach at Columbia in the 90 seasons the Lions have pursued the sport, will return to guide the men's team after an absence of 16 years.


BT Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BT Financial Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
1,721,000
1,360,000
Per share
.56
.44


Coscan Development reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coscan Development
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
59,253,000
64,091,000
Net inc
4,453,000
3,993,000
Share earns
.20
.19
Shares outst
6,147,000
5,747,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Mortgage Rates Are Up
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 10.56 percent, their highest rate in nearly a year, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
It was the highest rate since fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.61 percent last May 19.
They averaged 10.41 percent last week.


Magna Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magna Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b4,653,000
4,339,000
Share earns
.37
.37
Shares outst
12,678,533
11,853,752
b-After income from an adjustment in accounting of $1,076,000, or 9 cents a share.


Douglas &amp; Lomason reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Douglas &amp; Lomason (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
104,155,269
107,768,160
Net inc
656,065
36,258
Share earns
.33
.02


Calprop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calprop Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,316,137
10,532,497
Net loss
465,533
b569,928
Share earns
-
.12
b-Net income
Year-ago share earnings is adjusted for a 10 percent stock dividend paid in December 1989.


Developer Will Raze McMartin Preschool
LEAD: The building that housed the McMartin Preschool has been bought by a developer who intends to tear it down.
Two owners of the school were accused of abusing children there, leading to the longest criminal trial in United States history.


Intellicall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intellicall Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
41,677,000
16,116,000
Net inc
1,650,000
771,000
Share earns
.24
.15
Shares outst
6,852,000
5,074,000


Gleason Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gleason Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
34,788,000
31,780,000
Net inc
b1,016,000
c1,524,000
Share earns
.18
-
b-After income from discontinued opertions of $427,000, or 8 cents a share.
Operating results for both the Gleason Components Group and Gleason Power Systems, which were sold in 1989, have been reclassified as discontinued operations.


Reds Pull Through to Win in 9th
LEAD: Chris Sabo singled off Tim Burke with the bases loaded and two out in the bottom of the ninth inning tonight, giving the surging Cincinnati Reds a 3-2 victory over the Montreal Expos.


Matlack Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matlack Systems Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
55,512,000
55,263,000
Net loss
206,000
513,000
6mo rev
107,794,000
110,333,000
Net loss
1,102,000
83,000


Wisconsin Temporarily Banning Gene-Engineered Drug for Cows
LEAD: In a decision that could spell enormous trouble for the fledgling agricultural biotechnology industry, Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin yesterday approved legislation that temporarily bars the sale or use of a genetically engineered drug for use in dairy cows.


With a Spurt and a Gurgle, Perrier Is Back on the Shelves
LEAD: Perrier's natural spring came to life in New York City yesterday - but not exactly the way planned in the company's $25 million reintroduction campaign.
One of four delivery trucks bearing the first shipment overheated on the way from the Bronx to Greenwich Village and its radiator spurted like a geyser, sending the 1979 GMC truck wheezing down Ninth Avenue.


Intermet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermet Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
99,355,000
112,353,000
Net inc
334,000
5,564,000
Share earns
.02
.26
Shares outst
21,089,000
21,429,000


Dissension in Senate Over U.S.-Soviet Pact
LEAD:
In the first serious break in Congressional support for the Administration's Lithuania policies, nine Republican senators announced that in view of Kremlin embargoes on Lithuania they would oppose ratification of a new Soviet-American trade agreement.
Page 4.


Kinark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kinark Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
8,264,000
6,928,000
Net inc
626,000
277,000
Share earns
.18
.08


Checking Battery Power
LEAD: A common consumer complaint is that disposable batteries give little indication of when they should be discarded.


Blinder, Robinson Chief Barred by S.E.C. Judge
LEAD: An administrative law judge today barred Meyer Blinder from the securities business for life, although Mr.
Blinder, the head of the nation's best-known penny stock brokerage, can appeal the ban in two years.


Aldus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aldus Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
25,466,000
26,478,000
Net inc
3,787,000
4,704,000
Share earns
.27
.33
Shares outst
14,223,000
14,102,000
The company said both years included Silicon Beach Software, which was acquired on a pooling-of-interests basis in February 1990.


10,000 Are Expected to Lose Jobs to Spotted Owl
LEAD: The loggers who have been chewing at this peninsula of ancient forest for the last century have weathered hard times from automation, overcutting and recessions.
But never have they taken the kind of economic blow expected this summer on behalf of an owl whose life is endangered by the way they earn their living.


BUSH PRODS NATION ON CENSUS RETURNS
LEAD: Eager to speed a lagging population count that Republicans hope will help them gain seats in Congress, President Bush today called on Americans ''to stand up and be counted'' by returning their census forms.


Lynch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lynch Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
24,153,000
19,660,000
Net inc
471,000
305,000
Share earns
.36
.24
Shares outst
1,294,000
1,287,000


Jerusalem Shrine Closed in Protest


Alvin B. Finesman, Executive, 60
LEAD: Alvin B. Finesman, a housewares marketing executive, died of lung cancer on Sunday at the Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 60 years old and lived in New Canaan, Conn.


Fathers of Old Also Cared for Children
LEAD: To the Editor:


Workmen's Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Workmen's Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
882,862
619,208
Per share
.55
-
There were no per share earnings applicable in year-ago period because the company said its principal subsidiary, Workmen's Federal Savings Bank, converted from a mutual to a stock savings bank and was acquired by Workmen's Bancorp on Jan.


Ex-Mental Patient Says He Saw Fama Fire a Silver Gun 4 Times
LEAD: A resident of the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn with a psychiatric history that includes hallucinations testified yesterday that he saw Joseph Fama shoot Yusuf K. Hawkins on Aug. 23.


European Inflation Up
LEAD: Big price increases in Britain, Portugal and Greece drove European Community inflation up by five-tenths of a percent in March, to an annual rate of 5.3 percent, the European Community's statistical office, Eurostat, said today.


Christine Sturgis Wed in Scarsdale
LEAD: Christine Ann Sturgis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Sturgis of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Roman Catholic Church to Steven John Reiss, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul J. Reiss of Colchester, Vt.
The Rev.
Bernard J. Campbell performed the ceremony.


Medical Imaging Centers of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Imaging Centers of America Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
16,114,985
9,143,860
Net inc
993,404
649,274
Share earns
.12
.11
Shares outst
8,352,556
5,724,781


Interface Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interface Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
10,050,345
9,733,440
Net inc
603,236
1,003,218
Share earns
.14
.23
6mo rev
18,753,694
15,472,864
Net inc
1,014,450
1,542,515
Share earns
.24
.35


Bomb at Pat Robertson Offices
LEAD: A bomb in a package addressed to the Rev.
Pat Robertson exploded today at the headquarters of his Christian Broadcasting Network, injuring a security guard.


Texas Utilities Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Utilities Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
938,340,000
983,460,000
Net inc
188,841,000
131,402,000
Share earns
1.00
.77


Dreyfus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dreyfus Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
65,998,000
66,016,000
Net inc
19,279,000
21,199,000
Share earns
.48
.52
Shares outst
40,566,000
41,152,000


Service for Robert Breen
LEAD: A memorial service for Robert Breen, a theatrical producer and an arts executive, is to be held at 5:30 P.M. on Tuesday at the Unitarian All Faiths Sanctuary of the Universalist Church, 4 West 76th Street.
Mr.
Breen died on March 31 at the age of 80.


Rev. Michael W. Murphy, Catholic Priest, 98
LEAD: The Rev.
Michael W. Murphy, who in 1971, at the age of 80, became the oldest man to be ordained a Roman Catholic priest, died on Wednesday.
He was 98 years old.


Aetna Earnings Increase 3.6%
LEAD: The Aetna Life and Casualty Company today reported a 3.6 percent increase in net income in the first quarter, with increases in most of its divisions but sluggish results from its auto and homeowner lines.


Setting a Fair Course
LEAD: The New York State Court of Appeals has wisely returned yacht racing to the water - which is just where the sport belongs.
By a 5-to-2 vote, the court awarded the America's Cup, yachting's most coveted prize, to the San Diego Yacht Club.
The club won the cup in a one-sided race against a New Zealand challenger in 1988, only to lose it in a court battle a few months later.


Hawks Looking at Reed
LEAD: The Nets have given the Hawks permission to interview one of New Jersey's vice presidents, Willis Reed, for Atlanta's head coaching job, and the Hawks plan to contact Reed next week, Stan Kasten, Atlanta's president, said yesterday.


Medusa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medusa Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
27,701,000
24,393,000
Net loss
1,220,000
2,416,000


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
HOCKEY
U.S. Beats West Germany
Team U.S.A. defeated West Germany yesterday by 5-3 at the world championships in Bern, assuring itself of a place in next year's ''A'' pool.
Kevin Stevens of the Pittsburgh Penguins scored two goals as the Americans won their fourth consecutive game.
Medal-round play begins today.


Eagle Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
b1,148,000
335,000
Per share
.90
.26
b-Included a gain of $719,000, or 56 cents a share, net of tax, on tax refunds and interest related to an out-of- court settlement with the Internal Revenue Service.


Niagara Mohawk reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Niagara Mohawk (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
953,475,000
848,452,000
Net inc
91,801,000
71,246,000
Share earns
.60
.44
Included in earnings for the first quarter 1990 are $23 million, or 11 cents a share, of certain expense deferrals provided by the agreement.


Bridge
LEAD: Contracts of five hearts and five spades represent a no man's land in which peril lurks.
To vindicate the bidding the declarer must make exactly 11 tricks: If he makes 10 he has bid too much, and if he makes 12 he has not bid enough.


Church &amp; Dwight reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Church &amp; Dwight (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
98,006,569
90,977,341
Net inc
5,842,821
2,015,765
Share earns
.28
.10


Covering Up in the Season to Take It Off
LEAD: The lifeguards at California beaches this summer may eventually achieve the bronze, sun-god look traditionally associated with the job.
But on the way, they will be lavishing highly protective sunscreens on their skins, wearing hats and sunglasses, and sitting under umbrellas.


Compucom Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compucom Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
68,817,000
55,714,000
Net inc
443,000
246,000
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
28,574,000
27,434,000


Books of The Times;   From Polish Exiles, Explanations and a Novel
LEAD:
Between East and West
Writings from Kultura
Edited by Robert Kostrzewa
273 pages. Hill &amp; Wang. $30.
Killing the Second Dog
By Marek Hlasko
Translated by Tomasz Mirkowicz. 117 pages. Cane Hill Press. Paperback, $8.95.


Medstat Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medstat Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,109,000
2,234,000
Net inc
353,000
288,000
Share earns
.13
.11
6mo rev
5,909,000
4,402,000
Net inc
676,000
537,000
Share earns
.25
.20


Papp Gets Pledges After Grant Rejection
LEAD: Joseph Papp, director of the New York Shakespeare Festival, announced yesterday that he had received pledges for gifts totaling more than $60,000 following his rejection of a $50,000 grant from the National Endowment for the Arts because, he said, he could not accept the Federal agency's restrictions on obscenity.


Ionics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ionics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
29,558,000
25,605,000
Net inc
985,000
746,000
Share earns
.23
.18


Ralph Matlaw Dies; Slavics Professor, 63
LEAD: Ralph Matlaw, an expert on 19th-century Russian literature who was a retired professor of the University of Chicago, died of cancer on Tuesday at Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago.
He was 63 years old and lived in Chicago.


The Beerlin Wall
LEAD: We were in a sea of beer called Memorial Stadium.
That's in Baltimore.
I'd told Mike we would see the Baltimore Orioles play the Oakland Athletics.
He was surly about the sea of beer.


Contel Cellular reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Contel Cellular (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
24,899,000
12,657,000
Net loss
12,533,000
b492,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
99,944,000
100,024,000
b-Net income
The company said financing costs and amortization of goodwill relating to the recently acquired McCaw Properties totaled $13.7 million for the period from Feb.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the March of Dimes Walk America fund-raiser, Lexington Avenue from 23d Street to 96th Street will be closed tomorrow from 7 A.M. to 2 P.M.


Charlotte Boschan, Developer of Banks Of Data, Dies at 70
LEAD: Charlotte Boschan, an economist who established the first electronic data bank in the field when she was associated with the National Bureau of Economic Research a quarter-century ago, died of complications of surgery on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 70 years old and lived in New City, N


Baghdad Rages On
LEAD: The conventional Washington argument on Iraq is that President Saddam Hussein is totally impervious to official complaint, but may mellow when handled with velvet.
Fiercely prickly he is, but the evidence scarcely supports the conclusion.


Pinnacle Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pinnacle Bancorp
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
135,000
150,000
Per share
.19
.22
9mo net inc
699,000
3,188,000
Per share
1.01
4.57


Monarch Machine Tool Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monarch Machine Tool Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
25,133,659
22,216,427
Net inc
222,205
521,789
Share earns
.06
.14


Doman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Doman Industries
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
158,938,000
66,711,000
Net inc
4,368,000
4,416,000
Share earns
.22
.22
Results for 1990 include those of Western Forest Products Ltd. and Western Pulp Limited Partnership, which were acquired last July.


First Federal Savings Bank of Montana reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank of Montana (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
591,918
b867,149
Per share
.30
.44
9mo net inc
1,883,731
1,760,610
Per share
.96
.92
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $1,056,565 on the sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.


Convictions Set Aside For 3 in an Ulster Case
LEAD: An appeals court today set aside the convictions of three Irish citizens serving 25-year sentences for conspiring to kill Britain's Secretary of State for Northern Ireland in 1987.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, APRIL 28, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


Corrections
LEAD: A review on April 20 about a concert version of Jerome Kern's ''Cat and the Fiddle'' at Weill Recital Hall misidentified the show's orchestrator.
He was Robert Russell Bennett, not Richard Rodney Bennett.


Reviews/Film;   This Lady-Killer Bites
LEAD: Fifteen seconds' worth of dewy-looking farmland scenery, of the sort that might be used to sell cracked wheat, establish that Emily (Carre Otis), the heroine of ''Wild Orchid,'' is a sweet and unspoiled creature.
The film's second scene glimpses Emily at a New York job interview, explaining in a stupefying monotone that she is a bright young lawyer and linguist.


Contras in the Field Vow Again to Keep Weapons
LEAD: The military commander of the contras has taken a tough new line, saying his rebel army will keep its guns until the Nicaraguan Government dismantles the entire ''repressive structure'' set up by the Sandinistas.


An Uphill Battle Against Roadside Squalor
LEAD: Even when there is no traffic, New York City's highways are a mess.


Entertainment Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entertainment Publishing (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
26,835,000
22,997,000
Net inc
4,840,000
3,396,000
Share earns
.86
.64
Shares outst
5,650,000
5,340,000
9mo rev
76,147,000
66,817,000
Net inc
11,571,000
b7,263,000
Share earns
2.08
1.42
Shares outst
5,567,000
5,106,000


Healthdyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthdyne Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
31,636,000
21,828,000
Net inc
b2,241,000
c139,000
Share earns
.14
.01
Shares outst
16,436,000
15,902,000
b-After an extraordinary tax loss carryforward of $320,000, or 2 cents a share.


Confusion Still Reigns In Iran-Contra Case
LEAD: After three years of investigations, the Iran-Contra scandal remains a confused whodunit, a mystery with no ending.
One reason is the limits Congress put on itself.


PERSPECTIVES: Staten Island Development;   Introducing a New Style in Tract Housing
LEAD: ON barren high land with views of the Verrazano Bridge and the World Trade Center, the largest home-building venture ever undertaken on the North Shore of Staten Island is to get under way this year.
The builders are a partnership called Skyline New Homes Corporation and they call their low-rise development Celebration at Rainbow


Heroine Addiction
LEAD: Quick - who is Jo March?


IN THE REGION: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Farmingdale$148,000
94 Midwood Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement; taxes $3,800.
Malverne$157,500
112 Sydney Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old Tudor; den, fireplace, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.


Ms. Whittemore To Wed in August
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence F. Whittemore of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Gioia Arnold Whittemore to John Brewster Frelinghuysen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Frelinghuysen Jr. of Bernardsville, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.


Dana Pearce Is to Marry
LEAD: June wedding plans for Dana C. Pearce and Thomas S. Lyons, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William V. Lyons of Norwalk, Conn., have been announced by Miss Pearce's mother, Carol B. Pearce of Forty Fort, Pa.
Miss Pearce, 31 years old, is a daughter also of William J. Pearce of Odessa, Fla.
A graduate of Skidmore College, she is the senior sales executive in New York for Phoebe


GENDER GAMES IN RESTORATION LONDON
LEAD:
SEXING THE CHERRY
By Jeanette Winterson.
167 pp. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.


Managing;   Why Women Walk Out on Jobs
LEAD: Thomas J. Smith, the Computer Science Corporation's director of human resources, was mildly surprised to discover that turnover among professional women at the Moorestown, N.J., information services company was 50 percent higher than for professional men.
But when he polled the women who left, he was shocked.


Lisa Alano and Brian McCarthy Jr. Are Married
LEAD: Lisa M. Alano, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlo Alano of Shrewsbury, Mass., was married yesterday to Brian A. McCarthy Jr., a son of Arlene McCarthy of Stamford, Conn., and Mr.
McCarthy of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Brenda G. Husson officiated at St.
James's Episcopal Church in New York.
The bride, 31 years old and a graduate of Wheaton College, is an account executive at Ralph Lauren in New York.


Cynthia Rice Engaged To Kyle E. Chadwick
LEAD: June wedding plans for Cynthia A. Rice and Kyle E. Chadwick, a son of Norma and Dale Chadwick of Endicott, N.Y., have been made known by the prospective bride's parents, Wiley and Philip Rice of Syracuse.


WHO IS KILLING THE QUAINT VILLAGES OF ENGLAND?
LEAD:
TITMUSS REGAINED
By John Mortimer.
281 pp. New York:
Viking. $19.95.


Behind Taj Glitz, a Declining Cash Flow
LEAD: In late March, Donald J. Trump was putting the finishing touches on the exuberant publicity campaign that attended the April opening of his Taj Mahal Hotel and Casino.
The result was industrial-strength hoopla, during which Mr.
Trump burbled about the thrill of finally completing the vast and long-delayed project and the vitality it would inject into all of Atlantic City.


Gun Sales and Vigilantism Rise in the New South Africa
LEAD: A searchlight from the pickup truck scanned the darkened field near the St.
Helena gold mine until it fixed on a couple lying in the long grass.
The night patrol lurched to a halt.
Several armed men in khaki uniforms jumped out.


TALKING: Balky Buyers;   Accessible Facts Are Reassuring
LEAD: ONE consequence of recent revelations that sponsors of some converted cooperatives in the New York City area face serious financial problems is a growing cadre of nervous buyers.
Moreover, because the whole co-op market is weak, sellers and boards of directors are seeking new ways to reassure timid buyers.


Campus Life: UConn;   Faculty Rejects Plan to Broaden Time for Tenure
LEAD: The Faculty Senate at the University of Connecticut at Storrs narrowly defeated a proposal last week that would have allowed time spent finishing Ph.D.'s to be counted as time that must be worked before tenure is considered.


Portuguese Revolution Settles Into Stability
LEAD: The anniversary of Portugal's 1974 revolution is still marked as a public holiday here each year, but nowadays April 25 is more of an occasion for escaping to the beach or the countryside than for banner-waving at political demonstrations.


Review/Rock;   David Bowie's Oldies Get a Final Go-Round
LEAD: Leave it to David Bowie to find a way out of the longtime rocker's oldies problem.
For a performer who got started in the 1960's, like Mr.
Bowie, playing old hits in concert can become a dreary obligation.
With his current tour, which had its first United States performance tonight at the Miami Arena, Mr.


Selective Privacy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Where the Dalai Lama Dwells
LEAD: THE rare visitor to Tibet can still see the Potala, the 1,000-room palace overlooking the capital of Lhasa, but something vital will be missing.
For the heart of Tibet has been transplanted to the tiny hill town of Dharmsala in the foothills of the Indian Himalayas.
It is here that a 54-year-old monk named Tenzin Gyatso (also known as the 14th Dalai Lama, winner of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize and Tibet's spiritual and temporal leader) makes his home.


More Drugs in Ship Containers Flood Ports
LEAD: While attention focuses on the Mexican border and the Caribbean as routes for smuggling cocaine into the United States, Federal law-enforcement officials say perhaps as much as half of the narcotic floods directly into New York and other East Coast cities through the commercial ports.


STREETSCAPES: The Judson Memorial Church;   A Problem Solver Is Now Facing Its Own Problems
LEAD: IN its century as a fixture of Washington Square in Greenwich Village, the Judson Memorial Church has been dedicated to solving the problems of others.
Now it has problems of its own.


Resentment of New Thatcher Tax Feeds the Bonfire of Britain's Anarchists
LEAD: For some people supporting the black flag of anarchism, the new head tax for local-government services in Britain is viewed as a form of violence, to which they are responding in kind in battles with the police and other attacks.


Gardener Raises Tulips and Spirits
LEAD: ELLSWORTH BARTHEN enjoys life.
He does things that give him and other people pleasure.


Review/Theater;   80's Suburbia as Seen by Extraterrestrials
LEAD: The aliens in Constance Congdon's ''Tales of the Lost Formicans'' are as friendly as E. T., but they see no necessity of phoning home or of returning to their extraterrestrial roots.
These are resident aliens living somewhere in Colorado, and offering closed-circuit commentary on the plight of suburbia.


Choosing Guests
LEAD: To the Editor:


What Gains in Deregulation?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Battling the Legacy of Illness
LEAD: TWO SISTERS HAD A TRAGIC problem.
Their older brother was dying of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a genetic disease that destroys its victims slowly.
From early childhood onward, the muscles deteriorate.
The process is agonizing and inexorable.
Most patients are unable to walk by the time they are in their teens, and few live beyond their mid-20's.


By Train and Plane and, Oh Yes, the Car
LEAD: TO a reviewer emerging from Manhattan, the Noyes Museum, 100 or more miles away, seems ideally suited to its present show about locomotion. ''Trains and Planes'' this is called, and though a few of its images are drawn from the Herndon Collection of early to mid-20th century art, most date from the 1980's.


Dangerous to Read New Testament for History;   Improved Relations
LEAD: To the Editor:


From a Myriad of Music, 20 Gems
LEAD: SPRINKLED among the hundreds of European music festivals are many that offer something different and are less well known than the major festivals.The following 20 festivals have been selected for a variety of reasons - unusual programming, exceptional participants, captivating theme, stunning setting.


New Kid on the Block in Huntington
LEAD: TWO jointly owned restaurants on Huntington Harbor reflect the new and old waves of Long Island Italian dining.
First, there was Tee T's Landing, with its tuxedoed waiters, Continental food and lofty prices.
Significantly, Tee T's is no more.
It is being converted into a catering establishment.


Closing a Beach On Fire Island
LEAD: After reading Diane Ketcham's article April 8 (Fire I. Village Restricts Beach), I was incensed!
As a homeowner in Ocean Beach, I am quite familiar with the situation reported in that story.
As it reads, one would think that all sides of this issue were represented, albeit not equally.
Actually, this article only scratched the surface and was not researched, nor reported accurately.


BETWEEN TWO WORLDS
LEAD: SYDENHAM IS A DISTRICT of London famous for, well, nothing.
It is one of those gray, anonymous, slightly tattered neighborhoods where the hairdressing salons have names like World of Hair and most businesses seem to deal in video films, plumbing supplies or fish and chips.
About a third of the shops on the street are vacant, their windows soaped and covered with faded posters for pop concerts and wrestling matches.


Despite the Deficit, at Least One Tax Looks Untouchable
LEAD: OVER the last two decades, New Yorkers have seen their taxes rise on just about everything.
But not on gasoline.
When this year's state budget is finally adopted, taxes on dozens of goods and services will likely rise once again.
But not on gasoline.
In politics, it seems, some things are indeed sacred.


Monet's 90's, and Ours
LEAD: For a century now, those who love beauty have reveled in the lucid landscapes of Claude Monet.
But an exhibition of 95 of his works at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston makes the surprising case that Monet was a political artist as well. ''Monet in the 90's,'' which closes today, reopens May 19 at the Art Institute of Chicago.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 22, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE NEGOTIATOR, by Frederick Forsyth.
(Bantam, $5.95.) An American expatriate tries to
thwart terrorists.
2
3
ALMOST HEAVEN, by Judith McNaught.
(Pocket, $4.95.) A historical romance set in
London's salons and Scotland's Highlands.


Melissa Shaw Married To Gregory J. Fleming
LEAD: Melissa Danne Shaw and Gregory James Fleming were married yesterday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The Rev.
Henry Boyle and Deacon Frederick Betti officiated.


In the Family
LEAD: His father once successfully defended the America's Cup, and now Teddy Turner, the son of the broadcast magnate Ted Turner, plans to follow in Dad's wake, sort of.
The younger Turner said he would mount an $8 million campaign to win the next Whitbred round-the-world sailing race, in 1993.
Noting that no United States boat had ever competed in the race, Turner said an


'Vanities' Burns Up Bronx
LEAD: Yo!
Save the Bronx from Hollywood!
As the filming of Tom Wolfe's satirical novel, ''The Bonfire of the Vanities,'' was ending in New York City's northernmost region last week, Borough President Fernando Ferrer was seething.
Bronxites, he said, are being cinematically mugged by this labyrinthine story of racial and ethnic bashing, dubious politics and judicial righteousness.


Bella Spewack, Author, 91, Dies; 'Kiss Me Kate' Is One of Her Hits
LEAD: Bella Spewack, co-author with her late husband, Samuel, of a string of wacky comedies for Broadway and film - including such hits as ''Boy Meets Girl'' and the Tony Award-winning ''Kiss Me, Kate'' - died Friday night at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91 years old.


Bomb Explodes at a Gay Bar, Prompting a Protest
LEAD: A homemade pipe bomb exploded in a popular gay nightclub in the West Village early yesterday morning, prompting a protest march on the Sixth Precinct station house last night by hundreds of people.


Fashion;   Getting Carried Away With Tote Bags
LEAD: A new tote bag can be a spirit-lifting purchase.
It also offers practical advantages for coping with the vagaries of spring weather - to stow a sweater, an umbrella or the fixings for an impromptu lunch alfresco.


Latin American Interiors
LEAD:
LANDSCAPES OF A NEW LAND
Fiction by Latin
American Women.
Edited by Marjorie Agosin.
194 pp. Buffalo: White Pine Press. Cloth, $19. Paper, $10.


In Wilde Farce, the Importance of Satire
LEAD: PITY poor Oscar Wilde.
The year that ''The Importance of Being Earnest,'' one of the most witty, charming and elegant comedies of the English stage, was produced, Wilde was tried, convicted and sentenced to hard labor for homosexuality.
Not long after his prison release, he died in Paris, broken in health and fortune.


Holocaust Books For Young Readers
LEAD: I must agree with Irene M. Symons of the Queens Library, who wrote to comment on a statement attributed to me in a recent article on my book ''We Remember the Holocaust.'' There are many books for young readers on the topic.
I state in my preface, '' 'We Remember the Holocaust' is not meant to be the only book a young person will read about the Holocaust.


For Unity's Sake, Chamorro Risks Losing Friends by Embracing the Foe
LEAD: THE basic law of Nicaraguan politics has always been clear: the winner takes all.


Change on the Horizon for Landmarks
LEAD: The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission began its second quarter-century last week on a momentous note: within a few hours, it created a 2,000-building historic district on the Upper West Side and got a new chairwoman, Laurie Beckelman.


OVERSIZED TAXES FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS?
LEAD: One of Washington's annual springtime rites is the required Congressional budget resolution.
This year, the debate will encompass many things, but a centerpiece will be the proposal by many leading figures in Congress to raise tax rates for the rich, starting with the infamous ''bubble.'' The bubble is, of course, the anomaly in the income tax code that has marginal tax rates rising to 33 percent for taxpayers at roughly the $75,000 level, then dropping back down to 28 percent for those with incomes over roughly $200,000.


Letters;   LINDA FAIRSTEIN VS. RAPE
LEAD: Katherine Bouton's article ''Linda Fairstein vs.
Rape'' (Feb. 25) highlighted the important work done by this outstanding prosecutor.


Elizabeth Segal to Wed
LEAD: June wedding plans for Elizabeth S. Segal and Peter M. Steven, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ranald J. M. Steven of Hartford, have been announced by Miss Segal's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Segal of Yardley, Pa.
Miss Segal, 28 years old, is the coordinator of counseling and referral at Planned Parenthood of Greater Boston in Brookline, Mass.


Next Week;   Why Is The Triple Crown Won So Rarely?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Is Overpopulation Too Grim a Tale?
LEAD: NO problem facing the earth looms larger than the growth in the reproductive rate of the human species.
Virtually all degradation of the environment, all exhaustion of natural resources and substantial human suffering can be attributed to the crushing effect of a population that is too numerous for our planet.


Islander Fan Sees Rule Bias
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Modern Flavors in a Historic Setting
LEAD: NEW ENGLAND inns aren't what they used to be, and traveling epicures should be thankful for that.
The era of sticky buns, cottage cheese relish dishes and Indian pudding has given way to New American cooking and the use of familiar fresh ingredients in unexpected ways.
An example of an old inn with new ways is the Simsbury 1820 House.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Beethoven: Mass in C (Op. 86), 'Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage' (Op. 112)
Audrey Michael, soprano; Lilia Bizimeche Eisinger, mezzo; Markus Schaeffer, tenor; Michel Brodard, bass; Gulbenkian Chorus and Orchestra, Michel Corboz, cond.
Erato 2292-45461-2; CD only.
The grandly scaled ''Missa Solemnis'' has so overshadowed Beethoven's earlier Mass in C that performances of the latter are today offered almost as specialist footnotes.


Bush Aide Intervened on Stiff Fines for Businesses
LEAD: The Justice Department abruptly retracted a letter of support for a set of tough sentencing guidelines for convicted corporations after the White House counsel inquired about it, according to Administration officials and department documents.


A Better Blip
LEAD: EXPERTS IN AERONAUTICS WILL recognize the shape on the computer screen at right as that of an L-1011 aircraft.
The image was generated as the plane approached Philadelphia International Airport by the radar dish shown above, more than a mile and a half away, at the University of Pennsylvania's Valley Forge Research Center, evidence that radar is now capable of identifying objects as more than blips.


Corrections
LEAD: Schedule listings in the Television section today for Wednesday evening and Thursday evening carry erroneous entries supplied by Channel 5 for 8 P.M.
The film ''Trading Places'' will be shown on Wednesday at 8 and ''All of Me'' on Thursday at 8.


Life in a Borderless Greenback Empire
LEAD: The following is an excerpt from ''The Borderless World: Power and Strategy in the Interlinked Economy,'' to be published in August by Harper Business, a division of HarperCollins Inc.
Kenichi Ohmae is managing director of McKinsey &amp; Company's Tokyo office.


Letters;   BUSH'S CABINET
LEAD: Dan Quayle must have been relieved to hear William Safire assert that the Constitution prohibits Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d from running on a national ticket with fellow-Texan George Bush (''Bush's Cabinet: Who's Up, Who's Down,'' March 25).
But the 12th Amendment only prohibits a delegate to the electoral college from casting ballots for Presidential and Vice


Walter Roll Wed To Jane Choremi
LEAD: Jane H. Choremi and Walter G. Roll were married yesterday at the Greek Orthodox Church of the Resurrection in Glen Cove, L.I.
The Rev.
Emmanuel J. Gratsias officiated.
Mrs.
Roll, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alec M. Choremi of Glen Head, L.I., graduated from the Foxcroft School and Wheaton College.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-19


ANCIENT WOVEN HATS WITH MYSTERIES STILL TO BE UNRAVELED
LEAD: The hatters of the ancient Andes were artisans of great sophistication, flair and a genius for weaving.
The remarkably expressive caps they wove - the corners embellished with tassels or peaks - were worn by warriors as status symbols from the 4th to the 10th centuries in Peru, Bolivia and Chile, and were interred with their owners at death.


State Withdraws Plan To Cut Swan Population
LEAD: SWANS will be laying their eggs along the Connecticut coast during the next few weeks without interference from the state.


David Howe to Wed Ritchey Banker
LEAD: September wedding plans for Ritchey Cheek Banker and David Yeager Howe, a son of Jean Yeager Howe and Stephen W. Howe, both of Marblehead, Mass., have been announced by her parents, Ritchey F. Goodwin of New York and Vincent C. Banker of Locust Valley, L.I.


Fashion: On the Street;   Coats for Evening Keep Their Allure The Day After
LEAD: When they were ready to step out at night, many women used to throw a daytime coat over their most elaborate evening dress.
After all, who was going to notice in the limousine or taxi?
Now, evening coats are being seen more often.
And there's a new twist, at least in Europe, where fashionable women are donning embroidered velvet evening coats during the day.


SHAPING HIS OWN PAST
LEAD:
IN THE ARENA
A Memoir of Victory, Defeat, and Renewal.
By Richard Nixon.
Illustrated. 384 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


Reporters Scrutinize Ads As They Used to Speeches
LEAD: Campaign television commercials, the central element of statewide campaigns here, are being scrutinized far more rigorously than in the past by California's political reporters.


Letters;   DISNEY DECO
LEAD: While in Orlando recently, a colleague and I were driving to dinner at one of the Disney World resorts when we made a wrong turn and ended up face to face with the new Swan Hotel.
We sat there, dumbfounded.
The assault to our visual sense was overwhelming.
We even drove around the hotel to see whether we had just happened to approach it from a wrong angle, but there was nothing appealing about it.


Georgina B. Bliss Planning to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. Bliss of West Chester, Pa., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Georgina Bassett Bliss, and William Richmond Marshall 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Swan Marshall 3d of Harbor Island, the Bahamas.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: It's a question that's posed to almost every individual hundreds of times each year: ''Do you know so-and-so?'' When the answer is ''no,'' that's that.
But when it's ''yes,'' what does it mean?


TRICKLE-DOWN GASTRONOMY
LEAD:
SOUP OF THE DAY
By Frances Starn.
208 pp. New York:
Delta. Paper, $9.95.


European Leaders Act to Strengthen Unity


From Florida, Bar-Made Brews
LEAD: THANKS to a change in state law three years ago, restaurants and bars are now allowed to make and sell their own beer, thus providing visitors with the perfect antidote to the often blistering effects of the sun.


FISHING IN SOVIET UNION
LEAD: When Trout Unlimited, a nonprofit international conservation organization, established rapport with sport-fishing interests in the Soviet Union a few years ago, it seemed inevitable that significant numbers of American anglers would eventually be visiting that vast country in quest of Atlantic salmon, Arctic char and various species of trout.


Customers Fight Plan to Raise Water Rate
LEAD: A BID by the Kent Water Company to raise its rates is raising the ire of many of its customers.


AIDS Linked to TB Outbreak in Africa
LEAD: To the dismay of public-health officials and doctors, the AIDS virus is playing a disturbing role in an outbreak of tuberculosis in Africa.


William V. Muran Wed to Miss Carr
LEAD: At the Brompton Oratory in London, Theresa M. Carr, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Denys R. Carr of Normanton, Yorkshire, England, was married yesterday to William V. Muran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Van Muran of Brookville and Southampton, L.I.
The Rev.
John Fordham, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


A LOOK ON THE BRIGHT SIDE
LEAD:
OUR COUNTRY
The Shaping of America From Roosevelt to Reagan.
By Michael Barone.
805 pp. New York: The Free Press. $29.95.


Blood Stigma, Blood Risk
LEAD: When some 50,000 Haitian-Americans marched in protest across the Brooklyn Bridge recently, their complaint was arcane - the Government won't accept their blood.
But it's a deeply felt issue.
It pits their understandable fear of being stigmatized against a slight extra chance of contaminating the blood supply with the AI


5 Manhattan Sperm Banks Are Ordered to Halt Process
LEAD: The state Health Department said Friday that it had barred deposits at five Manhattan sperm banks, two of which have been sued by women who said they were impregnated with sperm other than their husbands' because the banks mixed up semen deposits.


POTATO POTENTIAL
LEAD: A SIMPLE BAKED POTATO IS FINE.
AND A NICELY TURNED, boiled potato with parsley is perfectly pleasant.
But they are to food what sensible shoes are to fashion.
More and more, the potato is a medium of culinary inspiration and flights of fancy.
Potato slices are masquerading as ravioli and stuffed with pigs' cheeks.


Employers Balk at High Cost Of High-Tech Medical Care
LEAD: In a dramatic illustration of the way rapid advances in medical care in the United States sometimes collide with the will to pay for them, an employer is objecting to a $1.25 million bill for a worker's spouse who became the first person to receive a new heart, liver and kidney in the same operation.


MEMORY REPAIR
LEAD: I congratulate Sandra Blakeslee for her well-researched review of normal and pathological memory loss, ''Memory Repair'' (October 8).
In a discussion of the most current views on how memory declines with aging, she omits one potentially important factor: cerebrovascular disease.
Although stroke is considered the second most common cause of dementia after


Honoring the Best Among Secretaries
LEAD: THE role of the secretary is changing dramatically, as the technical skills needed to perform the job increase and the opportunities for promotion grow more favorable.
A local secretarial awards program last week reflected how expectations have changed.


The Medical Assault on Stroke
LEAD: STEVE REMINDED ME OF A BIG teddy bear as he lumbered into my office several months ago, but not only because he was a docile, barrel-chested six-footer with maudlin brown eyes and a wisp of a smile.
His left leg arched out a tad to the side as he swung it forward, producing a tipsy waddle.
And his left arm hung inert, bent at the elbow, like a big, droopy paw.


Enhancing Life For the Disabled
LEAD: In the March 25 Westchester Weekly there was an article entitled ''Matching the Handicapped With Jobs.'' This piece seemed to portray a positive idea about persons with disabilities.
Throughout the article, however, terms such as ''the autistic'' and ''the more severely handicapped'' were used to describe the students.


Terry McElfresh to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Charles W. McElfresh of Wayne, Pa., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Terry M. McElfresh, and Timothy M. Downes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Downes of Troy, N.Y.
Ms.
McElfresh, 30 years old, is a group-sales representative at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in Philadelphia.


Houston Officer Is Convicted In Death of a Black Woman
LEAD: A former Houston policeman has been convicted of voluntary manslaughter in the shooting of a black woman on a Houston freeway last October after a night of drinking among off-duty officers.


N.H.L. PLAYOFFS: Friday's Game;   Bruins Getting Ahead by Not Getting Physical
LEAD: The Boston Bruins moved a step closer to winning their first Stanley Cup in 18 years by taking a step back from physical confrontations.


Letters;   DISNEY DECO
LEAD: The fact that there has been so much hoopla surrounding the latest architectural works commissioned by Walt Disney World for its kingdom in Orlando, Fla., goes to show how little we recall our own architectural history (''Disney Deco,'' by Patricia Leigh Brown, April 8).
The idea of using architecture to lure crowds to entertainment and commercial ventures is hardly a new phenomenon - world's fairs have done this for more than a century.


A Murky Subplot In Israel's Drama
LEAD: IN Israel, assembling a new Government is a little like putting together a jigsaw puzzle while blindfolded: it's never clear where to find the pieces, whether they will fit or what the resulting picture will be.
But as Shimon Peres failed in his five-week attempt to find enough pieces for a Labor Party Government and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir began last week to try on behalf of the Likud, the usual disarray was complicated by the question of how, and why, 20 Orthodox Jewish families moved into the Christian quarter of Jerusalem's Old


Identifying Reviewers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music;   A Challenging Program By Peabody Trio, in Debut
LEAD: The Peabody Trio assembled an ambitious program for its debut recital in Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday evening, interestingly varied but perhaps slightly too demanding.
Part of the Walter W. Naumburg Foundation's 1989 Chamber Music Award (which the Peabody shared with the Cavani String Quartet), the recital featured the premiere of Bright Sheng's Four Movements for Piano Trio, commissioned by the foundation as part of the award.


Weather Warms, and It's Time for Stews
LEAD: STEWS are not just for winter.
Going through some old diaries recently, I came across an entry describing a picnic I had gone on as a child when my father was posted at the British Embassy in Vietnam.
The tropical heat had been even worse than usual and we had taken shelter from the sun in the ruins of a French villa by a beach not far from Saigon.


Writing an Opera Is a Composer's Ultimate Challenge
LEAD: Opera is still the ultimate challenge and the ultimate achievement in a composer's life.
It combines all the other arts; the composer is in control, which he is not when writing for dance or providing incidental music for the theater.
In opera, all aspects of structure and timing are in his hands.


Miami
LEAD: To the Editor: Having recently returned from Miami, I feel your readers should know that some restaurants in the Miami area are now including a 15 percent tip on their bill.


Question Of the Week;   Should Athletes Accept Money for Autographs?
LEAD: No. Take the money from the owners, not from the kids.
JOE RANCATORE Jr.
Belmont, Mass.


Helicopter Crash Kills Pilot
LEAD: The pilot of a helicopter removing a satellite dish from the top of a 14-story building was killed this morning when the craft crashed onto the roof and burst into flames.
Four people assisting with the work escaped without injury when they ran to the far end of the roof as the helicopter lost power and crashed.


Question Of the Week;   Should Athletes Accept Money for Autographs?
LEAD: Despite the Pete Rose tax business, I am indifferent.


Campus Life: Minnesota;   A Resignation Is Prompted By Tensions
LEAD: After a negative performance review by a University of Minnesota faculty committee, the head of the school's computer science department announced last week that he will resign May 1 at the request of Minnesota's Institute of Technology dean.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
CULT BASEBALL PLAYERS: The Greats, the Flakes, the Weird, and the Wonderful.
Edited by Danny Peary. (Fireside/Simon &amp; Schuster, Paper, $9.95.) Bait-and-switch alert: Willie Mays is not a cult baseball player.
Neither are Babe Ruth, Mickey Mantle, Duke Snider, Ted Williams, Henry Aaron or Lou Gehrig, though all appear in ''Cult Baseball Players,'' an uneven collection of 60 hero-worshiping essays by writers of large and small repute.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I am trying to fasten a fairly large hook to a hollow-core door.
I have tried plastic anchors and plastic toggles, and in both cases they loosened because the plywood or veneer covering the hollow core is quite thin and not very firm.
Any suggestions?


Rangers Stunned, But Not Baffled
LEAD: The emotional devastation was still fresh, and so the analysis being offered was emerging through a filter of anger and anguish.
The analysis on the part of the Rangers, though, was neither superficial nor cliched.
They agreed, with a unanimous and frank sense of remorse, on how precisely they had been eliminated by the Capitals from the Patrick Division final.


POSTINGS: 13 Acres in Brooklyn;   Land for Houses
LEAD: New York City has scheduled an auction next month of 13 acres of vacant land in southeastern Brooklyn near the boat slips and clam shanties along Paerdegat Basin, which leads into Jamaica Bay.
The Department of General Services' Division of Real Property is offering the tract as two plots, one of 340,000 square feet with a minium price of $6 million, the other of 260,000 square feet and a minimum of $5 million.


LOST IN THE MODERN KONTRY
LEAD:
THE FAMILY
By Buchi Emecheta.
239 pp. New York:
George Braziller. Paper, $8.95. Cloth, $17.95.


Mortal Insult?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ms. O'Neill Weds Kevin Broderick
LEAD: Catharine Mauze O'Neill, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George D. O'Neill of Oyster Bay, L.I., was married there yesterday to Kevin Patrick Anthony Broderick, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
William Peter-Kean Broderick of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich.
The Rev.
Charles A. Ribaudo performed the ceremony at St.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: ''When I gave up my knight, it was really a positional sacrifice.
I got two pawns for it and my opponent's development was sadly in arrears.
In fact, it would take him at least four moves to get his queenside pieces into action.
It had to be worthwhile.'' That was how the 30-year-old Seattle grandmaster Yasser Seirawan summed up the key decision in his game with Jonathan Tisdall, a 31-year-old expatriate American international master who lives in Norway, in the 14th Reykjavik International Open Tournamentin Iceland, which ended


Campus Life: Oberlin;   Students Boycott Classes to Protest Police Actions
LEAD: After a confrontation between the Oberlin police and demonstrators, many students boycotted classes last Tuesday while professors canceled other classes to attend a communitywide forum on what they say was police brutality.
Townspeople also attended the forum.


Bring On the 'Smart' Window
LEAD: To the Editor:


Report Tells of Pilot Errors in Indian Airbus Crash
LEAD: Contradicting assertions by Government officials that mechanical failure was to blame, a report on the crash of a new Airbus A-320 in Bangalore in February concludes that the pilot and co-pilot made a series of fatal errors in the final minutes of the flight.


Boggs and Evans Lead Rout of A's
LEAD: Wade Boggs drove in five runs with a two-run homer and a bases-loaded double today and Dwight Evans hit a three-run homer as the Boston Red Sox routed the Oakland Athletics, 12-3.
The victory was the third in a row for the Red Sox and their fifth in six games.


East 86th Street
LEAD: To the Editor:


Satire Is an Art
LEAD: To the Editor:


Love Walks In - Again
LEAD: In Craig Lucas's romantic fantasy ''Prelude to a Kiss,'' the protagonist, Peter, has a nervous moment when he meets the family of Rita, the woman with whom he has fallen in love.
As preparations began recently to move the play from the Circle Repertory Off Broadway to the Helen Hayes Theater, where it opens on Tuesday, Timothy Hutton found himself in much the same position.


EUROPE'S ALLIANCE SEEKS CLOSER TIES
LEAD: The 12 European Community leaders agreed today to make a detailed examination of ways to strengthen European unity as they move into the new era opened by the anticipated reunification of Germany.


MR. WARHOL, MEET MR. BARNUM
LEAD:
CULT HEROES
How to Be Famous for More Than Fifteen Minutes.
By Deyan Sudjic.
Illustrated. 160 pp. New York:
W.W. Norton &amp; Company.
Paper, $10.95.
PUBLICITY STUNT!
Great Staged Events That Made the News.
By Candice Jacobson Fuhrman.
Illustrated. 173 pp. San Francisco:
Chronicle Books.


The Ship Buzzed With Rumors of Garbo
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Rosenauer To Wed in June
LEAD: June wedding plans for Kathleen Veronica Rosenauer and Dr.
Horace Fuller Henriques 3d, a son of Claire W. Henriques of Greenwich, Conn., and Mr.
Henriques Jr. of Buyck, Minn., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Adolf Rosenauer of Reno.


Miss Webster Weds Christophe Genin
LEAD: Virginia Field Reiland Webster, a daughter of Deborah de Land Sendax of New York and Thomas Clarkson Hunter Webster of St.
Thomas, Pa., was married yesterday to Christophe Genin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michel Bernard Genin of Paris.
The Very Rev.
Arnold E. Mintz officiated at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr,


Mystical Music Dramas At Full Historical Circle
LEAD: Those who delight in cyclical patterns will be pleased to discover that two austere and exotic music dramas that bracket the history of Western art music have been released almost simultaneously.
Both Hildegard von Bingen's ''Ordo Virtutum'' and Harry Partch's ''Revelation in the Courthouse Park'' deal with divine beings and cosmic mysteries and use speech and chant with exotic instrumentation.


Organized Writer Has 'Quick Fix' Solution
LEAD: LUCY H. HEDRICK says no one, including herself, was born organized.
But, she says, everyone can be trained to be - in five days.


Woman Dies, the Wish Court Granted Her
LEAD: A woman paralyzed with Lou Gehrig's disease died within an hour of being taken off a respirator Friday after she convinced a judge that death was what she wanted.


THE IRAN-CONTRA COMMITTEES: DID THEY PROTECT REAGAN?
LEAD: PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN VISITED MILLIONS OF American homes last month as a videotaped witness in the Iran-contra trial of Rear Adm.
John M. Poindexter, his former national security adviser.
The President's testimony was a shambles of failed memory and failed responsibility that has left the Iran-contra scandal as it has always been: a confused whodunit, a plot-rich mystery with no central character and no ending.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are just normal people.


Wall Street;   Who's to Settle Cross-Border Spats?
LEAD: Congress and the securities industry may not yet be prepared to do much about the arbitration process that Wall Street administers to settle disputes between investors and their brokers.
But they certainly seem willing to study it.


Letters;   DISNEY DECO
LEAD: Disney Deco may be good marketing but it is bad architecuture.


Jean E. Maguire Married To Gijsbert van Seventer
LEAD: The marriage of Jean E. Maguire, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry C. Maguire Jr. of Merion, Pa., to Dr.
Gijsbert A. van Seventer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Huibert van Seventer of Amstelveen, the Netherlands, took place yesterday at Goodhart Hall at Bryn Mawr (Pa.) College.
The Rev.
W.
Bradford Greeley, a


Compound Interest
LEAD: Princess Stephanie of Monaco is going to be married.
It's definitely an alliance of real estate interests: the 25-year-old, whose family owns a 400-acre principality and gambling business, and a 26-year-old Parisian, Jean-Yves Le Fur, a developer and the son of a well known architect.
When the two threw a party at a Paris restaurant last weekend to announce the engagement and share champagne with 50 or so of their friends, Prince Rainier was missing.


A Showcase for Sex Is Run Out of Town, But Not Far Enough
LEAD: It's generally agreed that peep shows, nude dance parlors and pornographic bookstores are not good for cities.
They give a neighborhood a seedy image, hurt nearby businesses and, in some cases, promote prostitution.
But the businesses are legal, so there is little that cities can do.


Yo! It's the 8%, Pretax, FIFO Wal-Mart Hula
LEAD: To the Editor:


'THE HEART IS A LARGE PLACE'
LEAD:
INVENTING OURSELVES
Lesbian Life Stories.
By the Hall Carpenter Archives
Lesbian Oral History Group.
Illustrated. 228 pp. New York:
Routledge. Paper, $12.95. Cloth, $35.
WALKING AFTER MIDNIGHT
Gay Men's Life Stories.
By the Hall Carpenter Archives
Gay Men's Oral History Group.


Alison Maloney Wed To Thomas J. Estep
LEAD: Alison Farrell Maloney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Maloney of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday in Worcester, Mass., to Thomas Joseph Estep, a son of Lynn Estep of Albuquerque, N.M., and the late Gary P. Estep.
The ceremony at St.
Joseph Chapel at the College of the Holy Cross was performed by the Rev.


New Tree-Planting Technique Endorsed
LEAD: SCHOOLCHILDREN, communities and garden clubs have been celebrating Arbor Day since last week.
The day itself is set by each municipality, with local officials choosing a day when the climate suits tree planting.
The founder of Arbor Day, J. Sterling Morton, selected April 27 a century ago as the day for celebration.


WIRELESS HEADSETS UNLEASH THE MUSIC
LEAD: Aural privacy has its points.
With earphones, you keep the music all to yourself.
Not that you're esthetically stingy and unwilling to share your pleasures.
It's just that not everyone else in the house may be in the mood for the Appassionata.


Union Says Workers Are Exposed to Infection
LEAD: A union study claims that violations of safety precautions against AIDS and hepatitis B are needlessly exposing thousands of workers at private hospitals and nursing homes in the New York City region.


Trouble for Forte
LEAD: He was a star basketball player and an acclaimed television sports executive, but things have changed for Chet Forte.
The former high-scoring guard and playmaker for Columbia, who went on to receive nine Emmy Awards as a producer-director during his 25-year career with ABC, is now broke.
He is also suffering from cancer and facing a series of


Voters Propose to Put a Lid on Their Representatives
LEAD: YET another trend is swelling up from California, and this one is unlikely to make lawmakers anywhere very happy.
Since it has become almost impossible to throw the rascals out, a movement is gathering steam in California and elsewhere to shut them out - by limiting the time any legislator can hold the same office.


200,000 Demonstrate Against Abortion
LEAD: Hundreds of thousands of people rallied in the nation's capital today to pledge their commitment to outlawing abortion, hearing promises of support from President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle and hoping to send a powerful message to other elected officials about the strength of the anti-abortion movement.


Hawaii Appoints Senator
LEAD: United States Representative Daniel K. Akaka was appointed today to fill the Senate seat from Hawaii vacated by the death April 15 of Spark M. Matsunaga.
Mr.
Akaka, a Democrat, will serve until January, when the winner of a special election will be seated.


Lifestyle;   A Billionaire Couple's Divorce, in Impeccable Taste
LEAD: On the social circuit this week, there was talk of the attractive way John and Patricia Kluge, who are said to be the country's wealthiest couple, are dissolving their marriage of nine years.
It sounded like a divorce made in heaven, which was refreshing, since everyone had had enough of the other kind.


NATURE: A CRISIS OF PERCEPTION
LEAD:
DISCORDANT HARMONIES
A New Ecology for the Twenty-First Century.
By Daniel B. Botkin.
241 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $19.95.


There She Is, Miss Long Island...
LEAD: IT may have been Garden City, not Atlantic City, but pageant jitters were just as evident. ''I'm so nervous I'm having trouble breathing,'' said a contestant, Kristine Meaney, as she waited backstage at the Garden City Hotel.


Breast Cancer: Preventable Tragedy
LEAD: Matilda Cuomo's timely article, ''Taking Aim at a Preventable Tragedy'' (April 8) alerts all women to the benefits, indeed urgency, of the early detection of breast cancer and to the more than 90 percent survival rate if this deadly disease is diagnosed early enough.


Let's Not Teach Smoking in Schools
LEAD: Every time I think we as a society are prudent in our decision-making abilities, an article comes along to prove me wrong.
In the article about high schools and smoking, I was reminded of how foolish we are in teaching Smoking 101 on our school grounds.
As role models, school faculty cannot be faulted for smoking; after all, they probably picked it up in high schools they themselves attended.


Question Of the Week;   Should Athletes Accept Money for Autographs?
LEAD: No, athletes should not accept money for autographs.
My feeling is that they owe it to their fans.
The people are responsible for their success, popularity and their great salaries.
They are given the privilege to do what they love to do and get paid for it.
GREGORY PERILLO
Staten Island


Eastern Europe: The Polluted Lands
LEAD: As Eastern Europe struggles toward democracy, it must also grapple with a ravaged environment.
Corrosive soot has fouled water and soil, and in blackened industrial cities the air is laced with heavy metals and chemicals.
In a world ruled by production targets, there was no pressure to clean up.


A Man With No Mandate Yearns for Consensus
LEAD: MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV never seemed more the master of his nation's opaque and treacherous political process than when he dealt with objections in the national congress and had himself upgraded earlier this year to what was lightly termed the ''super president.'' He assumed executive emergency powers the czars might have envied, and all without the bother of going to the people for popular election.


The Rangers Didn't Answer the Knock
LEAD: For the Rangers, opportunity to win the Stanley Cup seldom knocks.
Only in 1972 and 1979 had opportunity even been sighted in the neighborhood around Madison Square Garden.
Too much litter.
Too many panhandlers.
Too many ticket scalpers.
Too few hockey players.
Not after 1940 had opportunity attended a champagne party in the previous Garden, several blocks uptown.


BEST SELLERS: April 22, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St.
Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
world encounter their often unexpected destinies
during a get-together in a small Scottish town.


Zoe Dyson Becomes Bride of Mitchell Hedstrom
LEAD: Zoe Christina Dyson, a daughter of the Venerable Archdeacon Thomas Dyson and Lucette Dyson of Warwick, Bermuda, was married yesterday to Mitchell Warren Hedstrom, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric L. Hedstrom Jr. of East Aurora, N.Y.
The bride's father, the archdeacon of the Anglican Church in Bermuda, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.


You Can Dance to It, But Is It Worth a Listen?
LEAD: The title of Lil Louis's debut album ''From the Mind of Lil Louis'' (Epic ET 45468; all three formats) should be taken quite literally.
Nearly all the music in it has an imagined, insubstantial air: the low-register whisper of his rhythms, female voices cooing drowsy lullabies, Lil Louis's almost scientifically cool sexuality.


Wall Street Arrogance and William Jovanovich
LEAD: To the Editor:


Addictive Behavior: Another View
LEAD: When the social-clinical psychologist Dr.
Stanton Peele (New Jersey Q &amp; A: ''Addiction and the 'Disease Mythology,' '' March 18) takes aim at the social-problem aspects of addiction, he can be brilliant.


Southeast Asia's Healthful Fare
LEAD: FRESH GREEN CORIANDER AND fragrant lemongrass, pungent fish sauces laced with garlic and hot chili peppers, sweet and sour tamarind and exotic fruits like durians and star-shaped carambolas: the last 10 years have seen a proliferation of interest in these and other Southeast Asian foods.
It started with restaurants, primarily Thai and Vietnamese.


Dangerous to Read New Testament for History;   Hold Up Examples
LEAD: To the Editor:


With An Easy Beat
LEAD: While classical music makes up the bulk of the offerings at summer music festivals, there are many events devoted to jazz, Latin music, guitar playing and reggae.
Here is a brief sampling.
ARUBA
Jazz and Latin Music Festival
June 15 to 24


The Ship Buzzed With Rumors of Garbo;   More Than Skin Deep
LEAD: To the Editor:


Academic Field Trip to the Bleachers
LEAD: AT 6:30 on a Friday morning at the Amtrak station in Springfield, Mass., an august group of college professors from the nearby University of Massachusetts has assembled, along with a dean from Amherst College, a local mayor and a state representative, a few librarians and a generous smattering of hangers-on.


Penalty Eased for Doctor in Steinberg Case
LEAD: The doctor who arranged the illegal adoption of an infant boy for Joel Steinberg and Hedda Nussbaum will be suspended for six months, the state Board of Regents ruled today.


DATA UPDATE: April 29, 1990
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Feb.90
Jan. 90
Change
Starts
1,457
1,568
-7.0%
Completions
1,355
1,433
-5.4%
Sales
607
589
+3.0%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)


Religious Rift Joins Politics In Peru Race
LEAD: Behind the thick 16th-century walls of the shrine of St.
Rose, patron saint of Peru, Msgr.
Javier Ariz spoke worriedly of the ''improper mixing of religion and politics.''


Review/Opera;   Juilliard's 'Hugh the Drover,' A Vaughan Williams Rarity
LEAD: Ralph Vaughan Williams's aim in ''Hugh the Drover,'' his first full-length opera, was to create a thoroughly British work that would break down his countrymen's resistance to the genre.
He had doubts about the plausibility of such an undertaking, but he did his best to stack the deck, incorporating a handful of folk songs and molding his own melodies along appealingly folkish contours.


Tibetan Treasures on View
LEAD: PERCHED on scaffolding in a third-floor gallery at the Newark Museum, Phuntsok Dorje is painting blue lotuses and flaming jewels on a Tibetan Buddhist altar.
No artistic liberties here.
Each meticulous brushstroke complies with color and design traditions set more than 1,000 years ago.


Claire E. Turner Is Married on L.I.
LEAD: Claire Elizabeth Turner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Turner of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Mary to Michael Schlesier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond H. Schlesier of Seaford, L.I.
The Rev.
James P. Swiader officiated.


Miss Lewis Weds Thomas Tyree Jr.
LEAD: Kathleen Barry Lewis, the daughter of Margaret S. Lewis of Barrington, R.I., and Roger S. Lewis of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to Thomas Burdick Tyree Jr., a son of Joan Brophy Tyree of Pawling, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Tyree.
Msgr.
Oscar Ferland, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Chapel by the Sea in Newport, R.I.


RAISING THE IRON CURTAIN
LEAD:
THE SHATTERED BLOC
Behind the Upheaval in Eastern Europe.
By Elie Abel.
278 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company.
$20.95.


IN DEFENSE OF MIKE MILKEN
LEAD: Not every customer of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Michael R. Milken, has been jumping for joy at the latter's recent guilty plea in Federal Court.
We have all read the articles that called Mr.
Milken and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. criminals.
Well, if it's a crime to donate tens of thousands of dollars to rescue a company from bankruptcy and save hundreds of jobs, maybe Congress ought to take another look at the law.


U.S. Attorney Alito Is Appointed to Bench
LEAD: The Senate has confirmed the nomination of United States Attorney Samuel A. Alito Jr. of New Jersey to a seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Valley Cottage
LEAD: RESIDENTS of Valley Cottage in Rockland County say nothing ever happens there and they love it that way.
This bucolic four-square-mile unincorporated hamlet, part of the Town of Clarkstown, has few sidewalks, and building lots are zoned for one-third of an acre to six acres.
Street lights are few and far between because they are installed only for safety and when residents request them.


Campus Life: Syracuse;   42 Years of Warmth And Wit Wind Down
LEAD: In 42 years of teaching constitutional law at Syracuse University, Michael O. Sawyer had a ready tongue, a sharp wit and a wicked jab at New Jersey, the state he loves to hate.
And he has always had a willing audience, including students like the head of Columbia Pictures, the leader of President Bush's clean-air team and members of Gov.


Mental Health Budget: Foolish Economies
LEAD: Your excellent article, ''Mental Health Budget Cuts Seen as Breach of Faith,'' highlights once again the penny-wise, pound-foolish attitude taken by bureaucrats and legislators as they slash away at the mental health budget.
In their efforts to trim the mental health budget they consistently take a short range view, choosing to effect savings today that will lead to far greater expenses down the road.


Review/Music;   Violinist, in Podium Debut Leads the Jupiter Symphony
LEAD: The Jupiter Symphony, a chamber orchestra of young freelancers and students, usually performs under the baton of its enterprising founder, Jens Nygaard.
On Monday evening, though, the orchestra was conducted by Robert Mann, the first violinist of the Juilliard String Quartet.


A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF THE WORLD
LEAD: The day of the big game dawned bright and clear.
In New York.
Warm spring Saturday, potential for jogging or puttering, but something better to do: the Boston Garden.


POSTINGS: Queens Expansion;   T-Shirt Maker Chooses To Stay
LEAD: The balloon over Robin's head in the latest products from the Bowe Industries factory in Middle Village, Queens, might carry the words: ''Holy logo, Batman, we're staying in New York!'' Indeed, after considering a move to the South, the owners of Bowe will remain in New York and expand their T-shirt factory as a result of a $4.1 million bond financing arranged by the city's Industrial Development


Two Very Different Troupes, One Shared Goal
LEAD: Washington Ballet and Ballet Chicago, both of which performed here last weekend, have something revealing to tell us about the state of regional ballet in America.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Freehold
$170,000
Jackson Mills Road
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 29-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, patio, 3 acres; taxes $1,882.
Glen Rock
$215,000
143 Sycamore Terrace
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; full basement, fireplace, close to park; taxes $3,914.


Regina Boyle Married to William J. Wheeler Jr.
LEAD: Regina C. Boyle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Boyle of River Vale, N.J., was married yesterday to William J. Wheeler Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wheeler of Carmel, Ind.
The Rev.
Stephen Feehan officiated at St.
Andrew's Roman Catholic Church in Westwood, N.J.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Snap faded flowers off daffodils, tulips and other spring-flowering bulbs so the foliage ripens naturally and the thrust does not go toward unnecessary seed pods, but for next spring's flowers.
Finish lawn patch seeding with quality grass seed where large bare spots occur.
Sow another half row of peas, spinach, radishes and beets to keep the summertime harvest coming.


NELSON ALGREN: THE MESSAGE STILL HURTS
LEAD: It shouldn't surprise me that Nelson Algren, clearly one of the best novelists of his time, is not much read these days.
It's the ''kill the messenger'' syndrome, I suppose, for the news that Algren's works brings us is not good news: if the world he describes is at all like our own, then it's not morning in America, and it hasn't been for a long, long time.


Data Bank/April 29, 1990


Dynamic Duo
LEAD: To the Editor:


Daytona Gets V6 Power
LEAD: There was a time that I wanted a Dodge.
No, that doesn't say it.
I lusted after a Dodge.
It was 1969 and the car was a Charger R/T hardtop, maybe the most beautiful Dodge ever built.


So Far, the 'German Question' Isn't Much Discussed by Germans
LEAD: A RESPECTED West German newspaper publisher recently tried to convince an American visitor that foreigners were making far too much of German unification.
East Germany was only the size of a large West German state, he said, so its absorption could hardly increase Germany's size or power all that much.


LOVES AND TORMENTS OF A MAN-CHILD
LEAD:
FRANZ WERFEL
A Life in Prague, Vienna, and Hollywood.
By Peter Stephan Jungk.
Translated by Anselm Hollo.
Illustrated. 318 pp. New York:
Grove Weidenfeld. $24.95.


Central Park, Bent but Not Broken, Comes Through Earth Day
LEAD: To the Editor:


Judith Goodfarb Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Judith Ann Goodfarb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Goodfarb of Ardsley, N.Y., was married last evening to Marc Chamlin, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin Chamlin of Yardley, Pa.Rabbi Albert L. Sturmer officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Debra Lee Todd Planning Marriage to Mark Herlyn
LEAD: An August wedding is planned by Debra Lee Todd and Mark Warner Herlyn, Miss Todd's mother, Hazel Todd of Atlantic Beach, Fla., has announced.
Mr.
Herlyn is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warner B. Herlyn of Mamaroneck, N.Y.


SAY 'CHEESE,' AMERICA
LEAD:
I'M SO HAPPY
By Marvin Heiferman and
Carole Kismaric.
Illustrated. Unpaged. New York:
Vintage Books. Paper, $10.95.


Setting the Record Straight
LEAD: To the Editor Because of difficulties in transmission while I was in the Soviet Union recently, there are inaccuracies in my article ''In Moscow, a Happy Ending for a Jewish Film Festival'' [April 22] .


Dr. D. Scott AlenickTo Wed Miss Chaplin
LEAD: June wedding plans for Suzanne Elizabeth Chalpin and Dr.
D.
Scott Alenick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome B. Alenick of Hillside, N.J., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Chalpin of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Betsy Oot to Wed A Law Student
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Terence R. Blackwood of Centreville, Md., have announced June wedding plans for Mrs.
Blackwood's daughter Betsy Van Oot and Christopher Dennin Ruppel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip F. Ruppel of Larchmont, N.Y.


Campus Life: Yale;   20 Years Later, 'Coeds' Recall Breaking a Barrier
LEAD: The sandstone edifices, Gothic spires and statues of scholars long dead have not changed.
Nearly everything else about Yale has, however, since female undergraduates were admitted in 1969.


Protests in Mongolia Go On, With Government Unyielding
LEAD: Mongolian opposition groups today protested for a second day in the capital, Ulan Bator, despite a stern warning from the Communist Government that they were breaking the law.


To Begin With, All She Had Was a Vision
LEAD: There was a chill wind off the Potomac and the rain fell in sheets on the cherry trees, but inside her office Zelda Fichandler, who had just announced her retirement after 40 years as producing director of Washington's Arena Stage, was cheerfully reflective.


Brewers Are Succeeding With a New Get-Tough Attitude
LEAD: As far as Chuck Crim could recall, the only time he had ever been ejected from a game was during his college days in Hawaii. ''And I didn't even say it,'' the Milwaukee relief pitcher said. ''It was the guy behind me.''


A Troubled Transition for the Ansonia
LEAD: AFTER a five-year struggle, the owners of the Ansonia Hotel, one of the city's architectural landmarks, have put forth a plan to convert the building into a condominium residence.


From Opera to Jazz, Britain Has It All
LEAD: Not only does Britain have the oldest continuous music festival - the 263-year-old Three Choirs Festival, held this year in Worcester - but it also seems to offer more music festivals, excluding folk festivals, than any other country: more than 40.


Social Events
LEAD:
Ninja Turtles and Friends


Has America Learned to Deal With Iran?
LEAD: AFTER more than a decade of trial and error, American officials are satisfied that they have found just about the right policy for dealing with hostage-takers and with Iran.
President Bush summed it up last week in five words: ''I don't trade for hostages.''


When Women Go Golfing
LEAD: Like Phyllis Kronick (''Golf on Saturday, but Not for Women,'' Opinion page, March 25), I was surprised at the restrictive rules against women golfers at the clubs in my area.
While I feel it is imperative for women to relentlessly seek to revise these Neanderthal rules, our birdies and eagles should not be grounded while we await change.


What's Doing In: Cincinnati
LEAD: Two pairs of winged pigs sculptured in bronze that were commissioned for the entryway of the Bicentennial Riverfront Park in celebration of the city's history as a pork capital caused quite a stir when they were unveiled almost two years ago.
But that was minor compared with the uproar this month when civic leaders sought to block the Contemporary Art Center's opening of ''The Perfect Moment,'' Robert Mapplethorpe's controversial photography retrospective.


Weather Warms, and It's Time for Stews
LEAD: STEWS are not just for winter.
Going through some old diaries recently, I came across an entry describing a picnic I had gone on as a child when my father was posted at the British Embassy in Vietnam.
The tropical heat had been even worse than usual and we had taken shelter from the sun in the ruins of a French villa by a beach not far from Saigon.


Miss McGeady, Nurse, Marries
LEAD: Elizabeth Kerrigan McGeady, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard X. McGeady of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher James O'Brien, a son of Raymond V. O'Brien Jr. of Colts Neck, N.J., and the late Theresa O'Brien.
The Rev.
Philip Morrissey performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Assumption in


WITH A BOOST FROM UNCLE SAM
LEAD:
ENTERPRISE
The Dynamic Economy of a Free People.
By Stuart Bruchey.
645 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Paper, $24.95. Cloth, $49.50.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Thursday is the 150th anniversary of the first postage stamp, the British Penny Black.
For collectors of the popular topic ''stamps on stamps,'' the sesquicentennial is becoming something of a philatelic frenzy.


Salvadoran Reform Must Start With Army
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHY YOU'RE AFRAID OF THE DOCTOR
LEAD: THE MEDICAL TRIANGLE
Physicians, Politicians and the Public.
By Eli Ginzberg.
314 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $27.50.


Patricia Grajcar Weds R. M. Edwards
LEAD: Patricia Dianne Grajcar, a daughter of Mrs.
Francis A. Pastorek of Cheswick, Pa., and the late Edward M. Grajcar, was married yesterday to Robert Monroe Edwards, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan M. Edwards of Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
The Rev.
Salvatore B. Matarazzo officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.


Illness and Literature
LEAD: To the Editor:


Different Jobs Mean Different Nails
LEAD: HARDWARE and building supply stores carry a wide variety of nails, as anyone who has shopped for them can testify.
The reason is the diversity of building materials; nearly all require nails with specific properties.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: In the 19th century, rulers of one country often sought to impress the rulers of another with some rare and exotic gift.
Occasionally, the gifts were coins.
The King of Siam presentation set of rare United States coins donated to the Asian monarch by the United States in 1836 is one example.


In London, A Catalogue Of Fakes
LEAD: London seems fascinated these days with fakery, pastiche, and imitation.
The city's largest redevelopment schemes are latter-day Venetian piazzas and Roman squares.
A night at the opera may feature Macbeth warbling Verdi with a chorus of Nazi storm troopers.
The historical novelist Peter Ackroyd fills bookstores with simulations of Oscar Wilde's diaries, Hawksmoor's dark plottings, and Thomas Chatterton's frauds.


Czechoslovakia: Constitutional Scholars' Lab
LEAD: ''I rescheduled three classes to come to this, and I haven't ever rescheduled a class for a Supreme Court case,'' said Laurence H. Tribe, the Harvard Law School professor.
But a constitutional convention is hard to resist.


ON TV, LESS SEPARATE, MORE EQUAL
LEAD: There is one part of the American scene in which the black presence over the last decade has become dramatically less separate and more equal.
That's on television, the Great Emulation Machine whose very existence depends on correctly identifying and servicing its audiences.
In the mid-1980's, ''The Cosby Show'' stunned a good many industry ex perts by vaulting to the top of the ratings - and staying there.


ON THE TRAIL OF THE TERRORISTS
LEAD:
THE FALL OF PAN AM 103
Inside the Lockerbie Investigation.
By Steven Emerson and Brian Duffy.
304 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95.


Elizabeth Hix Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan R. Hix of Mill Neck, L.I., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Brabb Hix and John T. Colby Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Colby of Glen Cove, L.I.
Miss Hix, a graduate of Skidmore College, is an operations controller at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.


Letters;   BLACK STUDIES' NEW STAR
LEAD: Henry Louis Gates Jr. does good, and valuable, work (''Black Studies' New Star,'' by Adam Begley, April 1).
But what we are witnessing is the Valvano-ization of the academic scene.
Like famous coaches who jump teams for more lucrative deals, the superstar scholar now negotiates for tenure, endowed chairs, hiring authority and the like.


Big Project in Sound Arouses Concern
LEAD: A DESERTED island in Long Island Sound just off the New Rochelle coastline is the focus of a bitter dispute over a proposal to build a $1 billion residential community for 3,700 people.


Parenting Courses: Attitude Isn't Taught
LEAD: John Imhof's letter [April 8]  on teaching parenting courses in public schools misses the point entirely.


High-Tech Business Loses A Friend at the Pentagon
LEAD: AS reports circulated late last year that the Bush Administration was planning to cut back support for high-technology programs, Andrew S. Grove, president of the Intel Corporation, the Silicon Valley computer chip maker, sent a violin to Richard G. Darman, the White House budget director. ''If what I hear is true,'' Dr.


Stepmothers Fight the 'Evil' Image
LEAD: THEY are mothers who dread Mother's Day. ''You know how I spent my first Mother's Day?'' said Sue Baer, her fingers toying with the mother's ring she wore on a chain around her neck. ''I wound up cooking breakfast for his mother and waiting for the kids' natural mother to come and get them.'


New Tree-Planting Technique Endorsed
LEAD: SCHOOLCHILDREN, communities and garden clubs have been celebrating Arbor Day since last week.
The day itself is set by each municipality, with local officials choosing a day when the climate suits tree planting.
The founder of Arbor Day, J. Sterling Morton, selected April 27 a century ago as the day for celebration.


Researching Diet's Role in Cancer Fight
LEAD: DR.
CHUNG S. YANG, a cancer researcher at Rutgers University's College of Pharmacy, says he is not convinced that popular nutritional supplements, like vitamins and garlic capsules, should be used to prevent or treat serious disease.


Reporter's Notebook;   Images of Bensonhurst Night Flash Again in Court
LEAD: It is springtime outside the Brooklyn courthouse where the Bensonhurst trial enters its third week tomorrow.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Of Bistro Fare and Homey Peasant Food
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
La Boheme


'Blading' -- With a Hoot and a Holler
LEAD: WHAT GOES AROUND CAME around, all right; it just took awhile.
In the 18th century, when Dutch craftsmen made the first roller skates, they patterned them after ice skates, with the wheels in a row.
This design survived for more than a century, until an American introduced what is now considered the conventional roller skate, with sets of wheels side by side.


Letters;   A WHOLE NEW BALL GAME
LEAD: As an endocrinologist with a responsibility for many people with diabetes, I found Harvey J. Fields's About Men article, ''A Whole New Ball Game'' (April 1), insightful.


AMERICA TACKLES THE PESTICIDE CRISIS
LEAD: Enough blaming consumers for wanting only ''blemish-free fruit.'' The real culprits, in my New York City neighborhood at least, are the retailers - the Food Emporiums, Red Apples and so on - which steadfastly refuse to offer the consumer any selection of organic produce.
That I must travel more than 10 long blocks to a health food store to find even the humblest selection of organic produce on a regular basis is all the more surprising, since my neighborhood is crowded with food stores and aswarm with preschoolers.


Of Jim Brown And Gary Gait
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrThis letter supplements the letter by former Morgan State lacrosse player Roland Nicholson Jr. (''Mailbox,'' April 8).


Campus Life: Clark;   A Teacher's Edict Breaks Tradition On Class-Cutting
LEAD: William Koelsch, a professor of history and geography at Clark University, last week became the first faculty member to break with an 87-year-old tradition, approved by the administration, that let students skip classes on one day of the term.


Question Of the Week;   Should Athletes Accept Money for Autographs?
LEAD: In Utopia, athletes do not get paid for spending their off days signing thousands of autographs, copies of The New York Times are free, and hospitals don't charge for their services.


Rentals Abroad
LEAD: To the Editor: I wish to report an unusually unpleasant experience with Four Star Living, a villa rental company.


Marcy Anne Berg Will Wed in July
LEAD: The engagement of Marcy Anne Berg to Michael Weinsier, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Weinsier of Kings Point, L.I., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Steven Berg of Buffalo.
A July wedding is planned.


Cashing in on a Hot New Brand Name
LEAD: Poor Homer Simpson.
He's constantly broke.
Last Christmas, when his bonus didn't materialize at the nuclear plant where he's a safety inspector, and when the Christmas savings went to get a tattoo removed from his puckish son, Bart, he was reduced to trying to scrounge up money for gifts by gambling his last $13 at the dog track.


POSTINGS: Condo/Co-op Seminar;   Sorting Out the Problems
LEAD: Two major real estate groups - the Council of New York Cooperatives and the Association of Real Estate Women - will sponsor a seminar for board members and professionals tomorrow night that will try to sort out problems besetting the New York condominium and cooperative market.
The seminar will be held at 6:45 P.M.


French Opera Isn't the Same As Operas in French
LEAD: Jules MasseneT (1842-1912) created music in the mainstream of French opera that ranged over three centuries from Lully to Poulenc.
Hector Berlioz (1803-1869) was a Frenchman who nonetheless managed to keep outside that mainstream.
Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714-1787) was a German cosmopolitan who worked in Paris for pleasure and profit.


Ms. Butsikares to Wed R. J. Tompkins
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Socrates K. Butsikares of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Stasia Butsikares, to Richard J. Tompkins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Tompkins of White Plains and Harwichport, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.


Swimming for Fitness and Solitude
LEAD: PEOPLE ASK WHAT I THINK ABOUT when I'm swimming laps, and whether I don't get bored - perfectly reasonable questions.
I would like to be able to say that I think profound thoughts underwater, that I write poems or work out complicated dilemmas.
But the truth is that I sing the same songs to myself over and over (Roy Orbison is a current favorite) and concentrate on counting laps - from one to eighteen, four times.


Japan's Stubborn Overseas Bank
LEAD: As Japan's longtime financial ambassador to the world, the Bank of Tokyo became used to seeing its fortunes mirror the international successes of corporate Japan.
But in a striking example of how deregulation and competition are transforming the financial system here, this proud institution is now in the fight of its life.


New Sport
LEAD: He played on a leading college team last season, so it should come as no surprise that Karl Brown has been tapped to play professional football next season, except for one thing: Brown has never played football.
His college sport was basketball, and although he played on the Georgia Tech team that made it to the Final


Hearns Retains His Title on a Decision
LEAD: Thomas Hearns retained his World Boxing Organization super middleweight title when he won a unanimous 12-round decision over Michael Olajide Jr. at the Taj Mahal here.


Japanese Composer Is Honored
LEAD: VOCAL music - opera, song recitals, choral music and a variety of folk performances - crowds the calendar this week.
It begins tonight at 7 o'clock in Scarsdale's Hoff-Barthelson School, where the Japanese composer Yoshinao Nakada is to be honored.


Currency;   The Swiss Franc Moves Up
LEAD: This was the week of the Swiss franc as it moved higher against the dollar, the West German mark and the yen.
A week ago, it took 1.4900 francs to buy a dollar.
By last Friday, it took only 1.4530.
The franc has been helped by the country's relatively high interest rates and by comments at week's end by the head of Switzerland's central bank supporting a strong currency and a sustained fight against inflation.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I am trying to fasten a fairly large hook to a hollow-core door.
I have tried plastic anchors and plastic toggles, and in both cases they loosened because the plywood or veneer covering the hollow core is quite thin and not very firm.
Any suggestions?


What the Mai Doesn't Bring
LEAD: TODAY I brought in the mail, dumped it on the table and started going through it.
There was a ''telegram'' from a place in the Poconos advising me to get there soon to pick up a prize I didn't want.
There was a ''personal'' envelope that, upon opening, turned out to be an urgent request for funds to help a senator


Pamela Reach Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Reach of Ridgefield, Conn., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Pamela J. Reach, and Charles L. Baker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles N. Baker of Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Miss Reach, 26 years old, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is the government sales program manager at the Hart Environmental Management Corporation in Cherry Hill, N.J.


A Silent Bond
LEAD: MY FATHER AND I are driving alone across miles and miles of flat prairie on a private retrospective of his work as an architect: small-town churches, banks, schools.
Until now, his career, like all parts of his life with which I haven't been directly involved, is something I've known only vaguely for the simple reason that he's almost never talked about it.


It's Heigh Ho, as Disney Calls the Toons to Work
LEAD: Remember when a Saturday afternoon double feature was always preceded by a lively cartoon?
Whether it was Mickey on skates or the antics of a jealous Donald Duck, those six-minute teasers were as much a part of the movies as long lines and popcorn.


Letters;   DISNEY DECO
LEAD: How odd that nowhere in your article is the observation made that what distressingly separates these fantasies in Orlando and elsewhere from true architecture of the past is the hyping of a product in the very buildings themselves.
Unless I am forgetting some egregious examples, our great buildings of the past did other things than literally embody a commercial product.


The Tonic That Keeps 'Cheers' Bubbling Along
LEAD: Most hit television series live the life of a thoroughbred: Five years or so out on the track and then a long, lucrative existence in retirement at stud - which in television translates to syndication.


Bears Shake Things Up
LEAD: The Chicago Bears' signing of Mark Carrier during the draft last Sunday caused a chain reaction throughout the National Football League.
Agents and team executives differ greatly in their perceptions of the deal: some are certain it could induce a stream of contract disputes with first-round choices while others conclude that it will prove inconsequential.


Where Mozart Made Music and a Life in Vienna
LEAD: A HUGE exhibition, ''Mozart in Vienna,'' to open early in November, will be the official overture to the city's lavish and prolonged tributes to the composer it buried in a pauper's grave on Dec. 6, 1791.
As Vienna's two opera houses, its prestigious orchestras, famous performers, recording companies, publishers and tourist industry are all tuning up for a spectacular encomium to the genius 200 years after his death, the danger of media overkill makes music lovers shudder.


New York Subways Run Into Another Round of Trouble
LEAD: FRUSTRATED by rising crime, long lines at token booths, vandalized turnstiles and the presence of homeless people and beggars on trains, many New Yorkers are abandoning the subway.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
SHUBERT BIRTHDAY PARTY


Meg Maher and John Rogers Married
LEAD: The wedding of Margaret Anne Maher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Maher of Garden City, L.I., and John M. Rogers, a son of Mary Rogers of Southold, L.I., and the late Francis Rogers, took place yesterday at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Garden City.
The Rev.
Charles Bierne officiated.


DEATH WAS LIVELIER THAN LIFE
LEAD:
THE SECOND WAR
By G. C. Hendricks.
196 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


Future Role Still Unwritten For Theater Saved by State
LEAD: SEVEN years after the state took over the American Shakespeare Theater in Stratford, it still has no long-range artistic mission - and no short-range schedule of performances.
The managers of the American Festival Theater, as its is now known, are struggling to assemble a brief summer season.
But they say they are trying to avoid the problems they encountered last summer, when they hastily reopened the theater for six weeks.


Just Visiting
LEAD: CHINA and the Soviet Union are speaking to each other again, but that's about it.
Prime Minister Li Peng was in Moscow last week, a year after Mikhail S. Gorbachev's ice-breaking visit to Beijing, to sign agreements increasing trade and cutting troops along the border.
But Mr.
Li gave terribly polite answers to questions about whether China blamed Mr.


New York City to Expand AIDS Housing Program
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins announced the expansion last week of a New York City program that finds and rents apartments for homeless people with AIDS.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on March 18 with a report in the Travel Advisory column about French river cruises misidentified a building in Paris.
As a reader has recently written to point out, the building was the Caisse des Depots et Consignations, a French Government financial institution, not the Ecole Militaire.


Question Of the Week;   Should Athletes Accept Money for Autographs?
LEAD: I would prefer to see active players, with their big salaries, use this as an opportunity to help the charity of their choice.
I don't resent the old-timers who sign for cash.
Most of them could use the additional income and are willing to chat at length about the old days.
That's what baseball is all about.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD: WELCOMING SPRING


Style Makers;   George Holz, Fashion Photographer
LEAD: For George Holz, fashion photographer, form does not always follow function.


Pistons Beat Pacers for 2-0 Series Edge
LEAD: The defending champion Detroit Pistons took a two-games-to-none lead this afternoon in their first-round National Basketball Association playoff series with the Indiana Pacers as Isiah Thomas and Bill Laimbeer took charge down the stretch for a 100-87 victory.


Caller ID: An Excellent Service
LEAD: I must respond to the letters to the New Jersey editor on March 18 about Caller ID.
It seems to me there are people who are so separated from the world that they would trivialize this excellent service.


Unknown Baroque By Female Composers
LEAD: A concert of music by 18th-century women composers will be performed by the early-music chamber group Vineyard Musicke at the Vineyard Theater, 108 East 15th Street, on May 8 at 8 P.M.
The concert, titled ''Unknown Baroque: Women Composers of Italy and France,'' will focus on newly edited manuscripts that have recently been made available in modern editions.


Jean M. Dugan Wed To Stephen B. Faber
LEAD: Jean M. Dugan and Stephen B. Faber were married yesterday at Old St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Philadelphia by the Rev.
Bruno Ugliano.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Albert J. Dugan of Chalfont, Pa., and Mr. and Mrs.
Peter R. Faber of Madison, N.J.


Protesters Call for Romanian Leaders to Resign


Europe's Unheralded Festivals
LEAD: IF you can obtain tickets - and hotel reservations within an hour's drive - a pilgrimage to a big, glamorous European music festival can be a delightful experience.
But festivals have proliferated in recent decades, and the most rewarding are not necessarily the most famous.
Going to a less fashionable festival may be easier (or may not be: some are already sold out for this year) and may be just as musically enjoyable.


Shelley L. Sypher Is Wed in Florida
LEAD: Aboard the yacht Infinity in Tampa Bay off St.
Petersburg, Fla., Shelley Lynn Sypher, the daughter of Richard B. Sypher of Sea Cliff, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert J. Theriault, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo P. Theriault of Seminole, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Garrett Evans, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony.


MOSCOW ENDORSES PARIS-BONN EFFORT IN LITHUANIA CRISIS
LEAD: The Soviet Government reacted favorably today to the effort by France and West Germany to ease the crisis over Lithuania's declaration of independence.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's spokesman described the effort as ''sober advice'' and ''a kind of appeal for reason against extremism.''


A Wiser Arkansas Proves Faster, Too
LEAD: John McDonnell, the Arkansas track coach, was angry.


Special Today
LEAD: The Good Health Magazine


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Rockefeller Center;   Management: A Mix of Maintenance and Mystique
LEAD: THE managers of Rockefeller Center liken their task to performing open-heart surgery on a patient who is playing golf.


THE SHAME OF THE SECRETARIAT
LEAD:
COUNTENANCE OF TRUTH
The United Nations and the Waldheim Case.
By Shirley Hazzard.
179 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


11-Year-Old Turns Himself (Poof!) Into a Magician
LEAD: ''MOMMY, we saw the Magic Boy!'' a wide-eyed 4-year-old shouted as he ran up to his mother after a party in Darien. ''Oh, you mean there was a magician,'' his mother said.  ''Yeah,'' chimed in a few more young partygoers. ''But he's a kid!'' Then, jumping up and down and pointing, they yelled, ''There he is!


WILLIAMS SHOCKED AMERICAN THEATER INTO MATURITY
LEAD: The story is told that when Andre Gide was asked who was France's greatest writer he replied, ''Victor Hugo . . . helas.'' In the same way, the answer to a question about America's best playwright might be, ''Eugene O'Neill (or, to some minds, Tennessee Williams) . . . alas.'' Though both responses express sorrow, the cases are different.


Shabby Fielding Costs Mets Against Astros
LEAD: If there is one aspect of the Mets that may plague them more than any other, it is defense.


Which Values?
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Should Athletes Accept Money for Autographs?
LEAD: It's a free country.
Why shouldn't athletes accept money for autographs?
A better question, but one I can't answer: Why would a sane person pay for one?
MATT CUTUGNO
New York


Nannies' Workshop Offers a Link Between School and Home
LEAD: SOMETIMES these days they are called au pairs.
More often they are still referred to as nannies.
But except for rainy weather, they don't come with umbrellas.


SILENCE IS GOLDEN
LEAD: AFTER RANDOM HOUSE'S RECENT OUSTER OF ANDRE Schiffrin as managing director of its Pantheon Books division, and the walkout by his editorial staff, news reports sketched a picture of runaway losses at Pantheon and a refusal by Schiffrin to take the steps necessary to shore up the imprint's bottom line.


Is America Abandoning Sick Patients?
LEAD: WHEN 79-YEAR-OLD Ernesta Springer entered Doctors Hospital in New York for surgery on her right leg, she was in excruciating pain but she was able to walk.
A month later, she was still in great pain.
And now she could not get out of bed on her own.
But because the treatment was completed for the particular ailments for which she had been admitted - a blocked artery as well as gangrene, both associated with diabetes - the hospital sent her home.


Miss Storke Weds Andrea Mattarelli
LEAD: Victoria J. Storke, the daughter of William F. Storke and Angela Thornton of New York, was married yesterday to Andrea Mattarelli, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sergio Mattarelli of Genoa, Italy.
The Rev.
John E. Halborg officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.


Letters;   BLACK STUDIES' NEW STAR
LEAD: Why the concern about Professor Gates's deal making?
If major universites can rejoice at paying basketball coaches half-million-dollar salaries, there should be no arguments against paying Gates whatever he requests.
VICTOR M. WEBB
Los Angeles


Painters Are Embracing Wood
LEAD: WOOD is in.
So says Roni Feinstein, director of the Whitney Museum's Fairfield County branch, and her anthology, ''With the Grain,'' proves the point nicely, but does not settle the question, fad or movement?


The Crafts Are Old, The Materials Modern
LEAD: TO most people, the debris of modern life - torn pantyhose, worn-out wire hangars, used containers and cans - is just that, rubbish.
But to Nina Johns, it becomes the stuff of folk art, one that draws upon her American Indian heritage.


Katharine Hadow To Marry in June
LEAD: Elizabeth S. Blake of Ouray, Colo., and Kenneth M. Hadow of Tampa, Fla., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Katharine Lunsford Hadow and Andrew Macbeth Shaw, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan M. Shaw of Basking Ridge, N.J.


Fame for Unser
LEAD: Most of his 35 Indy-car victories have long since been forgotten, and much of his prize money has long since been spent, but the way Bobby Unser sees it, he is now assured of perpetual renown.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: I ran into an old pal the other day at the Museum of Modern Art.
He was carrying a vintage Leica rangefinder around his neck, which is more than I can say for myself - or, for that matter, a lot of photographers.
I can remember when no self-respecting photographer would dare to be seen in public without some shape or form of 35-millimeter around his or her neck.


The Executive Computer;   'Little Black Boxes' That Can Save a Hard Disk
LEAD: When mainframes and minicomputers first arrived in corporations, they were typically accompanied by small armies of white-coated lab technicians.
These high priests kept the computers humming and tried to support the people who waited in line to tap their wisdom.
Years later, when microcomputers started appearing on everyone's desk, the computer support staffs did not grow proportionately.


POSTINGS: New Center in Newark;   Brain Research at Rutgers
LEAD: Rutgers University has begun construction in Newark of its Aidekman Building, a research laboratory devoted to the study of the human brain and its disorders.
It will be the centerpiece of the Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience at the university's Newark campus.
The site, at the corner of University Avenue and Warren Street, is six blocks from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, a state institution administratively separate from


A Glasnost 'Swan Lake' By the Boston Ballet
LEAD: When Fernando Bujones partners the Bolshoi's Nina Ananiashvili in the world premiere of the Boston Ballet production of ''Swan Lake'' at the Wang Center for the Performing Arts here this Thursday, a lot more will be happening than a peculiar love affair between a prince and a swan.
The 26-year-old company spreads its wings in a staging straight out of the Kirov Ballet tradition, pairing American dancers with Kirov or Bolshoi Ballet partners and promising megatons of personality per square yard of stage.


Lisa Vogel Wed To Billy Aronson
LEAD: The chapel of the Loomis Chaffee School in Windsor, Conn., was the setting last evening for the wedding of Lisa Ellen Vogel and Billy Aronson.
Rabbi Harold Silver officiated.


Sarah Bosch Wed To W. B. Bischoff
LEAD: Sarah Elizabeth Krauss Bosch, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Paul F. Bosch of Waterloo, Ontario, was married yesterday to Warren Buckley Bischoff, a son of Nancy K. Bischoff of New York and Richard T. Bischoff of Jupiter, Fla.
The bride's father officiated at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in New York.


For Japanese, Flag and Anthem Sometimes Divide
LEAD: Graduation ceremonies at an elementary school were delayed the other day when a father ripped down the Japanese flag and hid it inside his clothes.
Many other schools throughout the country refused to display the flag in the first place.


Housebuster Adds the Berby Trial to His Streak
LEAD: Housebuster, the outstanding sprinter whose handlers are resisting the temptation to stretch him out for the spring classics, jogged to an easy 5 1/4-length victory against five mediocre rivals today in the $84,000 Derby Trial Stakes at Churchill Downs.


From a Bunker, Afghan Chief Marks Anniversary of '78 Coup
LEAD: For the last 11 years, the anniversary of the Marxist coup here on April 27, 1978, has been celebrated by a mass parade of troops and tanks.
But this year President Najibullah canceled the parade and marked the anniversary at a 20-minute ceremony, held 36 hours early, in a bunker near his palace.


Wine Distributor Seeks Compensation for Recall
LEAD: The United States distributor of Riunite wines is seeking compensation from the Government for what it says was a mistaken recall of some of its Italian wines that cost the company $39 million.


Weather Warms, and It's Time for Stews
LEAD: STEWS are not just for winter.
Going through some old diaries recently, I came across an entry describing a picnic I had gone on as a child when my father was posted at the British Embassy in Vietnam.
The tropical heat had been even worse than usual and we had taken shelter from the sun in the ruins of a French villa by a beach not far from Saigon.


Illness and Literature
LEAD: To the Editor:


Different Jobs Mean Different Nails
LEAD: HARDWARE and building supply stores carry a wide variety of nails, as anyone who has shopped for them can testify.
The reason is the diversity of building materials; nearly all require nails with specific properties.


New &amp; Noteworthy: Paperbacks
LEAD:
SOMEBODY'S BABY, by Claire Harrison. (Signet, $3.95.) The Beemes, a family of 60's liberals, find it disturbing enough that their 15-year-old daughter is pregnant, but they really hit the roof when she refuses to get an abortion.
Last year our reviewer, Ellen Feldman, said this novel is ''as topical as today's headlines.


Dangerous to Read New Testament for History
LEAD: To the Editor:


Colleen Horan Is Married
LEAD: Colleen M. Horan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Horan of Bethpage, L.I., was married there yesterday to Anthony P. Sofronas, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Sofronas of Little Silver, N.J.
The Rev.
Patrick Hanley officiated at St.
Martin of Tours Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Sofronas, 26 years old, graduated from Villanova University and is an analyst at Morgan Stanley in New York.


Cinderella Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHO'S ON FIRST, ETC.
LEAD:
THE BASEBALL BOOK 1990
By Bill James.
343 pp. New York:
Villard Books. Paper, $12.95.


Weicker's Senate Successor Wins Rapid Prominence
LEAD: When Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut narrowly won election in 1988, it was widely considered a fluke, a victory that reflected a rejection of the three-term Republican incumbent, Lowell P. Weicker Jr., more than widespread support for the state's lesser-known Democratic Attorney General.


Sorry to Get Personal, but. . .
LEAD: It is a matter of concern that after many ups and downs over the years, educational exchange is once again coming on hard times.
Despite rising costs, it appears that the Administration and Congress intend to let stand a flat budget for Fulbright scholarships for the fifth straight year.
In doing so, they will ratify a 23 percent decline in the number of participants over this five-year period.


New Tree-Planting Technique Endorsed
LEAD: SCHOOLCHILDREN, communities and garden clubs have been celebrating Arbor Day since last week.
The day itself is set by each municipality, with local officials choosing a day when the climate suits tree planting.
The founder of Arbor Day, J. Sterling Morton, selected April 27 a century ago as the day for celebration.


That Awful Question At the Store
LEAD: NOW I know what I should have said.
But when the woman approached me, I was too busy studying the barbecued chickens.


Review/Theater;   Body Building and Love In a Comedy by Arrabal
LEAD: When Job, a champion weight lifter who is one of two characters in Fernando Arrabal's allegorical comedy ''The Body Builder's Book of Love,'' hoists a barbell to his chest, he prefers not to concentrate on the mechanics of his sport.
A mystical ascetic who has committed his spirit to an unseen woman named


ON MY MINDThe Case for Berlin
LEAD: What are those soldiers doing, for Heaven's sake, right there on the sidewalk in the center of the East German capital while people from all over the world are looking on?


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Happy Hava Nagila


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Sunday about an agreement to send American military trainers to Peru incorrectly identified the United States Ambassador there.
He is Anthony C. E. Quainton.


Being Counted: How the Estimate Is Made
LEAD: Long after the speeches are over and the grounds are swept up, it is the number of those who turn out for today's anti-abortion rally that will be remembered.


The Naked Truth
LEAD: Men have it bad.
No doubt about it.
Just when they thought it was safe to eat quiche, cry at the movies and go to plastic surgeons for nips and tucks, along come the trustees of the Muckenthaler Cultural Center to tell them it isn't.
The center, in Fullerton, Calif., has pulled a photograph of a naked John Lennon from its show called ''Heroes, Heroines, Idols and Icons.


Wall Street;   In April, the 'Sell' Signals Were Right
LEAD: SeveraL months back, a market forecaster in Chicago named Robert P. Moseson started warning his institutional clients to avoid the stock market during April.
Unless there's a handsome rally tomorrow, it was certainly sound advice.


Different Jobs Mean Different Nails
LEAD: HARDWARE and building supply stores carry a wide variety of nails, as anyone who has shopped for them can testify.
The reason is the diversity of building materials; nearly all require nails with specific properties.


Rarely Heard Wurlitzer
LEAD: Fans of the opulent Brooklyn Paramount Theater will be able to hear its Wurlitzer pipe organ at 3 P.M. today when Hector Olivera presents a pops concert of theater-organ music.
The concert on the four-manual, 2,000-pipe instrument, which is normally submerged beneath the center's floor, will be in the former movie theater, now the Schwartz Athletic Center of Long Island University, at Flatbush and DeKalb Avenues in downtown Brooklyn.


New Beginning at Bridgeport Collapse Site
LEAD: AT least 60 units of housing and a memorial will be built at the site in Bridgeport where 28 workers lost their lives three years ago in New England's worst construction accident.


Jonathan Sapers Weds Ms. Mesch
LEAD: At the First Presbyterian Church in New York, Cristine Allen Mesch, the daughter of Mildred Allen Mesch of New York and Dr.
John Mesch of Albany, was married yesterday to Jonathan Simonds Sapers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Sapers of Brookline, Mass.
The Rev.
Euton E. Williams performed the ceremony.


Cynthia Romaine To Wed in August
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore C. Romaine Jr. of New York have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Cynthia Scherer Romaine and Thomas Garland Milstead 3d, a son of Nancy Hopkins Milstead of Lynchburg, Va., and Mr.
Milstead Jr. of Virginia Beach, Va.


'Die Hard 2' Fights an Uphill Battle
LEAD: Inside Los Angeles International Airport, travelers shake their heads in disbelief.
More than two hundred shopping days remain till Christmas, yet frosted evergreen wreaths deck the halls, poinsettias dot the bustling terminal and a children's choir warbles Christmas carols.
The tourists scurry away, wondering if they've lost track of time, when a voice booms out, ''Action!


Sara Mae Engram, Journalist, Marries
LEAD: Sara Mae Engram, a journalist, married John Fahey Reilly, a building consulant, yesterday.
The Rev.
George Toole officiated at the Towson (Md.) Presbyterian Church.


MEXICO ARRESTS 6 IN ABDUCTION CASE
LEAD: Denouncing the kidnapping of a Mexican doctor wanted in the United States as an example of ''the law of the jungle,'' Mexico's Attorney General has announced the arrest of six people in the case, issued warrants for seven more and said he would call on the United States to extradite any suspects who might have fled across the border.


On Language;   To Wherever In a Handbasket
LEAD: HARRY AND I HAVE been wondering,'' writes Lois Reasoner of Westport, Conn., ''about the origin of the phrase going to hell in a handbasket.
We have heard it used in conversation five times in the past few months.''


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   A Potato Coat for Chicken
LEAD: When foods cooked in potato batter began to appear on menus across the country, chefs never dreamed that this would provide the perfect alternative to the skin on a chicken breast.
But that has been a result.


CHANGES IN TEMPO ON THE PODIUM
LEAD: Over the last year and a half, from Zubin Mehta's announcement of his resignation as music director of the New York Philharmonic until the orchestra's designation the other day of Kurt Masur as his successor, a cloud of pessimism had gathered over New York's orchestral life.


New Marrow for Chernobyl Pilot
LEAD: A Soviet helicopter pilot suffering from radiation poisoning because of his efforts to stem the Chernobyl nuclear disaster underwent a bone marrow transplant here late Friday and is in stable condition today.


Kidnapping Sows Suspicion in Trusting Town
LEAD: Trevor Wetterling and his big brother, Jacob, were nearly inseparable.
Where Jacob went, Trevor followed.
Their parents even looked for activities that the boys could pursue separately, to foster independence.


Campus Life: Chicago;   A Major Imperiled By Popularity And Understaffing
LEAD: A shortage of professors and a growing number of students is leading the University of Chicago to suspend a program started after Watergate called Politics, Economics, Rhetoric and Law.


EXPECTING TO RETURN
LEAD:
RUSSIA ABROAD
A Cultural History of the Russian Emigration, 1919-1939.
By Marc Raeff.
Illustrated. 239 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $29.95.


New Views of Human Intelligence
LEAD: INTELLIGENCE - THE DARK SECRET of American social science and education - is coming out of the closet.
Once intelligence was perceived as a narrow group of mental abilities, those measurable by an I.Q. test.
But according to that view great groups of the population turned out to be not very smart or educable.


Town Without Highways or Boutiques 'Takes Care of Its Own'
LEAD: WARREN is a small town by almost any measure.
Only 1,210 people live there.
The single school has only one class in each grade.
Six shops sit on the short stretch of street that is ''downtown.''


Mr. Cheney, Try Mr. Nunn's Way
LEAD: Defense Secretary Cheney revealed a bit more this week about how he intends to reduce the Pentagon budget.
He announced a cutback in procurement of some new aircraft, like the Stealth bomber.
But he'll have to do more just to meet his own target of reductions of 2 percent a year in 1991 through 1995.


Czech Glassware and Crystal
LEAD: GLASS was made in Bohemia, the northern region of Czechoslovakia, as far back as the time that the country was inhabited by Celts.
Later, in the 8th and 10th centuries, glassmaking flourished in what was then called the Great Moravian Empire.


Q and
LEAD:
Renting French Campers


'Gaia: The Growth of an Idea'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Phone Surcharges
LEAD: To the Editor: A telephone surcharge of $50 was added to my bill while I was a guest at the Aerogolf Sheraton Hotel in Luxembourg.
No notification of a surcharge was posted on the telephone or in the room.


Humbling 60 For Stewart
LEAD: ''I shot 60 on nine holes,'' said Payne Stewart. ''That's pretty impressive, huh?''


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Plenipotent


Mutual Funds;   Time to Test the Country Funds?
LEAD: Single-country funds, the glamour stocks of the closed-end mutual fund group, have taken investors on a dizzying downhill ride since they peaked in mid-January.
But some analysts say the overheated market has finally cooled, leaving good buys for speculators and people who want to fill the high-risk end of portfolios.


Meeting the Needs of Families
LEAD: To the Editor:


Debt to Society
LEAD: Contrite but rich, Michael Milken pleaded guilty last week to less than insider trading but much more than he had admitted to before.
The master of the junk bond universe cried, apologized and said he did cheat clients, rig prices and help friends get around securities and tax laws.
He acknowledged working with others, like Ivan Boesky, who effectively turned him in, but he didn't agree to talk about them.


The Quest for Tickets
LEAD: COMBINING music with travel makes a highly enjoyable vacation, but the success of such a trip depends in large part on planning, especially when attending some of Europe's more popular festivals.
The following addresses are intended to help travelers obtain information, but since in many cases it is too late to get tickets this summer, the guide can be saved for next year.


German Unification Means Taxes for the East
LEAD: If the Government's proposals for monetary and economic union of the two Germanys are adopted, East Germans can expect to find their freshly printed and minted West German marks quickly falling prey to a less pleasant element: taxation.


Campus Life: Stanford;   Students Protest End of Concerts By Grateful Dead
LEAD: Grateful Dead fans rallied last Tuesday on Stanford University's main plaza to protest the university's decision to bar the group from performing two concerts.
The group gathered about 350 signatures on petitions to ''bring back the Dead.''


As Espinoza Excels, Yanks Take 2d in Row
LEAD: His teammates are prejudiced, of course.
They see Alvaro Espinoza play every day and they see the spectacular sometimes become the mundane.
They say he is among the finest shortstops in the game, perhaps even the best.
Espinoza listens and nods.
He does not disagree.


Review/Pop;   Haitian Band Revitalizes Tradition
LEAD: For decades, the popular music of the French Antilles has been suavely understated, carried by the lilt of the Haitian compas direct and the bubbly synthesizers of Martiniquan-Guadeloupean zouk.
Boukman Eksperyans, a nine-member Haitian band that played a brilliant New York debut on Tuesday night at S.O.B.


Question Of the Week;   Should Athletes Accept Money for Autographs?
LEAD: Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig never accepted money for their autographs, and Ted Williams used to privately visit sick children in hospitals for free.
Today's athletes embarrass themselves by accepting money for autographs when real heroes once signed them out of love for the game and for the kids who make it so special.


Harvard Loses Rhythm and Race
LEAD: The disaster that every oarsman fears - the crabbed stroke - struck Harvard today and probably cost the Crimson heavyweight varsity eight a victory against their most formidable foe, Pennsylvania.


Beauty;   MIRROR IMAGE
LEAD: THERE ARE WOMEN WHO carefully compose their faces every morning in daintily lighted makeup mirrors.
They may also be the ones who actually use all the tools in a makeup brush kit, who apply facial masks and hair packs once a week and don't bat an eyelash at cake mascara.
Then there are those who dash on their blusher in a fogged bathroom mirror and check their lipstick in the rear-view mirror of a cab.


THE BABY BOMB
LEAD: The more I read articles such as Carin Rubenstein's ''The Baby Bomb'' (October 8), and the more I try to analyze why my own 19-year marriage (producing four wonderful children) failed, the more I conclude that perhaps one of the most frequent reasons for disintegrating marriages, particularly those with children, is this: we enter marriage and parenting with unrealistic expectations of ourselves, our spouses and our children.


Fashion;   Who Says Summer Has to Be Colorful?
LEAD: The combination of black and white is an attention-getter.
A summer fashion staple, black and white looks especially fresh this year in bold graphic patterns, whether stripes or checks, plaids or polka dots, florals or geometrics.


Derby Love, Same Time Each Year
LEAD: ''You're going to the Kentucky Derby?'' my friend Angles Beltrami asked me a couple of weeks ago. ''What for?
How can you put up with all that aggravation?''


Lebanese Christians Declare a 36-Hour Truce
LEAD: Hundreds of families returned to their town in the Christian heartland northeast of here today, but they were given only 36 hours to inspect their houses, which have been demolished in three months of fighting between Christian army troops and rival militiamen.


Evening Hours;   Saluting Artists and Their Patrons
LEAD: The art world took the spotlight at the week's benefit parties.
On Thursday evening, Artists Space, a stronghold of freedom of expression in the arts, brought out a crowd of 500 for its annual spring fund-raising dinner.


High Silliness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Business Diary: April 22-27
LEAD:
COMPANIES
The Milken Guilty Pleas
It began as a noble enterprise: Open up the credit markets to the daring and the imaginative, the untested companies snubbed by the ossified old firms that rule Wall Street.
Rattle the complacent managers of the bloated corporations those older investment banks count as their clients.


A COLD EYE ON ARAFAT
LEAD:
INSIDE THE PLO
Covert Units, Secret Funds, and the War Against Israel and the United States.
By Neil C. Livingstone and David Halevy, in cooperation with the Ethics and Public Policy Center, Washington.
Illustrated. 336 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $21.95.


Weather Warms, and It's Time for Stews
LEAD: STEWS are not just for winter.
Going through some old diaries recently, I came across an entry describing a picnic I had gone on as a child when my father was posted at the British Embassy in Vietnam.
The tropical heat had been even worse than usual and we had taken shelter from the sun in the ruins of a French villa by a beach not far from Saigon.


2 Attacks in Northern Ireland
LEAD: Two bomb attacks rocked Northern Ireland today after the police warned of a new campaign of violence by the Irish Republican Army.
Mortar bombs were fired at a border checkpoint at Strabane.
In Lisburn, a bomb attached to a lamppost exploded while security forces searched for a car bomb that the I.R.A.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Hockey
Czechs Beat Canadians: Czechoslovakia, fourth in the preliminary round with a 4-3 record, surprised Canada by 3-2 in yesterday's opening medal-round game at the world championships in Bern.
Czechoslovakia was helped by the strong goaltending of Dominik Hasek and two quick first-period goals.


Ludlam's Horror-Comedy, 'Irma Vep,' in Fairfield
LEAD: THE mainstreaming of theater avant-garde goes on with the Boston Post Road Company's well-intentioned production of ''The Mystery of Irma Vep'' by Charles Ludlam, the producer, playwright, director, actor and founder of the Ridiculous Theatrical Company in Greenwich Village, which he led successfully for 20 years and for which he once wrote about the search for a third sex (in ''Bluebeard'') and played what was surely the most poignant


A Prince, His Castle and the Tenants
LEAD: Once upon a time there lived a good prince, but evil men seized him in his castle and threw him in prison.
New men came and released him, but they also turned out to be tyrants.
The prince perished in their prison, his castle fell into ruin and his people became impoverished.


Tech Notes;   Stealth Also Comes in a Cut-Rate Blimp
LEAD: Should Congress balk at financing the half-billion-dollar-each Stealth bomber, maybe lawmakers will look more kindly at the Stealth blimp.


Freedom From Welfare: The Best Hope Yet
LEAD: WHEN the Social Security Act passed Congress in 1935, one section provided for public assistance for the blind, the disabled, the elderly and dependent children.
Public assistance was seen as a temporary measure, until those groups would become covered under Social Security.
As we now know, Aid to Dependent


Hong Kong's 'Hostage' in China Won't Give In
LEAD: Almost everyone wishes he would confess to some counterrevolutionary crime or another, if only to get his sentence reduced, but Liu Shanqing sits in his unheated prison cell in China and obstinately refuses to admit that it was wrong to believe in democracy.


Treatment for Pryor
LEAD: The former world junior-welterweight champion Aaron Pryor has been ordered to undergo two years of treatment for drug abuse.
Pryor entered a no-contest plea to a charge of possessing illegal drug paraphernalia, a pipe used for smoking cocaine, which was found in his car after he was stopped by the police in Cincinnati in September.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Angry Young Britons


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the March of Dimes Walk America fund-raiser, Lexington Avenue from 23d Street to 96th Street will be closed today from 7 A.M. to 2 P.M.


More, Not Less Aid to Afghan Rebels
LEAD: Just a year ago, following the Soviet troop departure, we were counting the days until the mujahedeen took over in Afghanistan.
But so far President Najibullah's staying power has proved far stronger than anyone imagined, bolstered by more than $300 million a month in Soviet economic and military assistance.


Cards' Schedule Draws Criticism
LEAD: The Phoenix Cardinals are drawing heat about their 1990 National Football League schedule.


Review/Jazz;   3 Uncategorizable Bands In Corner Store Festival
LEAD: The Knitting Factory's Corner Store Syndicate Festival, which started on Tuesday night and lasted for three nights, brought together a group of musicians who don't fit any of New York's more rigid musical genres.
This is a good idea: The musicians, who stand somewhere in an uncategorizable zone between straightforward jazz and downtown music, deserve the recognition.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a plan change by the publishers, a review of ''Landscapes of a New Land: Fiction by Latin American Women'' in The Times Book Review today misstates the book's format.
It is available from White Pine Press in paperback only.


Residential Resales
LEAD:
Closings in the week ended April 14
MANHATTAN
Chelsea
$290,000
155 West 15th Street
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar triplex co-op in a loft building; elevator, large windows, southern exposure; maintenance $456, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)


T. P. Malone Weds Miss Linsenmeyer
LEAD: Barbara Mary Linsenmeyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Linsenmeyer of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Bridgetown, Barbados, to Thomas Patrick Malone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis T. Malone of Street, Md.
The Rev.
John Marbaix performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral, assisted by the Rev.


Westhelp Wins But Faces a Delay
LEAD: ANDREW M. CUOMO, builder of transitional housing for homeless families, was speaking only partly in jest last week when he noted that it was just three years ago that he put his proposal to County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke over lunch.


The Space Telescope: A Sign of Intelligent Life
LEAD: IF the human species became extinct tomorrow -wiped out, sad thought, by a lethal virus or a nuclear war or the unwelcome arrival of a giant comet from the Oort Cloud - and extraterrestrials who came to investigate the disaster began by examining Earth's satellites to learn about the creatures who once ruled the blue planet below, what would they find?


HEROES OF THE LANDSCAPE


Different Jobs Mean Different Nails
LEAD: HARDWARE and building supply stores carry a wide variety of nails, as anyone who has shopped for them can testify.
The reason is the diversity of building materials; nearly all require nails with specific properties.


TV Transforms Crucial California Race
LEAD: California has long been a laboratory for observing the impact of television on politics, but rarely have the medium's power and its limits as a political tool been made so clear as in the race for governor here.


Fan Salutes SUNY's Axtell
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Carol A. von Glahn Weds Eric C. Hussar
LEAD: At the Wyoming Presbyterian Church in Millburn, N.J., Carol A. von Glahn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore A. von Glahn of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday by the Rev.
Ronald W. Johnson to Eric C. Hussar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Hussar of Lancaster, Pa.


Indians' Ancient Cavern Is Defaced for a Movie
LEAD: Film makers defaced a limestone cavern in the Mojave Desert by painting Indian pictographs on the rock for a scene in an Oliver Stone movie on the late singer Jim Morrison, park rangers say.


Priscilla Rea Bride Of James Timpson
LEAD: Priscilla Rea and James Timpson were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in Manhattan.
The Rev.
John Stubbs performed the ceremony.


Optimistic Forecast For Shore
LEAD: LOCAL and state tourism officials, real-estate agents and merchants say they are expecting a better summer season at the Jersey Shore this year than last year.


The Bottom Line on Air Fares: Where Is It?
LEAD: WHAT happens when a traveler buys an air ticket and then, before the day of the flight, sees an advertisement for the same ticket on the same airline at a much lower price?


Amy Leib, University Aide, Engaged To Mark C. Alexander, Law Student
LEAD: A June wedding is planned by Amy Jill Leib, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Leib of North Lauderdale, Fla., and Mark Clifford Alexander, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford L. Alexander Jr. of Washington.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
'CLARA'


Boston Massacre: Knicks Lose Historically
LEAD: The Boston Celtics' long playoff history is filled with many great moments.


Deanna Aftab to Marry
LEAD: Shirley H. Hammond of Holmdel, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter Deanna L. Aftab to Jeffrey S. Guy, the son of Lynda Guy-Dunhoff of Warren, Ohio, and Morris E. Guy of Lisbon, Ohio.
Miss Aftab, a Vassar College graduate, is also the daughter of Mansur Tolu Aftab of Hollywood, Fla.
She and her fiance, a graduate of Kent State University, are 25 years old and students at the Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine.


Letters;   BLACK STUDIES' NEW STAR
LEAD: I do not understand why people like Professor Gates and Toni Morrison, who earnestly proclaim commitment to the advancement of their race, hang around universities like Princeton, Cornell and Duke, where scarcely a black can be found.


Statistics Say It Too Well: All Our Children Need Our Support
LEAD: JUST a few weeks ago, I had the joyous experience of sitting in Yale-New Haven Hospital holding my newborn grandson in my arms.
He was just 12 hours old, my fifth grandchild.
I thought, how lucky this beautiful little boy is.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A Streetscapes column on April 8 about the Bronx Borough Hall erred in stating that the restoration of its grand staircase would cost $711,000.
That figure is for the entire project, including landscaping.
Work on the staircase alone will cost $175,000.


Duncan and Sabo Power Reds to a 6-4 Victory
LEAD: Mariano Duncan and Chris Sabo hit home runs to help unbeaten Jack Armstrong gain his fourth victory today, rallying the Cincinnati Reds to a 6-4 triumph over the Montreal Expos.


Firefighters Stop to Help Victims in a Brawl
LEAD: Firefighters who happened upon a street brawl in Brooklyn used hooks and crowbars to hold off the mob as they tried to treat a man who had been stabbed, Fire Department officials said yesterday.


SHUTTLE LANDING IS PLANNED TODAY
LEAD: Still buoyant over their historic deployment of the Hubble Space Telescope, five astronauts prepared today to end their five-day shuttle flight with a landing Sunday morning, weather permitting.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
Tour Operators Act to Protect Clients' Money


John W. Jorgensen, Executive, 64
LEAD: John W. Jorgensen, who retired this month as president and chief executive of the Earle M. Jorgensen Company, a California-based steel and aluminum distributor and processor, died of cancer on Friday at his home in San Marino, Calif.
He was 64 years old.


Women's Sports And a Question
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


To the Editor:
LEAD: Anatole Broyard's essay is a touching and provocative disclosure of his experience of serious illness and the literature related to it.
All my best wishes go out to him.
Readers might also recall two works by May Sarton, the poet and novelist whose journalistic writings have had tremendous appeal, especially to people who cherish independence and savoir-vivre.


Campus Life: Wellesley;   Recycling Program Aims to Involve Entire Community
LEAD: Wellesley College started a recycling program this month intended to involve all members of the college community.


Man Says He Put Dead Friend Outside His E. 68th St. House
LEAD: The police were awaiting autopsy results yesterday after a man said he had left the body of a friend outside his brownstone on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.


AMERICA TACKLES THE PESTICIDE CRISIS
LEAD: ''America Tackles the Pesticide Crisis'' has a nice sensational title that will surely garner readers who didn't realize we had a crisis.
Before synthetic agri-chemicals, one farmer was able to feed about 18 people; now, with the help of these chemicals, he can feed about 80.
Who would have fed them if farmers hadn't changed the way they grow food?


Food Allergies: A Growing Controversy
LEAD: SEVEN-YEAR-OLD JOSEPH'S ENTIRE face swells if he merely has a peanut in his mouth.
Should he accidentally eat one he could die, the result, his mother says, of her having ''lived'' on peanut butter sandwiches when she was nursing him.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Taking a Vicarious Ride on the Wind
LEAD: Kite fliers may be kids at heart, but it is difficult to dismiss the sport as just kids' stuff anymore.


World Markets;   Beware These A.D.R. Pitfalls
LEAD: One of the easiest ways for American investors to invest in foreign stock markets is through American Despository Receipts, or A.D.R.'s.
With the rising attraction of global investing, these receipts are growing in popularity.
But investors can face problems.
Fees on A.D.R.'s can diminish their dividends, and investors can have trouble selling them or getting information on the company whose stock they represent.


It's the Final Finale for Broadway's Longest Running Musical


WHY ST. PAUL'S CATHEDRAL IS NO BETTER THAN IT IS
LEAD: Architects frustrated by the process of building large public projects today can take heart from the exhibition ''Sir Christopher Wren and the Legacy of St.
Paul's Cathedral,'' which will be on view until July 8 at the Octagon, the Federal mansion that is a part of the headquarters complex of the American Institute of


New Tree-Planting Technique Endorsed
LEAD: SCHOOLCHILDREN, communities and garden clubs have been celebrating Arbor Day since last week.
The day itself is set by each municipality, with local officials choosing a day when the climate suits tree planting.
The founder of Arbor Day, J. Sterling Morton, selected April 27 a century ago as the day for celebration.


The Trick Of Growing Older
LEAD: NOT LONG AGO, A MIDDLE-AGED friend with a bit of a bohemian streak stopped sleeping on a mattress on the floor and bought a regular bed.
The reason: when he woke up in the morning his stiff and creaky joints had begun to make it difficult for him to get up off the floor.
Now sleeping in a normal bed gave him a 20-inch head start.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: One of the most interesting tournaments of the year was played in mid-April in Taipei, Taiwan.
It produced one of the most interesting deals of the year.


Technology;   Molar Movies and Other Dentists' Aids
LEAD: Lights, camera, open wide!
The ongoing miniaturization of video technology is bringing tiny cameras into the dentist's office and right into a patient's mouth.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Personal income and spending for March.
New home sales for March.
I.B.M., Boeing and Berkshire Hathaway annual meetings.
TUESDAY: Construction spending for March.
WEDNESDAY: Leading economic indicators for March.
Manufactured goods orders for March.
OPEC's pricing committee holds an emergency meeting.


CRIME
LEAD: ''Women weren't safe in this town,'' snaps Shirley McClintock, thinking about the bigots and bankers and religious fanatics who keep trying to tell her how to live and what to think.
That's why the 55-year-old widow - the offbeat heroine of B. J. Oliphant's dandy first mystery, DEAD IN THE SCRUB (Fawcett, Paper, $3.95) - sticks to her


Illness and Literature
LEAD: To the Editor:


Caryl Churchill, Ex-Ideologue, Trusts to Luck
LEAD: ''I do take a little pleasure in discussing my plays, but it's a dangerous pleasure,'' says Caryl Churchill, one of the most inventive British playwrights of her generation. ''I don't want to think too much about myself; I would rather think about the things I'm thinking about.
If I have too much of a view of myself, or if I think too much of what other people think of my work, then it can get in my way.


Pop Music's Romance With the Past
LEAD: ''My Romance,'' Carly Simon's plush new album of popular standards by Rodgers and Hart, Dietz and Schwartz and others, is the latest welcome addition to a growing list of records released in the last several years that revive a pre-rock style that had been dormant for more than a decade.


FLOWER POWER
LEAD: Flower arranging is as subject to changing times and tastes as skirt lengths on Seventh Avenue. ''Everything runs in cycles,'' says Tom Pritchard, an owner of Pure Madderlake, the Manhattan flower shop. ''The 80's were all about surface and glitz.
Elaborate, overblown flower arrangements were de rigeur.


Nancy Dunn and Steven Grune Wed
LEAD: The Stanley Congregational Church in Chatham, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Nancy Ellen Dunn, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James Dunn of Summit, N.J., and Steven Bryan Grune, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Grune of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Gilbert Harttree performed the ceremony.


G, PG, R and X: Make the Letter Reflect the Spirit
LEAD: There's a new film that depicts the gnawing and disemboweling of corpses, the mutilation of a severed head and the aftermath of a killing in which the gun-wielding perpetrator is invited to dip his hand in the victim's blood.
But the killer in this last instance is a 13-year-old boy.
The victim is a water buffalo.


FLYING APART IN AUSTRALIA
LEAD:
THE WOMAN AT THE WINDOW
By Marian Eldridge.
185 pp. St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia:
University of Queensland Press/
International Specialized Book Services,
5602 Northeast Hassalo St., Portland, Ore. 97213.
Paper, $12.95.


Miss Melloy Wed To A. W. Gould
LEAD: St.
Joseph's on the Brandywine Roman Catholic Church in Wilmington, Del., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Anne Marie Melloy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Melloy of Wilmington, and Alexander Whitman Gould, a son of Josephine Wilkinson-Gould of Bailey's Bay, Bermuda, and Boston, and Edwin Jay Gould of New York and Palm Beach, Fla.


Pastimes: Gardening;   Designed for a Walk in the Woods


Letter Said to Show Waldheim as Early Pro-Nazi
LEAD: The Justice Department says a newly obtained document shows that President Kurt Waldheim of Austria was a supporter of the Nazi movement during his college days in Vienna, before he joined the German Army.


A Rare Gesture Of Protest
LEAD: To some, the Harvard Law School represents a noble fortress poised to withstand the tides of rapid change.
To others, it is merely the problem, not the solution.
One insider, the school's first tenured black professor, has now set his own boat upon the tide.
Derrick Bell, a member of the faculty since 1969, has requested an unpaid leave of a year or more to protest a conspicuous absence:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I am trying to fasten a fairly large hook to a hollow-core door.
I have tried plastic anchors and plastic toggles, and in both cases they loosened because the plywood or veneer covering the hollow core is quite thin and not very firm.
Any suggestions?


Letters;   BUSH'S CABINET
LEAD: Article II, Section 1 of the Constitution, as modified by the 12th Amendment, requires that Presidential electors, meeting in their respective states, ''vote by ballot for President and Vice President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same State with themselves. . . .'' This means that the Texas electors could vote either for Bush or Baker but not for both.


Lauren S. Aaron and Barry A. Fishbach Marry
LEAD: Lauren Sue Aaron, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Aaron of Roslyn, L.I., was married in New York last evening to Barry Alan Fishbach, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron Fishbach of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi James Prosnit performed the ceremony at Temple Rodeph Sholom.
A cum laude graduate of Lehigh University, the bride, who is 26 years old, is the promotion manager for the Thomas Regional Directory publishing company in New York.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Larchmont, N.Y.
$414,700
37 Concord Avenue
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 65-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $6,611.
Pound Ridge, N.Y.
$300,000
West Lane
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; 4 fireplaces, library, wraparound porch, bar, deck, patio; taxes $5,679.


Robert Graves Avenged
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Man Who Helped Define Choral Music
LEAD: There are connoisseurs of choruses for whom the name of David Willcocks is still inseparable from the famed King's College Choir of England's Cambridge University.
Never mind that Mr.
Willcocks - Sir David, since 1977 - gave up conducting the Cambridge choir as long ago as 1974; that he spent a distinguished decade at the helm of London's Royal College of Music; that he's had parallel careers as music director of London's Bach


African National Congress Reaches Out a Little for Negotiators
LEAD: When the African National Congress announced its delegation for preliminary talks with the Government next week, the lineup offered more than a few surprises.


Freedom From Pain
LEAD: PAST MIDNIGHT.
THE DAYTIME scurry along hospital corridors and the bustle in surgical patients' rooms at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J., have died down.


GRANNY GOES FOR IT
LEAD:
THE VARIETY ARTISTES
By Tom Wakefield.
192 pp. St. Paul:
Serpent's Tail/Consortium Book Sales.
Paper, $10.95.


A Busload of Students Eagerly Joins the Rally
LEAD: Strumming guitars, singing folk tunes from the 1960's and waving banners that read ''Abortion: the Ultimate Child Abuse,'' a busload of New Yorkers, mainly students from Columbia University, arrived in the capital this morning eager to take a stance in the battle over abortion.


THE WORLD BY THE LIGHT OF THE SEA
LEAD:
PLAYING WITH WATER
Passion and Solitude on a Philippine Island.
By James Hamilton-Paterson.
282 pp. New York:
New Amsterdam Books. Paper, $11.95. Cloth, $19.95.


At Last, Edmonton Is Whole Again
LEAD: The month of May can be an intriguing time in Edmonton, Alberta, the northernmost outpost of major league sports in North America.
The late-spring sunshine glows softly in the sky until deep into the evening, giving the place an eerie feeling of early summer.
Conversely, the northern location means you shouldn't put away your winter boots too soon.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I am trying to fasten a fairly large hook to a hollow-core door.
I have tried plastic anchors and plastic toggles, and in both cases they loosened because the plywood or veneer covering the hollow core is quite thin and not very firm.
Any suggestions?


Public's Last Say On David's Island Plan
LEAD: THE public got its last chance last week to testify on the proposed residential development of David's Island, a $1 billion project that supporters say could bring economic prosperity to New Rochelle and opponents say could bring environmental ruin to Long Island Sound.


Gorbachev Meets With Assad
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and President Hafez al-Assad of Syria met today and asserted that United States policies were an obstacle to Middle East peace, the official news agency Tass reported.
In their talks, Mr.
Assad raised the issue of emigration of Soviet Jews to Israel.
Tass said any problems caused by emigration must be solved in the context ''of the rights of the Arabs and not just of human rights.


200 Aliens Seeking Asylum Could Be Paroled in a Test
LEAD: About 200 aliens now held in custody as they seek asylum here could be paroled in an experiment set to begin this week in New York and other cities.


Latin America Develops a Longing For Aid and Investment From Japan
LEAD: TO impress Japanese investors, Brazil's President-elect performed karate kicks before photographers while in Tokyo in January.
To master the Japanese language, the children of Mexico's President attend a bilingual school in Mexico City.
And to win votes, the front-runner in Peru's presidential campaign has declared that his Japanese ancestry will help his nation attract $3 billion in aid and investment from


When Is a Pennysaver a Pennysaver?
LEAD: THIS WEEK is history.
The free weekly shopping newspaper, which is delivered to Long Island driveways in a plastic bag, announced recently that it would no longer be This Week, and thereby hangs a tale in the rough and tumble Long Island advertising market.


Knicks Appear to Be in Pieces
LEAD: The Knicks spent all season concentrating on becoming a better half-court team, both offensively and defensively.
Maybe they will improve next season.
Because it appears that this season is about to end for the Knicks.


Concern Rises Over the Cost Of Statehood for Puerto Rico
LEAD: Although supporters say legislation authorizing Puerto Ricans to decide the status of their commonwealth is likely to pass the Senate this year, there is growing concern in Congress over the potential costs of statehood.


A Double Bill at Westchester Opera
LEAD: IT isn't an X-rated movie that is trying to entice customers with promises of ''two magnificent hours of lust, intrigue and madness,'' not to mention ''opium, adultery and murder.'' That's the advertisement for the Westchester Opera's double bill: ''Cavalleria Rusticana'' and ''L'Oracolo.''


EVOLUTION IN EUROPE: Arms and Germany;   Allies Focus on What Atom Weapons Should Be Based There After Unity
LEAD: As Germany moves closer to reunification, the question of what kinds of nuclear weapons should be based there has begun to play a pivotal role in strategic talks among the Western allies.
The issue, American and


The Bravura of Rossini's City
LEAD: OF all Italy's regions, one of the least known - except for its beaches - is the Marches, which extends inland from the Adriatic through increasingly severe hills and steeper, more jagged valleys to the Apennines, beyond which lie Florence, Rome, and the familiar Italy of postcards and home movies.


James Denton Wed to Amy Campbell
LEAD: Amy Witter Campbell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas Campbell Jr. of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to James Turner Denton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Denton Jr. of Allendale, N.J.
The Rev.
Terence L. Elsberry performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.


2 Stars Soar in Updated 'Handy Dandy'
LEAD: AUDRA LINDLEY and James Whitmore (and James Whitmore and Audra Lindley) are doing remarkable transforming work in ''Handy Dandy'' at the George Street Playhouse through May 13.
Why, the two stars, in either order, are even conspiring to make one believe that ''Handy Dandy'' is a good play.


Lithuania Pays the Price And Acquires a Stoicism
LEAD: By squeezing Lithuania's economic lifeline, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev may have brought his conflict with the errant republic closer to compromise, but many Lithuanians say his embargo has had another, unintended effect: the quick maturing of an independent Lithuania.


Jonathan B. Clark Weds Alice Smith
LEAD: At St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien, Conn., Alice Van Buren Smith was married yesterday to Jonathan Bruce Clark.
The Rev.
Frederick Bender performed the ceremony.


Mistrial Declared in Case of Congressman
LEAD: A mistrial was declared Friday in the bank fraud trial of Representative Harold E. Ford after the jury said it was hopelessly deadlocked.


Cibes's Gambl On Income Tax Frames Debate
LEAD: REPRESENTATIVE WILLIAM J. CIBES Jr., co-chairman of the General Assembly's tax writing committee and a Democratic candidate for governor, says the end is near for Connecticut's tax system.


Choruses Choose the Uncommon
LEAD: IF symphonic programming frequently seems to be in a rut, large choirs even more rarely depart from the standard repertory.
Not so next weekend, though, when three 20th-century masterpieces are on the singing schedule.


Karen Peterson, Lawyer, Engaged
LEAD: June wedding plans for Karen Louise Peterson and Gerald Louis Sauer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marion Sauer of St.
Louis, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent Peterson of Kailua, Hawaii.


Worker Dies in a 5-Story Fall
LEAD: A workman was killed yesterday when he fell five stories from scaffolding at a building in Queens, the police said.
The man, Raymond Ankiewicz, 56 years old, of Woodbridge, N.J., was on a wooden platform being raised by two other workers at 24-16 Queens Plaza South in Long Island City about 10:35 A.M.


Now, Milken The Investor Is Tarnished
LEAD: Mike Milken is a crook. That he now admits. But is he also a poor investor?


Focus Shifts to '92 Cup at Last
LEAD: The New York court's ruling last week to award the America's Cup to the San Diego Yacht Club has set the wheels spinning for a May 1992 event in San Diego.


Video Art by Blacks
LEAD: Works made during the last 15 years by black video artists will be shown at the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, today and on May 13, 20 and 27 and June 3.
The programs are being shown in conjunction with the museum's new exhibition, ''Facing History: The Black Image in American Art, 1710-1940, and each includes several works that address such issues as cultural expression, the civil-rights movement and American blacks' relationship to Africa.


Q and A
LEAD:
Noisy Air-Conditioner


Dangerous to Read New Testament for History;   Slow Christianizing
LEAD: To the Editor:


A NEW POOL OF TALENT
LEAD: AFTER THE PLANE TOUCHED DOWN AT CLEVELAND HOPKINS Airport, six young black athletes straightened their blue-and-gold team parkas and started toward the baggage claim area.
As they strode through the corridor with their parents and coach, a black woman squinted from behind the Avis counter at the ''PDR Swimming'' insignia on their backs and hustled out to catch them.


AMERICA TACKLES THE PESTICIDE CRISIS
LEAD: It is an enormous pleasure for those of us who have argued against the lousy way we grow food to find articles like ''America Tackles the Pesticide Crisis'' (October 8, 1989), by Susan Gilbert.
For the Federal Government to publish reports saying that the agri-chemical ways not only poison us, but aren't effective or cost-efficient, is a cause for great wonder among people who have been saying that for decades.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Tenera L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tenera L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,300,000
10,400,000
Net inc
1,200,000
1,000,000
Share earns
.13
.11
Shares outst
9,227,040
9,141,422
Share earnings are in units.


Radio Ship With a Message For China Is Out of Contact
LEAD: The Goddess of Democracy, a radio ship that intends to broadcast pro-democracy programs to China next month, failed for a fifth day today to make radio contact and organizers said they were worried.


Will Staying Active Keep Knicks Alive?
LEAD: With 2-year-old Maurice Jr. trailing behind in stocking feet after misplacing his shoes, Maurice Cheeks arrived at the airport, just missing a 7 o'clock flight to New York on Saturday night.


Vincent McCorry, 80, Jesuit Retreat Leader
LEAD: The Rev.
Vincent P. McCorry, a Jesuit priest who led spiritual retreats around the nation, died of cancer on Friday at the infirmary of the Fordham University campus in the Bronx.
He was 80 years old and lived at the Jesuit Retreat House in Auriesville, N.Y.


Gay-Rights Groups Rally for Legislation
LEAD: More than 1,000 lesbians and gay men from across New York rallied at the state Capitol yesterday, calling for more protection from hate crimes and bias.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Romanian Nuclear Sale
Romania said its previous Government sent heavy water, used in making nuclear arms, to India.
Page A9.
Changes in NATO Are Urged
East Germany's new Prime Minister called for changes in the ''structure and strategy'' of NATO.
Page A8.
Two Youths Killed in Bronx


Lindberg Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lindberg Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
19,311,986
21,316,207
Net inc
b696,584
942,345
Share earns
.15
.20
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $209,000 from the sale of the company's Canadian subsidiary.


Czechoslovakia-I.M.F.
LEAD: Czechoslovakia expects to join the International Monetary Fund and World Bank by the time the groups hold their annual meeting in September, the Czech Finance Minister, Vaclav Klaus, said last week.
He said no decision had been made on what borrowing Czechoslovakia would need as it moves to reform its economy.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-9
A Japanese computer initiative, organized by the Government, will focus on mastering a highly promising advanced computer technology in which the United States now holds a substantial lead.
Page A1


Lamson &amp; Sessions Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lamson &amp; Sessions Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
75,221,000
87,252,000
Net inc
265,000
3,385,000
Share earns
.02
.27
Shares outst
13,213,000
11,920,000


Telecom USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telecom USA Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
209,901,000
161,929,000
Net inc
8,628,000
9,207,000
Share earns
.30
.32
The company said net income and earnings per share comparisons were negatively impacted by an increase in the company's effective tax rate from 36 percent in the first quarter of 1989 to 41 percent in the current quarter.


Black Audience For Networks
LEAD: ''If you're trying to target blacks, network television is a very efficient way to do it,'' said Steve Sternberg, the vice president and manager of broadcast research at Bozell.


Hearns Retains Title With the Usual Twists
LEAD: Throughout a career dating to 1977, Thomas Hearns has had a knack of confounding form.


Selas Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selas Corp. of America (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
16,216,000
8,215,000
Net inc
1,268,000
373,000
Share earns
.56
.17
Shares outst
2,278,000
2,209,000


Cordis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cordis Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
43,925,000
36,721,000
Net inc
2,372,000
b5,843,000
Share earns
.18
-
9mo sales
117,544,000
103,545,000
Net inc
6,194,000
b4,101,000
Share earns
.46
-


Washington Gas Light reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Gas Light (NYSE)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
736,370,000
721,041,000
Net inc
49,084,000
43,328,000
Share earns
2.47
2.35
Shares outst
19,335,000
17,892,000


United Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Industrial (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
61,987,000
68,948,000
Net inc
3,363,000
b2,923,000
Share earns
.26
-
b-Net loss and included a non-cash charge of $6,595,000 from a court settlement.


At Rye High, Doing Good to Do Well
LEAD: At Rye High School, only do-gooders get diplomas.
And virtually everyone is a do-gooder.
To graduate, students are required to perform 60 hours of community service over their four years.


Michael Shawn, 45, a Director And Choreographer for Broadway
LEAD: Michael Shawn, a director and choreographer, died of complications from AIDS on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 45 years old and lived in Manhattan.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Nixon Seeks Lesson From His Mistakes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Calgon Carbon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calgon Carbon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
63,540,000
59,520,000
Net inc
b7,210,000
7,890,000
Share earns
.36
.39
b-After an extraordinary charge of $1,240,000 which resulted from the repayment of the remaining debt incurred in the management led buy out of the company in April 1985.


Howls of Protest as Korean Stocks Plunge
LEAD: After a three-year boom in which average share prices rose 78 percent annually, the realization that investors could also lose money in the stock market has upset many South Korean investors.


COMMUNIST IS BACK TO PRESS PRETORIA
LEAD: In his first public appearance in this country in nearly three decades, Joe Slovo, the head of South Africa's Communist Party, said that apartheid would be perpetuated under another name unless the Government agrees to majority rule and a redistribution of wealth and land.


Jennifer Donohoe Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Jennifer Louise Donohoe, a daughter of Mrs.
B.
Duncan Hubley of Wayne, Pa., and John J. Donohoe of Philadelphia, to Dr.
Michael Astion, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian Astion of Clifton, N.J., took place yesterday.
Mayor William E. Neis of Doylestown, Pa., officiated at the Evermay inn in Erwinna,


Southdown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southdown Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
129,000,000
130,200,000
Net inc
6,300,000
b7,000,000
Share earns
.28
.33
Shares outst
17,200,000
16,600,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $3,300,000, or 20 cents a share.


CRSS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CRSS Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
125,544,000
149,220,000
Net inc
4,572,000
3,581,000
Share earns
.31
.30
Shares outst
14,790,000
12,104,000
9mo rev
391,398,000
461,783,000
Net inc
13,305,000
8,287,000
Share earns
.99
.68
Shares outst
13,473,000
12,208,000


Monique Shire Is a Bride
LEAD: Monique Francine Shire and Mark Robert Slap were married yesterday at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club by Rabbi Barnett Brickner.
Mrs.
Slap, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Shire of Scarsdale, N.Y., graduated from Wheaton College and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
She is a vice president of Maurice Shire Inc., a New York import-export company owned by her father.


Reviews/Music;   Showcase for Vocalism Of Ronstadt of the 80's
LEAD: In the 1970's Linda Ronstadt was the epitome of California pop-rock, lending her voice to carefully chosen ballads and rockers, new songs and oldies.
Through the 1980's until last year, when she released ''Cry Like a Rainstorm, Howl Like the Wind'' (Elektra), she devoted herself to anything but rock, performing pop standards (with full orchestra), Gilbert and Sullivan, opera and mariachi songs.


Wanted: L.I. Starter Home for $150,000
LEAD: When they got married three years ago, Nick and Denise Carone dreamed of buying a house and having four children.
Mrs.
Carone, now 26 years old, would quit work and be a full-time mother; Mr.
Carone, 34, would support the family on his salary doing technical maintenance for the Grumman Corporation.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week will be limited to the bill market beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of new one-year bills on Thursday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Basically you want to be left alone with your loved ones.
It's tiring to have the phone ring constantly, not to be able to step out the front door without a camera crew waiting.
You become a hostage again.
It's not right and it's not fair.''
-David Jacobsen, on the aftermath of being freed from captivity in the Middle East.


Fiserv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fiserv Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
44,441,000
39,068,000
Net inc
3,141,000
2,602,000
Share earns
.37
.31


Wagner Didn't Advocate Violence in 'Ring'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carrying Memory's Shackles, Ex-Hostages Explore Freedom
LEAD: Benjamin Weir felt awkward in his sandals and ragged beard.
David Jacobsen felt angry at his captors, at the press, at the world.
Lawrence Martin Jenco just wanted to look out the window, hungry to see the earth and the sky and the trees.


Repeal the Fourth Of July
LEAD: The following message, dated August 1776, has somewhat anachronistically been released to the world media.
It was addressed to colonials in America who had just issued their provocative and untimely declaration of independence.


After 15 Years (15!), 'A Chorus Line' Ends
LEAD: In an evening filled with joy and sadness, nostalgia and celebration, a capacity audience of 1,500 said farewell on Saturday night to ''A Chorus Line'' as the curtain came down at the Shubert Theater for the 6,137th and final time on the longest-running show in Broadway history.


All the Arms Talks: Where They Stand as the Summit Nears
LEAD: Despite some small signs of progress recently, negotiations on the first reduction in long-range nuclear arms are moving slowly and are complicating preparations for what President Bush has called his ''arms control summit,'' Administration officials say.


Review/Television;   Uncertainties May Lurk In 'Twin Peaks' Future
LEAD: When last spotted - in their regular ABC time slot of Thursdays at 9 P.M. - the folks over at ''Twin Peaks'' were clearly as determined as ever to go down as the most bizarrely compelling collection of characters ever to hit prime time.


Hawaii Congressman Named To Matsunaga's Senate Seat
LEAD: Representative Daniel K. Akaka of Hawaii has been appointed to fill the seat of Senator Spark Matsunaga, who died on April 15.


2 Teen-Agers Shot to Death In the Bronx
LEAD: A Bronx teen-ager, apparently angry over a slight to a girlfriend, lured four other teen-agers into a schoolyard Saturday night and opened fire on them with an automatic pistol, killing two and wounding two, the police said yesterday.


An Inmate on Work Release Is Seized in a Fatal Shooting
LEAD: A 26-year-old prison inmate at liberty on a work-release program shot a man to death Saturday evening after an argument on a Brooklyn street, the police said yesterday.


In Magazine Publishing, Gloom but Not Doom
LEAD: Joseph J. Hanson, the publisher of Folio and Publishing News, has an analogy for the current state of the magazine business.


CXR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CXR Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,600,000
11,300,000
Net inc
124,000
581,000
Share earns
.02
.08
9mo rev
25,917,000
30,119,000
Net loss
b1,216,000
c1,739,000
Share earns
-
.24


Books of The Times;   At the Silent Heart Of a Family in Pain
LEAD:
Family Pictures
By Sue Miller
389 pages. Harper &amp; Row. $19.95.


Moniterm Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moniterm Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,417,000
7,250,000
Net inc
151,000
b390,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Environmental Safety reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Safety
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,320,000
1,942,000
Net inc
b64,000
b682,000
Share earns
.02
.23
b-After income from discontinued operations of $1,337,000, or 45 cents a share for the latest year and $1,054,000, or 35 cents a share for the year-earlier period.


Track Bias Still Trails Mister Frisky
LEAD: SINCE 1875, 1,370 thoroughbred horses have run in 115 Kentucky Derbies.
Some were the greatest champions the sport has ever known.
Not one of them, though, came to town with as good a record as Mister Frisky will carry onto the track this Saturday for the 116th Derby.


Penguin Emerges as the Top Candidate to Acquire Grove
LEAD: The Penguin Group has emerged as the new favorite to buy Grove Weidenfeld since Simon &amp; Schuster withdrew from bidding for the troubled New York publisher last week.


Courtney C. Brown, 85, Is Dead; Columbia Business School Dean
LEAD: Courtney C. Brown, dean emeritus of Columbia University's Graduate School of Business, died of a stroke Saturday at the Brandywine Nursing Home in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
He was 85 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of April 29, 1990:
MONDAY
Allied-Signal Inc
Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co
Armstrong World Inds Inc
Foster Wheeler Corp
Baker Fentress &amp; Co
Kennametal Inc
Boeing Inc
Phiadelphia Subn Corp
Consol Freightways Inc
Wendys Intl Inc
TUESDAY
Burnham Pac Pptys Inc
Kansas Pwr &amp; Lt
Diamond Shamrock Inc
Koger Pptys Inc
Emerson Elec Co
Lafarge Corp
Georgia Pac Corp
Liberty Corp S C
Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubr Co
McDonald &amp; Co Invts Inc
IE Inds Inc
Monarch Mach Tool Co
Kansas City Pwr &amp; Lt
Monarch Mach


Heritage Media Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Media Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
48,043,000
20,761,000
Net loss
b4,106,000
6,681,000
Shares outst
40,878,000
19,354,000
b-Included a pre-tax gain from the early extinguishment of debt of $2,237,000.


Dole, the G.O.P. and Israel: How Much Criticism Is Too Much?
LEAD: The Senate's Republican leader, Bob Dole, has provoked a sharp and emotional debate within his own party about how far supporters of Israel should go in prodding its Government to commit itself to the Middle East peace process.


In Boston, an Example Of Service and Diversity
LEAD: On the wall of the headquarters of City Year, a youth service program here, hangs a copy of an American Indian prayer: ''Great spirit, grant that I shall not criticize my brother or sister until I have walked a mile in their moccasins.''


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
The Japanese Government is developing plans to organize an industrial effort to master a highly promising advanced computer technology in which the U.S. now holds a substantial lead.
The technology is known as massively parallel processing, in which tens of thousands of independent processors are combined in a single machine to solve problems in recognizing images, translating spoken languages and tracking everything from giant gene pools to incoming missiles.


Sprague Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sprague Technologies (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
84,400,000
106,300,000
Net inc
1,400,000
b100,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Included a loss of $500,000 from discontinued operations.
Sales for 1989 included $12.8 million in revenue from the company's ceramic capacitor and fil-mag operations which were placed as businesses held for sale as of July 1, 1989, and $10.9 million from a reporting change that included four months of foreign operations in the first quarter.


Hutchinson Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hutchinson Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 25
1990
1989
Sales
30,500,000
19,628,000
Net inc
1,521,000
b3,611,000
Share earns
.38
-
6mo sales
56,765,000
45,776,000
Net inc
2,337,000
b4,262,000
Share earns
.59
-


Saying Drug Gang Is Broken, New Haven Police Arrest 15
LEAD: Fifteen members of the Arch Street Gang, a group believed to be the main source of drug dealing in one neighborhood here, have been arrested, the police said.


Dial and Cheer
LEAD: MANY are the times when a sports fan far from home would give almost anything to hear, say, Johnny Most broadcast even part of a Boston Celtics game or Harry Caray chronicle the doings of the Cubs.
That day may be upon us thanks to a new concept called cable radio that utilizes radio broadcasts and the telephone.


Washington Priest Took Church Funds, Newspaper Reports
LEAD: The Rev.
George A. Stallings Jr., who broke from the Catholic Church here last year to form an African-American church, had a relationship with a man whom he put on the payroll of his former church, a published report said today.


Foote, Cone Seeks a Link With Japan
LEAD: DURING the Korean War, Norman W. Brown spent two years in Japan cracking codes as an Air Force intelligence officer.
Now, Mr.
Brown, the chairman and chief executive of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, is using his knowledge of East Asia to find a partner in the booming Japanese advertising market.


Beirut Captors Say They Will Free Second American;   Bush Hopeful but Cautious
LEAD: President Bush expressed hope that the pledge to release Mr.
Reed would prove true, but declined to say more.


Stora Paper Deal
LEAD: The Swedish paper company Stora A.B. said it would acquire Feldmuehle Nobel A.G., a West German paper and armaments concern, for four billion marks, or about $2.38 billion.
Stora's president, Bo Berggren, said, ''We are taking a decisive step in the creation of a very good forestry industrial structure.


At 35, Washington Is Still in Demand
LEAD: When the season turns to September, Claudell Washington will turn 36 years old.
But the newest Yankee, who is actually an old face returning to the Bronx, is still regarded as a capable hitter and outfielder.


Sierra Pacific Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sierra Pacific Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
129,896,000
121,974,000
Net inc
15,267,000
15,143,000
Share earns
.68
.70


CTS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CTS Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
63,058,000
67,898,000
Net inc
1,572,000
3,798,000
Share earns
.30
.70


T. L. Bondy Wed To Robin I. Forst
LEAD: Robin Ilene Forst and Thomas L. Bondy were married yesterday at the Rainbow Room by Rabbi Dennis Math.
The bride, who will keep her name, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Forst of Nanuet, N.Y.
Her husband is the son of Ellen E. Bondy of New York and the late Robert Bondy.


Reviews/Music;   An All-Chopin Recital
LEAD: At the beginning of Wendy Chen's piano recital at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night, it took close attention to separate out the reasons for her recent success.
Miss Chen, who is 17 years old and from California, has just won the National Chopin Piano Competition in Miami and will go on to its older and more prestigious namesake in Warsaw this


Bush's Unrealpolitik
LEAD: Is there a ''Bush approach'' to the conduct of foreign affairs?


Caminiti Hit in 10th Drops the Mets, 2-1
LEAD: Should Darryl Strawberry have tried to dive for Ken Caminiti's looping line drive in the 10th inning?
Would it have made a difference in the game between the Mets and the Astros?


A Disallowed Chassis Stalling Porsche Indy Team
LEAD: ANY good Indianapolis-car driver will tell you that if you venture too far into the ''gray area'' - the outside edge of a turn, where dust and dirt build up - you face a considerable risk of crashing.


East German, in Moscow, Calls for Changes in NATO
LEAD: East Germany's new Prime Minister called for changes in the ''structure and strategy'' of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization today as President Mikhail S. Gorbachev reiterated the Soviet Union's opposition to a united Germany's belonging to NATO.


Arthur S. Katz Is Wed To Nan Clarissa Silver
LEAD: Nan Clarissa Silver, the editor in chief of Health magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Arthur Shaye Katz, a senior associate in the law firm of Morrison &amp; Foerster in New York.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad officiated at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.


Arab Investment Overseas: A Vast Empire
LEAD: On a chilly morning 10 years ago, Nemir A. Kirdar stood outside the Emir's palace in Bahrain, watching the traditional procession of ministers, ambassadors, supplicants, coffee servers and falcon keepers going into the ruler's ornate hall for the weekly reception, known as the Majlis.


Behind Violence, Tensions Roil Mohawks
LEAD: A burned car and two police vehicles, their windshields shattered and their bodies dented, are the only solid remains of the rage between feuding Mohawk factions that tore through the town of St.
Regis with automatic gunfire last week.


Battling for the Senate
LEAD: Some Democrats are worried about losing control of the Senate this year.
More are concerned, and with more reason, that they might drop one or two seats in 1990, then see the Republicans win a majority in the Presidential year 1992.


Tucson Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tucson Electric Power Co.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
108,962,000
125,922,000
Net loss
14,749,000
b20,435,000
Share earns
-
.75
b-Net income


Low Cholesterol Tied To Colon Cancer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bralorne Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bralorne Resources (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
12,165,000
8,323,000
Net loss
b221,000
b28,465,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $1,541,000 for the latest quarter and $17,523,000 for the year- earlier period.


Hildegard Behrens Hurt By Falling Met Scenery
LEAD: Hildegard Behrens, the soprano singing Brunnhilde in Richard Wagner's ''Gotterdammerung'' at the Metropolitan Opera, was slightly injured when a collapsing piece of scenery hit her on the head on Saturday night.


Scott &amp; Springfellow reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott &amp; Springfellow (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,214,316
7,409,261
Net inc
206,928
309,021
Share earns
.10
.17
Shares outst
1,830,217
2,014,907
9mo rev
25,592,728
21,433,541
Net inc
1,109,081
871,977
Share earns
.57
.48
Shares outst
1,834,698
1,951,918


Co-Steel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Co-Steel Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
209,000,000
249,500,000
Net inc
4,000,000
12,200,000
Share earns
.17
.51
Results are in Canadian dollars.


After 15 Years, Thieu and Ky Offer To Help Bring Down Hanoi's Rule
LEAD: Fifteen years after the fall of Saigon, the two most prominent former leaders of South Vietnam - Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Cao Ky - are becoming active again, seeking to find a role for themselves in the future of the country they fled.


Lam Research reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lam Research (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
34,948,000
33,581,000
Net inc
1,158,000
2,538,000
Share earns
.10
.23
Shares outst
11,800,000
11,100,000
9mo sales
108,068,000
91,805,000
Net inc
5,810,000
6,657,000
Share earns
.50
.61
Shares outst
11,700,000
11,000,000


Question Box
LEAD:
Dead Heat in Derby
Q. Has there ever been a dead heat in the Kentucky Derby?
A.
Yes, but not one involving the first two horses to cross the finish line.
Not the third or fourth ones, either.
The only time in the 115-year history of the Kentucky Derby that two horses finished in a separate but equal fashion came in the 76th Run for the Roses in 1950.


Rider's Reunion
LEAD: OH, there had been a pony when she was younger.
She called him Cutty Sark and used to ride him bareback to the 7-Eleven from the barn in Virginia and under saddle at some unaccredited local shows.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Chesnokov Takes Title: Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet Union used timely rushes to the net from the backcourt to outduel Thomas Muster of Austria, 7-5, 6-3, 6-3, yesterday and win the Monte Carlo Open in Monaco.
Chesnokov, 24 years old, had previously won four titles, including one on the French Riviera last year in Nice.


Maxus Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxus Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
160,000,000
145,800,000
Net inc
3,400,000
b10,600,000
Shares outst
90,708,416
89,873,854
b-Net loss
There were no share earnings in latest first quarter after payment of preferred dividends.


Tech-Ops Landauer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tech-Ops Landauer Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,290,000
6,329,000
Net inc
1,742,000
1,708,000
Share earns
.41
.40
6mo sales
12,021,000
14,429,000
Net inc
3,180,000
3,339,000
Share earns
.75
.79


Shamir Adamant on P.L.O. Talks
LEAD: Israel's caretaker Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, who rejected a United States plan for Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, said today that foreign governments were trying to force him into negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Kansas City Journal;   After a Fall, A Statue Is Back On Top
LEAD: Tom Pendergast Jr. didn't live quite long enough to see it, but kinfolk and others who knew him say he would have been pleased by what Kansas City did the other day.


Another Setback at Seabrook
LEAD: The Seabrook nuclear power plant was shut down Saturday night and will not produce electricity until late May at the earliest, its operator said today.
The utility, New Hampshire Yankee, had wanted to begin production this week, but the reactor was shut down for up to six weeks to modify a turbine on the plant's non-nuclear side.


Market Place;   Viacom Avoiding 'Leveraged' Label
LEAD: THREE years after a leveraged buyout that took most of its stock from public hands, Viacom Inc. appears to be gearing up for a sizable acquisition, one that will be tailored to leave control of the company in the chairman's hands and increase borrowing without requiring the loans to be labeled ''highly leveraged.


Cocoa Growers Plan to Meet
LEAD: The world's main cocoa-growing nations are scheduled to meet in Ghana this week to discuss ways to maximize export earnings in a market with ample supplies.


Jordan Sparks Bulls
LEAD: Michael Jordan scored 36 points and led a last-minute surge that gave the Chicago Bulls a 109-102 victory over the Milwaukee Bucks today and a commanding 2-0 lead in their three-of-five-game playoff series.


Y.&amp; R.'s Midwest Chief
LEAD: Young &amp; Rubicam has appointed George Guimaraes regional chairman for the Midwest.
Before the agency reorganized its New York office earlier this month, Mr.
Guimaraes was one of three group general managers.


Cowboys' Walls Is Joining Giants
LEAD: Everson Walls, the veteran defensive back, said today that he was leaving the Dallas Cowboys to join the Giants.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
Farm Prices
April
New-Home Sales
March
Personal Income
March
Tuesday
Construction Spending
March
Wednesday
Factory Orders
March
Leading Indicators


Pirates Trounce Padres for 6th in Row
LEAD: Barry Bonds and Jay Bell hit three-run homers as the Pittsburgh Pirates won their sixth straight game in a 10-1 romp today over the Padres.


Metro Matters;   No Easy Justice In Case of Dentist Drawn to Crime
LEAD: Marsha Cohen will be sentenced to state prison this week by a judge who has largely tied her own hands.


'Pearl' Performs New Symphony
LEAD: LIFE is unfair, of course, but it can sometimes be especially cruel, instilling impossible dreams, nurturing unreasonable ambitions and revealing a heartbreaking imbalance between reach and grasp.


DISTURBANCES MAR COLLEGE FESTIVAL
LEAD: At least 20 people were injured and 110 arrested as revelers at a university festival hurled rocks and bottles, and the police responded with tear gas during two nights of disturbances, the police said today.


Exiled Communist Leader Returns to South Africa


Barkley in Charge In Sixers' Victory
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers have not advanced past the first round of the playoffs since 1986.
Charles Barkley is determined to change that this year.


Sysco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sysco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,865,300,000
1,717,724,000
Net inc
28,522,000
22,501,000
Share earns
.31
.25
Shares outst
91,477,371
90,524,464
9mo sales
5,631,542,000
5,009,355,000
Net inc
93,849,000
76,135,000
Share earns
1.03
.84
Shares outst
91,246,373
90,270,396


Hudson Foods reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hudson Foods (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
146,030,648
142,205,049
Net inc
2,141,211
4,047,997
Share earns
.15
.31
Shares outst
14,426,591
13,172,698
6mo sales
295,390,173
278,234,743
Net inc
2,305,191
5,639,429
Share earns
.16
.43
Shares outst
14,094,542
13,177,326


Technalysis Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technalysis Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,207,357
4,834,716
Net inc
498,953
449,828
Share earns
.23
.19


Horizon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
76,501,000
68,866,000
Net loss
948,000
b800,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
5,439,000
4,376,000
6mo sales
149,220,000
144,738,000
Net loss
1,909,000
b2,642,000
Share earns
-
.62
Shares outst
5,431,000
4,282,000


Weirton Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weirton Steel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
311,900,000
363,700,000
Net inc
4,000,000
6,100,000
Share earns
.18
.30


EMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EMC Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
40,468,000
24,110,000
Net inc
1,013,000
b7,538,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


Women and the Mysteries They Write
LEAD: Some 40 women of mystery -crime fiction writers from around the country - met at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church on Park Avenue at 51st Street on Friday night to honor one of their own: Amanda Cross.


Are There Fewer Viewers? Networks Challenge Nielsen
LEAD: THE question has a familiar rhythm but the television networks are not about to start singing it: Where have all the viewers gone?


Weiman Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weiman Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,568,000
11,153,000
Net loss
148,000
b175,000
Share earns
-
.23
Shares outst
696,500
757,500
b-Net income


Yankees Trade For Washington
LEAD: The winds swirled furiously all day at the Stadium yesterday, from the early morning until the last out of the Yankees' latest loss.


In Cradle of Revolt, Romanians Demand That President Quit
LEAD: Tens of thousands of people demanded the resignation of interim President Ion Iliescu today in one of the largest anti-Communist demonstrations in Timisoara since the December revolution.


Reviews/Music;   Red Hot Chili Peppers Play California-Style Party Punk
LEAD: The Red Hot Chili Peppers, who played at the Ritz on Thursday night, are an invitation to partake in a new version of an old myth.
Like the Beach Boys before them - and the Red Hot Chili Peppers are a 1980's version, in several ways, of the Beach Boys - they create an image of Southern California.


Diamond Shamrock Offshore reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diamond Shamrock Offshore (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
29,400,000
33,900,000
Net inc
6,200,000
9,600,000
Share earns
.09
.17
Shares outst
68,428,407
53,368,505


Review/Dance;   Century of American Steps
LEAD: Dance America took its audience on a tour through 100 years of American history and dance on Friday night at the Nikolais/Louis Choreospace.
It was an ambitious venture for the company, which was making its Manhattan debut with this program.
Founded in 1982 by Lorraine Caruso, its resident choreographer, Dance America aims to present a wide spectrum of dance.


Mine Safety Appliances Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mine Safety Appliances Co. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
111,962,000
102,697,000
Net inc
6,424,000
6,084,000
Share earns
.98
.92
Shares outst
6,509,044
6,579,981


Warehouse Club reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warehouse Club (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
61,100,000
62,194,000
Net loss
b1,128,000
121,000
6mo sales
133,868,000
136,858,000
Net loss
665,000
c649,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $157,000 from reversal of earlier net operating loss carryforward.


Where the Buck Stops in Nicaragua: Chamorro's First Days
LEAD: During her campaign for Nicaragua's presidency, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro was frequently disparaged as a figurehead candidate, a beloved widow in the service of interests and policies she scarcely understood.


Lithuanians Send a Signal of Their Solidarity


We're Just More Fractious Than the Japanese
LEAD: To the Editor:


E-Town Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Town Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,809,763
16,622,504
Net inc
1,298,624
981,908
Share earns
.55
.47
Shares outst
2,341,365
2,093,608
Yr rev
73,424,560
69,477,036
Net inc
5,479,483
6,259,825
Share earns
2.52
3.03
Shares outst
2,175,032
2,069,388


We're Just More Fractious Than the Japanese;   A Society That Serves
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shuttle Lands Safely in California, But Worries on Telescope Remain
LEAD: The space shuttle Discovery landed safely here this morning, but the Hubble Space Telescope, which it launched into orbit, continued to be plagued with problems that the space agency acknowledged were more serious than previously thought.


Nimick Enjoying Strong Year
LEAD: John Nimick has won two grand slam events on the pro squash tour this season, but he has done that before.
His goal now is to win the World Professional Squash Association Championship, a title that so far has eluded him.


A Celebration of Life in a Poet's Own Words
LEAD: Gwendolyn Brooks was sitting near the window of her hotel room, speaking a poem.
The afternoon light from Arch Street deepened her features as if they had been shaped from stone.
Her words were from an unpublished poem she wrote in the summer, ''Jane Addams,'' a message in the voice of the Chicago reformer that addresses the current age of uncertainty:


The Mind of the Knicks. The Brains of Boston.
LEAD:
Who would have thunk
The Knicks only think dunk;
While the Celtics, alas,
Look to pass.


Hostage to Go Free, Beirut Report Says
LEAD: An unsigned statement delivered to an international news agency in Muslim West Beirut said that another American hostage, Frank Herbert Reed, would be released within 48 hours.
The three-line statement, in


CHRONICLE
LEAD: REBECCA ROBERTSON, president of the 42d Street Development Project, a $2.5 billion renewal effort, calls her new job a ''once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.'' Ms.
Robertson, who was vice president for planning and development, will be the top official involved in day-to-day operations.
The project is to bring four office buildings, a hotel and merchandise mart to the area along with the restoration of nine theaters.


'User Friendly' Medicine Balls
LEAD: THE medicine ball, an exercise tool from the 1930's, is making a comeback.
Elite athletes are tossing an updated version of the ball, a device once used to increase body circulation, to hone their skills in specific sports.
The newly designed product is made of weighted polyurethane or rubber.
Original medicine balls were stuffed and leather-bound.


Kerkhoff Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kerkhoff Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Feb 28
1990
1989
Revenue
3,816,000
3,511,000
Net loss
45,000
b76,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
12,086,000
13,371,000
Net loss
323,000
b953,000
Share earns
-
.32


Accounts
LEAD: *
Campbell Soup Co., to Backer Spielvogel Bates, for its new microwave single-serving Red and White soups.


Armenians Observe a Grim Anniversary
LEAD: Staving off the unusually hot rays of the sun with a white fishing cap pulled down over his thick white eyebrows, Souren Papazian recalled on Saturday how the Turkish police came to his house and told his family and about 200 other people from their small village near Palu to start marching east.


Fabric of Campus Life Is in Tatters, a Study Says
LEAD: A breakdown of civility and other disruptive forces have undermined traditional academic and social values on American college campuses, says a report made public yesterday by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.


Outdoors: It's Tackle-Checkup Time for Surf Casters
LEAD: MAY is the month when surf casters from Cape Cod to New Jersey begin roaming the beaches in quest of striped bass and bluefish.
This is the time, if you plan to be one of them, to get your tackle in order.


Golden Valley Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Valley Microwave (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
43,721,000
41,308,000
Net inc
6,313,000
3,903,000
Share earns
.52
.32


A Broadway Legend's Last Curtain Call


The Editorial Notebook;   Europe's Borders: Faint - or Fragile
LEAD: Flows of trade and investment can surmount political borders between states.
States can raise higher walls, but at a fearsome price.
This tension between openness and insularity now arises on Poland's border with Germany.


Startled by Demand, Peace Corps Asks What It Can Do for Eastern Europe
LEAD: After years of decline that followed an enthusiastic beginning during the Kennedy Administration, the Peace Corps is again starting to flourish, partly as a result of new demands for volunteers in Eastern Europe, where they will be sent for the first time in the organization's 30-year history.


Systems Center Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Systems Center Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,389,919
13,630,232
Net inc
867,900
b1,575,581
Share earns
.11
.20
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $639,586, or 8 cents a share, reflecting change of method of accounting for income taxes.


Ivax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ivax Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
16,611,000
15,584,000
Net loss
838,000
1,385,000
Shares outst
17,412,000
17,120,000


Harvesting Exotic Crops To Save Brazil's Forest
LEAD: From the wharves of this steamy Amazonian river port, sacks of brazil nuts have started an odyssey that will end this summer at the cookie counters of Macy's and Bloomingdale's.


DSC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DSC Communications (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
114,743,000
90,089,000
Net inc
6,866,000
5,230,000
Share earns
.16
.13
Shares outst
43,172,000
41,161,000


Nature's Sunshine Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nature's Sunshine Products (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,615,000
12,197,000
Net inc
864,000
1,045,000
Share earns
.17
.20


People
LEAD: *
Gloria Appel has joined Grey Advertising as a senior vice president for account management.


Miss Leeds, Manager At Ann Taylor, Weds
LEAD: Deborah Leeds and Paul N. Glickman were married yesterday at the Westchester Country Club in Harrison, N.Y., by Rabbi Leonard Poller.
Mrs.
Glickman is a daughter of Carol Leeds of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Leopold Leeds of New York.
Her husband is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon M. Glickman of Westfield, N


EDO Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EDO Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
32,748,000
32,712,000
Net inc
1,309,000
1,419,000
Share earns
.17
.19


Nuclear Metals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nuclear Metals (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
11,211,000
13,502,000
Net inc
253,000
533,000
Share earns
.10
.20
Shares outst
2,498,018
2,623,870
6mo sales
21,135,000
24,276,000
Net inc
292,000
925,000
Share earns
.12
.35
Shares outst
2,533,484
2,627,084


UGI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UGI Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
122,272,000
113,594,000
Net inc
19,198,000
19,592,000
Share earns
1.79
1.85


Magazine Industry Bracing For Shakeout as Ads Drop
LEAD: After a heady decade in which the number of new magazines soared and advertising revenues more than doubled to $6.6 billion, the magazine industry is bracing for a shakeout.


Nixon Seeks Lesson From His Mistakes;   Thersites Defended
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Next Year' Salves Rangers' Wounds
LEAD: Darren Turcotte, his left foot in a cast, lurched around the locker room, every once in a while crossing paths and crutches with Brian Leetch.
Mark Hardy, nursing a badly damaged right ankle, didn't move around much at all, thereby avoiding the mostly solemn clubhouse traffic.


Reviews/Music;   A Concert Band Explores The Elements and Beyond
LEAD: The Yale University Concert Band performed a motley program at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening, which the title, ''Earth, Fire and Winds: Musical Explorations for Wind Symphony,'' did little to unify.
It appeared to refer mainly to a work by Jane Ira Bloom, a Yale graduate and a jazz performer of some note, called ''Rediscovery,'' written for the National Aeronautics and Space


Polish Jewish Festival Elicits Mixed Emotions
LEAD: A Jewish cultural festival is being held here this week, and the sounds of klezmer music and Yiddish theater evoke a time half a century ago when Jews were leading citizens of this stately medieval city.


Reviews/Dance;   Briefly, It Might as Well Be Spring
LEAD: Neil Greenberg's new eveninglong ''Branches, Swords, Flowers, Spears,'' performed on Thursday night at Dance Theater Workshop's Bessie Schonberg Theater, certainly lived up to its name.
There were branches, some of them bronzed.
Swords were waved.
Flowers were thrust, often looking like extensions of the dancers' hands.


A Texas-Sized Run Total
LEAD: The winners batted around four times, got 28 hits and scored so many runs that the scoreboard couldn't show them all.


Killing Reveals Racial Divide Beneath Model CommunitiesSection A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
LEAD: The accounts by Mr.
Jemmott and Dr.
Mack - the physical encounters of a youth, the suspicions of a prosperous adult - are among many angry, and, to many whites, often surprising complaints by blacks in these two suburbs known for their racial integration.


Business and the Law;   S.E.C. Complains About Its Limits
LEAD: AFTER more than three years of investigation, Federal prosecutors uncovered enough evidence of wrongdoing to convince Michael R. Milken to plead guilty to violating securities laws.
But none of that evidence from the largest investigation of crime on Wall Street will be turned over to the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal agency charged with policing the securities markets.


Blacks in College: Numbers and Rate
LEAD: The number of black students in college increased between 1986 and 1988, after nearly a decade of decline, the U.S.
Department of Education reports.
It's encouraging news, but there's still cause for concern.


Anti-Abortion Groups Lag in Raising Funds
LEAD: The leading abortion rights group has built up a political warchest this year nearly seven times as large as that of the chief organization opposed to abortion.


Susan J. Manne Married To Anthony J. Girese Jr.
LEAD: Susan Jane Manne, a law assistant at State Supreme Court in Manhattan, and Anthony John Girese Jr., the counsel to District Attorney Robert T. Johnson of the Bronx, were married yesterday at James House in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Judge William C. Donnino of the State Court of Claims officiated.


Jacqueline Thrope Weds
LEAD: At the Englewood (N.J.) Women's Club, Jacqueline Rose Thrope, the daughter of Florence Thrope of Whitestone, Queens, and the late Norman M. Thrope, was married yesterday to Eugene F. Peterson, a son of Zulay Lizano Peterson of Heredia, Costa Rica, and the late Frank W. Peterson.
Rabbi Charles Davidson officiated.


Review/Television;   A Series Examining The New Soviet Union
LEAD: ''Inside Gorbachev's U.S.S.R.
With Hedrick Smith'' offers a close-up report on the pressures and counter pressures within the Soviet Union over the reforms set in motion by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
The first hour of the illuminating four-part series, at 9 tonight on Channel 13, begins with last year's Parliamentary elections and the astonishing scenes of open dissent and debate in the new congress, including direct attacks on Mr.


Military Aid vs. Drugs? Yes, but . . .
LEAD: Washington is finally about to release $230 million in aid money, much of it for military support, to help Andean governments combat cocaine.
Is expanded military aid and advice the right way to address the drug problem in Latin America?


Alpnet Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpnet Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
22,626,217
23,923,658
Net loss
b1,354,801
b5,884,251
Shares outst
8,703,991
8,456,314
b-Included gains of $250,000 in 1989 and $524,612 in 1988, on sale of software rights.


Roche Holding Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roche Holding Ltd.
Year to Dec 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,021,000,000
5,572,000,000
Net inc
553,000,000
428,000,000
The company said sales and other figures were translated at rate of one Swiss franc equals 61 cents, the average 1989 prevailing rate, while consolidated net income was translated at one Swiss franc equals 65 cents, the rate at Dec.


Pacific Scientific's Chief Also Named Chairman
LEAD: Under Edgar S. Brower, the Pacific Scientific Company, a diversified maker of industrial and aerospace products, has doubled its sales and increased its profitability.
Last week, the company named Mr.
Brower, who is president and chief executive, to the additional post of chairman.


Compuchem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compuchem Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
13,846,000
10,083,000
Net inc
210,000
807,000
Share earns
.03
.12
Shares outst
7,445,819
6,496,881


President Adds Post At Sherry-Lehmann
LEAD: Sherry-Lehmann Inc., the New York wine merchant, has announced changes in its top management.
Michael Aaron, the president, has added the title of chairman, and Sam Aaron, his uncle and the dean of New York wine merchants, has stepped down.


Auto-Trol Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Auto-Trol Technology (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
21,779,000
19,274,000
Net inc
91,000
70,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
6,808,000
6,851,000
6mo rev
39,550,000
37,576,000
Net loss
1,721,000
b237,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
6,798,000
6,844,000


36.6% Rise In Orders For Tools
LEAD: Rising to their highest level since September, new orders for American-made machine tools increased 36.6 percent in March, with both domestic manufacturers and foreign customers increasing their orders.


Assemblyman to Seek Rep. Green's Seat
LEAD: Assemblyman Mark Alan Siegel announced yesterday that he would challenge Representative Bill Green for the seat the Congressman has held for the last 13 years.


Homeless With AIDS Desperately Need Supportive Housing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hull Ready For Game 7
LEAD: Brett Hull has scored against all three Blackhawks goaltenders, and he doesn't care whom he and the St.
Louis Blues will see in Game 7 of the Norris Division final Monday night in Chicago.


Clear Channel CommunicaFtions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clear Channel CommunicaFtions (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
12,963,843
10,013,333
Net loss
1,232,700
684,662


Protesters Clash With the Police in Seoul
LEAD: Thousands of workers and students clashed with riot policemen today in the streets of downtown Seoul to protest a police raid on strikers at the world's largest shipyard on Saturday.


MDU Rssources Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDU Rssources Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
104,200,000
113,200,000
Net inc
16,700,000
16,620,000
Share earns
.87
.86


Wind Quintet to Play New Work by Lee Hyla
LEAD: A new work for wind quintet by the composer Lee Hyla will be performed by Quintet of the Americas at the group's 10th-anniversary concert on May 8 at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
The quintet is composed of Karla Moe, flutist; Matt Sullivan, oboist; Joseph Stone, clarinetist; Harvey Feldman, bassoonist, and Barbara Oldham,


Kuhlman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kuhlman Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
38,315,000
40,426,000
Net inc
965,000
1,832,000
Share earns
.17
.33
Shares outst
5,633,000
5,524,000


Review/Theater;   Mixed Sexual Identities Lead to Royal Romance
LEAD: ''Do you read Middle Goth?'' one minor character asks of another in the new musical farce ''A Change in the Heir.''


Paper Couldn't Crack Tough St. Louis Market
LEAD: Skeptics and fans of the publisher Ralph Ingersoll 2d agreed on one thing when The St.
Louis Sun made its debut seven months ago: the start-up of the project would require deep pockets and patience.
But last week, Mr.
Ingersoll decided that neither would be enough.
Wednesday's issue was The Sun's last.


JAPAN SETS SIGHTS ON WINNING LEAD IN NEW COMPUTERS
LEAD: The Japanese Government is developing plans to organize an industrial effort to master a highly promising advanced computer technology in which the United States holds a substantial lead.


Kidnapping Suspect Is Arrested by F.B.I.
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation said today it had charged a New York man with kidnapping a mailman in New Jersey, stealing his uniform and forcing entry to a banker's house to extort $200,000.


USLife Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USLife Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
293,200,000
283,114,000
Net inc
b13,501,000
c15,523,000
Share earns
.81
.90
Shares outst
16,486,000
17,191,000
b-Included a capital loss of 9 cents a share primarily from disposal of a joint venture real estate investment.


Pope Criticizes Settlers in the Old City
LEAD: In an implied criticism of Israeli policies, Pope John Paul II expressed ''profound concern'' today over the recent attempt to create a Jewish settlement in the Christian quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem.


Zymos Copr. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zymos Copr. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
12,203,000
6,748,000
Net inc
229,000
b812,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Microage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microage Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
146,563,000
84,617,000
Net inc
1,735,000
1,128,000
Share earns
.39
.26
Shares outst
4,435,000
4,391,000
6mo sales
292,944,000
167,877,000
Net inc
3,568,000
2,247,000
Share earns
.81
.52
Shares outst
4,404,000
4,356,000


2 Bodies and Youth Found in Apartment
LEAD: The bodies of a woman and a man were found in an apartment yesterday morning in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn.
A 16-year-old youth, described by the police as mentally retarded, was found in good condition in the apartment.


Quisenberry Steps Aside
LEAD: Dan Quisenberry, the American League career leader with 238 saves, announced his retirement today after spending less than a month with the San Francisco Giants.


Reviews/Dance;   A Smile and Good Spirits From Paul Taylor's Troupe
LEAD: Paul Taylor's choreography has a distinctive solidity that recalls his own physique and the velvety prowl that characterized his dancing.
But it would be hard to characterize the man behind the dances by studying his themes.
A point in case was the program presented by the Paul Taylor Dance Company on Tuesday night at City


Bridge
LEAD: A few quiet players who seldom find partners in the top echelon have levels of skill much higher than their public reputations.
One of these was Stephen Adumkin of Manhattan, who died of a heart attack on March 31 at age 40.


Killing Reveals Racial Divide Beneath Model CommunitiesSection A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
LEAD: The accounts by Mr.
Jemmott and Dr.
Mack - the physical encounters of a youth, the suspicions of a prosperous adult - are among many angry, and, to many whites, often surprising complaints by blacks in these two suburbs known for their racial integration.


Pamela Ungar Weds William Blank
LEAD: Pamela Lynn Ungar and William Joseph Blank were married yesterday at the Canyon Club in Armonk, N.Y. by Judge Judith S. Kaye of the New York State Court of Appeals.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence B. Ungar of Larchmont, N.Y.
Her husband is the son of Vera Herzog of Flemington, N.J., and the late Joseph


Stewart Zeroes In To Edge Clemens
LEAD: Dave Stewart versus Roger Clemens.
As promised, a pitchers' duel at a hitter's park.
The final today: Athletics 1, Red Sox 0.


Union Texas Petroleum HoldFings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Texas Petroleum HoldFings Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
311,000,000
307,000,000
Net inc
31,000,000
b50,000,000
Share earns
.23
.45
Shares outst
84,343,746
83,944,486
b-Reflected a gain from its business interruption insurance of $28 million.


Douglas Bernstein Weds Ellen Foley, Fellow Actor
LEAD: Ellen Foley and Douglas Bernstein, actors, were married yesterday at Alger House in New York by Rabbi Joel Goor.
Mrs.
Bernstein is a daughter of Virginia B. Foley of St.
Louis and the late John Foley.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Bernstein of New York.


Eastern Utilities Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Utilities Associates (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
104,328,677
102,629,254
Net inc
12,379,639
11,650,557
Share earns
.81
.87
Shares outst
15,335,930
13,423,876


One Price Clothing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Price Clothing
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
21,760,933
14,726,243
Net loss
137,605
b173,585
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Grossman's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grossman's Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
156,935,000
219,575,000
Net loss
5,363,000
7,422,000


State Police Hold Fire In Indian Gun Incident
LEAD: State troopers ''chose not to take a life'' when they backed away from arresting a Mohawk Indian after another Mohawk fired a shot in the air, a state police spokesman, Lieut.
Michael Klusacek, said today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Marymount Manhattan College will pass a milestone on July 9 when REGINA S. PERUGGI becomes the college's first secular president, a post that has previously been filled by Roman Catholic nuns.
She will succeed SISTER RAYMUNDE MCKAY.
Ms.
Peruggi, an associate dean of academic affairs for the City University of New York, said she saw her mandate as ''meeting the challenges of an increasingly international and multicultural society.


Orphan Drug Law Spurs Debate
LEAD: Amgen Inc.'s new drug for anemia, the latest biotechnology blockbuster, might set an industry record for first-year sales.
Yet Amgen is shielded from competition by a law meant to encourage development of drugs for which there is supposed to be only a small market.


Johnson Worldwide AssociFates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Worldwide AssociFates Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 30
1990
1989
Sales
91,256,000
74,661,000
Net inc
8,240,000
b6,831,000
Share earns
1.04
.86
6mo sales
131,281,000
112,179,000
Net inc
8,741,000
b7,939,000
Share earns
1.10
1.00


John Clark, 77, Dies; Export Bank Director
LEAD: John C. Clark, who was an official of the United States Export-Import Bank after a career on Wall Street and in banking, died of prostate cancer on Friday at his home on Hilton Head Island in South Carolina.
He was 77 years old.


Push to Link Europe's Markets
LEAD: The European Community's program for economic unity has unleashed forces that are driving the community's stock exchanges to create a pan-European market for trading the shares of Europe's biggest companies.


Wave of Bomb Attacks Hits Northern Ireland
LEAD: A wave of bomb attacks hit Northern Ireland over the weekend after the police warned of a new offensive by the Irish Republican Army fighting to end British rule in the province.


BCE Mobile reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BCE Mobile
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
73,100,000
49,100,000
Net loss
3,100,000
700,000
The company attributed the higer loss in the latest quarter to increased interest expense associated with the financing of Bell Cellular's capital program for the expansion of its networks.


East Bloc Film Makers Have Liberty to Say What They Truly Mean
LEAD: The poster commissioned for the fourth annual American Film Institute Los Angeles Film Festival shows a red star and two frames of celluloid splitting apart.
For the dozen or so East European film makers who have gathered here to show their work in the film capital of the West, it would be hard to imagine a more apt symbol of the liberating exhilaration they say they are now experiencing.


Duriron Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duriron Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
70,675,000
70,089,000
Net inc
4,735,000
5,036,000
Share earns
.38
.40
Year-ago figures are restated to include the results of Automax Inc., which was acquired Nov.


Motel 6 L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motel 6 L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
97,234,000
84,806,000
Net loss
6,921,000
7,600,000
Shares outst
53,035,000
50,191,000


Tambrands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tambrands Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
159,256,000
129,936,000
Net inc
22,065,000
18,022,000
Share earns
1.02
.81


Haitians Protest Detentions at Miami Center
LEAD: About 1,000 Haitians massed today outside a detention center for aliens, tearing down a fence and calling on immigration officials to release Haitian detainees.


Kinetic Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kinetic Concepts Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
48,245,000
43,209,000
Net inc
6,396,000
7,380,000
Share earns
.13
.15
Shares outst
51,086,000
50,418,000


Bard Music Festival To Start With Brahms
LEAD: The music of Brahms and his contemporaries is to be the focus of the inaugural season of the Bard Music Festival at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Medalist Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medalist Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
27,072,000
26,712,000
Net inc
613,000
2,000
Share earns
.26
-


Review/Dance;   The Ceremonies of an Eternal and Healing Rite
LEAD: ''Shaman II,'' which had its premiere with the Laura Dean Dancers and Musicians Saturday night, is a reworked version of ''Shaman,'' a piece never seen in New York City and discarded by the experimental choreographer after a few performances in 1987 in Hamburg, West Germany, and at the American Dance Festival in Durham, N.C.


RMI Titanium Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RMI Titanium Co.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
68,029,000
58,502,000
Net inc
8,485,000
6,010,000
Share earns
.57
.40
All results presented are pro forma since an initial public offering of the 7.5 million shares of the company's common stock held by Quantum Chemical Corp.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Cartier Inc., New York, the U.S. subsidiary of Cartier International, the luxury-goods company, named Debbi Grenn-Scott vice president for corporate communications.


Mara Goldstein Is Wed To Ira Friedman on L.I.
LEAD: The marriage of Mara Goldstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Goldstein of Baldwin, L.I., to Ira Friedman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard W. Friedman of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., took place yesterday at the Seawane Club in Hewlett Harbor.
Rabbi Haskell Bernat officiated.


With Shoe on Capitalist Foot, Czechs Woo Old Industrialist
LEAD: The political transformation of Eastern Europe has brought many curious turns of history and attitude, but perhaps none more striking than the one unfolding in this Czechoslovak town.


Reviews/Dance;   40 Minutes of Turbulence Produces Fearsome Effects
LEAD: The intricate movements with which Wendy Perron fills her dances surely derive from interplays of ideas in the theater of her mind.
Ms.
Perron is a thinking choreographer.
But, on occasion, it is easy to feel that some of her ideas have not been translated into physical actions.


WITNESS PREPARES TO TELL OF FAVORS BY PIERCE AT H.U.D.
LEAD: A former top aide to Samuel R. Pierce Jr. says he will go before Congress on Monday to contradict testimony by the former Housing Secretary and show how Mr.
Pierce and officials of the Reagan White House were directly involved in the political manipulation of Federal housing programs.


Expectations Of Fed Move Are Growing
LEAD: A growing number of analysts say that the recent sharp rise in bond yields has intensified pressure on the Federal Reserve Board to tighten monetary policy.


2 Mail Bombings Were Similar, U.S. Official Says
LEAD: A Federal official said today that there were many similarities between mail bombings in a Texas church in January and at the Christian Broadcasting Network in Virginia last week.
Both bombs were mailed from the Fayetteville area, officials said.


Wang Posts Bigger Loss
LEAD: Wang Laboratories Inc. said Friday that it had a loss of $146.6 million in its most recent quarter, in part because of a number of significant one-time charges, including one related to the sale of its international lease-financing operations.


Romania Is Reported in Nuclear Deal With India
LEAD: In the latest disclosure by the new authorities in Eastern Europe about the activities of past Communist Governments there, Romania has revealed that the Ceausescu Government had improperly diverted a supply of Norwegian heavy water to India, according to Norwegian officials.


Convex Computer reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Convex Computer (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
48,648,000
33,333,000
Net inc
3,964,000
2,257,000
Share earns
.20
.12
Shares outst
19,590,000
18,512,000


Costly Homes Foil Hopes Of Buyers
LEAD: Despite a recent drop in prices, the goal of home ownership in the New York metropolitan region is far more elusive today than it was 10 years ago.


IFR Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IFR Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
13,177,000
12,208,000
Net inc
1,761,000
1,574,000
Share earns
.30
.27
9mo sales
37,944,000
34,285,000
Net inc
4,753,000
4,864,000
Share earns
.80
.81


Gaining Forearm Strength
LEAD: A physician who works out as a body builder has developed a new exerciser for the forearm muscles.
The exerciser is manufactured by Hannibal Fitness Products of Anchorage.


Baseball Statistics: How Much Is Enough?
LEAD: For more than 100 years, baseball has been a game of numbers as well as action and strategy: Roger Maris's 61 home runs and Joe DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak, for example.
Statistics helped to define accomplishment, and the lack of it.


Six Killed and Seven Missing In Sinking of Ferry Off Sicily
LEAD: A ferry carrying 52 passengers and crew members sank off the Sicilian coast this evening, leaving at least six people dead and seven missing, officials said.


Chips &amp; Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chips &amp; Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
66,363,000
57,374,000
Net inc
5,015,000
9,376,000
Share earns
.32
.63
9mo sales
211,660,000
155,807,000
Net inc
23,006,000
22,984,000
Share earns
1.47
1.58


Atalanta-Sosnoff Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atalanta-Sosnoff Capital Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,618,000
3,112,000
Net inc
b822,000
1,549,000
Share earns
.08
.17
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $549,000 from repurchase of convertible debentures, net of income taxes.


Unitrin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unitrin Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
298,600,000
272,100,000
Net inc
25,600,000
34,700,000
Share earns
.46
.63


Expanded Rosters Gain Teams' Favor
LEAD: At least 52 players will be dropped from major league rosters by the end of today, but half as many others may be spared because the 26 baseball teams are not expected to pare down as drastically as the newly ratified basic agreement allows.


Adultery as a Crime: Old Laws Dusted Off In a Wisconsin Case
LEAD: A 28-year-old woman will be arraigned next month in northern Wisconsin, where she is to stand trial on one of the rarest of criminal accusations: adultery.


Mr. Brown's Revealing Secret
LEAD: The Republican Party, responding to a request from Richard L. Berke of The Times, last week made public a list of 4,250 wealthy contributors who donated $7.1 million to the party in 1989.
The list, including individual donors of as much as $100,000, doesn't reveal how the money was spent, or how many other $100,000 gifts the national G.O.P.


Beirut Captors Say They Will Free Second American
LEAD: An unsigned statement delivered to an international news agency in Muslim West Beirut said today that a second American hostage, Frank Herbert Reed, would be released within 48 hours.


Milton Roy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Milton Roy Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
34,390,000
32,823,000
Net inc
1,651,000
538,000
Share earns
.30
.10
Latest first quarter's revenue included $1,423,000 in revenues from Automated Custom Systems Inc., acquired in January of this year.


Miss Kennedy, Student, Marries
LEAD: Maureen Ann Kennedy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin C. Kennedy of Wilton, Conn., was married there yesterday to David Mortimer Hays, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Hays of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
James E. Breen performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Fatima Roman Catholic Church.


City's Heart, in Ashes Now, to Beat as It Did of Old
LEAD: With a plaintive ''Please visit us,'' a hand-painted sign on a burned-out building in the Chiado district here announces that after 100 years at that site, the Martins &amp; Costa store has moved to a temporary address more than a mile away.


Lisa Beth Karasic Weds
LEAD: Lisa Beth Karasic, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard D. Karasic of Deal, N.J., was married yesterday at Temple Beth El in Oakhurst, N.J., to Scott Andrew Eskwitt, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert M. Eskwitt of Hillsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi David Wolf Silverman officiated.
Mrs.
Eskwitt, 28 years old, is a graduate of Johns Hopkins University and an account executive at the Burson Marsteller public relations company in New York.


Review/Music;   Schoenberg Songs in Longing Mood
LEAD: Arnold Schoenberg, that fearsome 12-tone composer, is still anathema to the general audience, to judge from the paltry crowd, stocked with friends of the performers, that turned out for a Schoenberg song recital last Monday night at Weill Recital Hall.


Weyenberg Shoe Manufacturng reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weyenberg Shoe Manufacturng
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
36,432,000
31,742,000
Net inc
1,440,000
1,330,000
Share earns
1.33
1.23


Benn Stops DeWitt
LEAD: Nigel Benn of England captured the World Boxing Organization middleweight title today by knocking out the rugged defending champion, Doug DeWitt, 44 seconds into the eighth round of a scheduled 12-round bout at Caesars Atlantic City.


Argentine Phones Disrupted
LEAD: The president of Argentina's state-run telephone company said saboteurs had damaged phone equipment, cutting off communications in 12 of Argentina's 23 provinces, a newspaper reported today.


Phoenix Medical Tech reports earnings for Qtr to March 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phoenix Medical Tech
Qtr to March 25
1990
1989
Sales
3,943,000
3,831,000
Net loss
836,000
b241,000
Share earns
-
.12
b-Net income


CHRONICLE
LEAD: At Hunter College's 120th birthday celebration on Saturday at the Sheraton Centre, the college's president, PAUL LECLERC, announced that BESS MYERSON, a Hunter College alumna, is giving $100,000 to the school.


Visit to a Tiny Planet: Within Glass Walls, Five Climates and 3,800 Species
LEAD: It is no small project to try to reproduce the planet in miniature.
Even Noah aboard his Ark breathed the open air and drank rain that fell from the sky.


