Jean Tinguely, Playful Sculptor of Scrap Contraptions, Dies at 66
Jean Tinguely, a Swiss-born sculptor who was best known for building whimsical self-destructing contraptions out of scrap parts, died Friday at a hospital in Bern, Switzerland, He was 66 years old.
A hospital spokesman in Bern told The Associated Press that Mr.
Tinguely died of complications from a stroke suffered Aug. 18.


Oregon Wedding For Sara E. Rand
Sara Elizabeth Rand, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Rand of Scotch Plains, N.J., was married yesterday in Gleneden Beach, Ore., to Thomas Urban, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruno J. Urban of Durham, N.C.
Nancy Tedrow, a justice of the peace, officiated at Salishan Lodge.
Mrs.
Urban and her husband, both 28 years old, received master's degrees in industrial administration from Carnegie Mellon University.
She graduated from Lehigh University and is a regional sales development manager for the Hewlett-Packard Company in Vancouver, Wash.
Her father is a senior vice president at Zotos International, a cosmetics company in Darien, Conn.


Miss Canty Wed To R. C. Reynell
Elaine Canty, the daughter of Gov. and Mrs.
Brian Canty of Anguilla, British West Indies, was married there yesterday at Government House to Richard Charles Reynell, the son of Louise Reynell of Swampscott, Mass., and the late Albert C. Reynell of Westbury, L.I.
The Rev.
Albert Gumbs, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 34 years old, is the vice president of the Computer Services Group (Bermuda) Ltd., a software consulting company in Hamilton, Bermuda.
She graduated from University College London.
Her father is the Governor of Anguilla.


Now Is the Time to Invest in the Soviets
Even before the colossal events of recent days -- the Soviet coup, the collapse of Communist rule, the splintering away of the republics -- everything seemed to be going wrong for Dresser Industries' plans to rebuild an aging drill-bit factory in southern Russia.
The central government in Moscow was feuding with the Russian republic over who was empowered to award the huge contract to the Dallas-based producer of oilfield equipment.
One of the ministries Dresser was dealing with was almost dissolved.
And Dresser's Soviet partners, ministries responsible for chemicals and heavy machinery, were struggling to find the hard currency to finance the project.


Cooper Rejoins Lakers in the Front Office
MICHAEL COOPER, a member of five National Basketball Association championship teams with the Los Angeles Lakers in the 1980's, is rejoining the team as special assistant to General Manager JERRY WEST.
Cooper's duties will include coaching, scouting, community relations and marketing.
Cooper left the Lakers before the 1990-91 season to play in Italy the past year.
During his 12-year National Basketball Association career, Cooper was named to the all-league defensive team eight times, and was the N.B.A. defensive player-of-the-year in 1986-87.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 150,000
110 Broad Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 75-year-old colonial; fireplace, c/a, eat-in kitchen, w/w carpeting, 2-car garage; taxes $2,928.
Howell 135,000
6 Stockport Way
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old split level; family room, 1-car garage, porch, c/a; taxes $3,000.
Hopatcong 99,900
4 Idalroy Trail
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch on cul de sac; full finished basement, new furnace; taxes $2,179.
Oakland 199,000
105 Grove Street
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old split level; screened porch, work area, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,666.
Ramsey 347,000
205 Heather Lane
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; porch, wet bar, custom-built kitchen; taxes $3,541.
Wyckoff 295,000
544 Old Woods Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old split level; 0.75-acre plot, sitting area, full basement; taxes $5,460.
OTHER AREAS Baldwin, L.I. 187,000
68 Park View Place
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 260,000
171 Larch Road
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; fireplace, new eat-in kitchen, family room, porch, beamed ceilings; taxes $5,350.
Old Saybrook, Conn. 110,000
66 Church Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 32-year-old ranch; walk-up attic, aluminum siding, needs work, 0.20 acre; taxes $1,239.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League
TEXAS RANGERS -- Activated Jeff Huson, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Named Bill Monbouquette pitching coach.
Football  National Football League
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Waived Buford Jordan, running back.
Signed Scott Ross, linebacker.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Waived Terry O'Shea, tight end.
Activated Ron Woodson, cornerback.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Robbie Keen, punter, to the practice squad.
Released Greg Joelson, defensive end, from the practice squad.
Canadian Football League
B.C.
LIONS -- Signed Keith Powe, defensive lineman, and Nigel Codrington, wide receiver.
HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Named John Gregory head coach.


Farma Way Heads Iselin Handicap
Farma Way, who finished a disappointing fifth in his last start, drew the No. 4 post position Friday and was made the morning-line favorite for the $500,000 Philip H. Iselin Handicap today at Monmouth Park.
The mile-and-an-eighth race for 3-year-olds and up is the ninth in the inaugural 10-race American Championship Racing Series.
A victory by Farma Way will give the colt the lead in the series.


Corrections
A chart on Aug. 4 in the Travel Advisory column misstated the cost of sending a postcard by airmail from Italy to the United States.
A card on which the sender writes more than five words is 1,050 lire (83 cents); up to five words, 1,000 lire (79 cents).


Thousands Rally in Washington, Calling for Action on Social Issues
Hundreds of thousands of union members and civil rights advocates, carrying signs and banners and wearing T-shirts with pro-union messages, gathered here today to call attention to domestic needs and to urge the nation's political leaders to improve health care and education and support workers' rights.
The Labor Day weekend rally, sponsored by the AFL-CIO, was both political and festive.
The crowd, estimated at 250,000 by the United States Park Service, struggled to stay cool on a 95-degree day in late August that was so hot that local fire units hosed down the crowd to help keep people cool during an afternoon of speeches. 'Fair Play for All'
"We're here to insist that democratic government -- the White House, the Congress and the courts -- must assure fair play for all, not just those with the most money, the most luck or the strongest bootstraps," said Lane Kirkland, the president of the organization of unions with 14 million members.


The Executive Computer; A Solution to Envelope Printing, at a Steep Price
The Address Express On-Line Addressing System is an intriguing new product that attempts to solve one of the greatest frustrations of office computing: addressing envelopes.
Most offices we enter have an old Selectric typewriter tucked away somewhere for the singular purpose of typing addresses on envelopes and labels, a chore that is often aggravating on a laser printer.
Tidemark Inc. of Newark, Calif. (415 490-5050), which makes the $1,195 Address Express inkjet printer, offers a convincing argument that there is a better way.
The Address Express unit, which is the size of the proverbial breadbox (or a small laser printer, for those who cannot remember what a breadbox was), attaches to a single personal computer or a Macintosh, or to a local area network.
As one might expect, the Mac software is much simpler to use, but the PC software is not difficult.


J. H. Steiger Wed To Katherine Ury
Katherine Savilla Ury, the daughter of Ann Donovan Ury of Durham, N.H., and Dennis Wayne Ury Jr. of Jersey City, was married yesterday in Middlebury, Vt., to Jeffrey Hugh Steiger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert K. Steiger of Holyoke, Mass.
The Rev.
J.
Gollan Root, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Mead Chapel at Middlebury College.
The bride, 26 years old, and the bridegroom, 28, graduated from Middlebury.
She is an assistant vice president at the Daiwa Bank in New York.
Her father is a historic preservation consultant.
Her mother is a psychotherapist and an associate professor of occupational therapy at the University of New Hampshire.


Mark Kritzman Is Wed to Ms. Gorman
Elizabeth Hollis Gorman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank David Gorman of Pinehurst, N.C., was married yesterday to Mark Paul Kritzman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Kritzman of Prospect, Conn.
The Rev.
Paul Thompson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Green River Church in Guilford, Vt.
The bride, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, was until recently an associate at the New York law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree from the University of Chicago, where she was an editor of The Law Review.
Her father, who is retired, was the vice president and general counsel of the Kennecott Copper Corporation in New York.


Data Bank/September 1, 1991
Index of Leading Indicators
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
1.2
0.6
0.7
Lumber
May
April
March
Millions of board feet
3,835
3,958
3,629
Cash Wheat Price
Aug. 30
Aug. 23
Aug. 16
No.1 K.C., per bushel
$3.24
$3.26
$3.13
Steel
Aug. 23
Aug. 16
Aug. 9
Thousands of net tons
1,583
1,654
1,588
Gross National Product
II Q'91
I Q'91
IV Q'90
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
$4,123.0
$4,124.1
$4,153.4
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
--0.1
--2.8
--1.6
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$104.1
$100.9
$100.6
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$119.2
$118.6
$127.5


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Aug. 18 misstated the cost of the "Gardens Handbook" published by Britain's National Trust.
It is $8 (not $6.35), including postage from London.


Erica Zielinski Weds Laurence Blumenfeld
Erica Dell Zielinski, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Zielinski Jr. of Jacksonville, Fla., was married last night to Laurence Howard Blumenfeld, a son of Rebecca Perlin of Brooklyn and the late Howard Blumenfeld.
Keith Johnson, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Sea Turtle Inn in Atlantic Beach, Fla.
Ms.
Zielinski, who is keeping her name, and Mr.
Blumenfeld are both 29 years old and graduated from Boston University.
She is an orchestra management consultant in New York.
Her parents are musicians in Jacksonville.
Mr.
Blumenfeld is the manager of jazz publicity for Columbia Records in New York.
His mother is an administrator at the Brookdale Hospital Center in Brooklyn.


Survive, Then Mend
The Soviet political storm has a centrifugal pattern that seems driven as much by the needs of the republics' leaders and their separate Communist Party machines as by nationwide disgust with the old Kremlin monolith.
As the major republics proclaim independence and vow to pull away from the central Soviet system, insurgent leaders like Mayor Gavriil K. Popov of Moscow are voicing suspicions that there is far too much opportunity in the current breakdown for Communist apparatchiks to stay in place by switching to some new libertarian label out in the provinces, where the party has long been the basic institution.
In the current confusion about whether and how to design a new national political system -- be it federation, commonwealth or something vaguer -- the leaders of the major republics are indeed trying to survive first personally in their home precincts astride reliable organizations manned by loyal patronage networks, whatever they may be called.
Chief among these is Leonid M. Kravchuk, the leader of the Ukraine, who is facing a presidential election on Dec. 1 and a potential new lease on power as the leading ex-Communist survivor in what could be a powerful independent republic.
Ranking with him is Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, the Kazakhstan leader who, while not making an independence proclamation, took care to have his republic's Communist Party break away from the national party as the latter became the chief target of condemnations and bannings.
The two leaders run the major republics flanking the nation's keystone republic, the Russian federation.
All three would be required as the nucleus of whatever new nationwide political system might be attempted.
At the very least they need each other economically as the political miasma continues.
This is the reason that the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, has reached out to both his neighbors with a proposal to find new ways to build mutual trust beyond the collapsing union.
When republics began proclaiming independence, Mr.
Yeltsin compounded the general anxiety by warning that he would raise the potentially explosive issue of readjusting borders if any of his neighbors wanted to secede.
In trying to repair the political damage from this hasty broadside, which critics characterized as Czarist and bullying, Mr.
Yeltsin sent emissaries to apologize to his neighbors.
More important, he proposed that Russia, the Ukraine and Kazakhstan, and other republics that might be interested, find fresh trust for some new association by agreeing to emphasize their economic ties and improve them through free-market pioneering.
Biting the Hand That Fed Them
This is the only germ of an idea for a new national system that republic leaders have been discussing as they join in the general lambasting of the Communist Party, which brought most of them to power in the first place.
Ordinary citizens are delighting in measuring the relative times the three republic leaders chose to leap from the Communist ship.
Mr.
Yeltsin is the pre-eminent populist apostate, having left over a year ago, vowing to undo the then combative and vindictive party.
The others left only in recent days as the party foundered after the unsuccessful Kremlin coup d'etat.
The one politician who dares not relish Mr.
Yeltsin's relative purity is Mr.
Yeltsin, for he needs his neighbors if some new approach at national reconstruction is to be attempted.
More basically, he has to protect vital economic ties that are being carefully itemized lately in public remarks by Mr.
Kravchuk, the Ukrainian leader who turned in his party card at the 11th hour to pursue Ukrainian nationalism full time.
Interdependence Reins Yeltsin
The Ukraine needs Russian oil in the same way that Russia needs Ukrainian grain, he stresses in a typical ecumenical appeal that is replacing now forbidden Communist dogma on the hustings.
Seeing to his survival with voters, Mr.
Kravchuk now regularly points to the border issue to raise the Ukraine's traditional wariness of being Russia's "colony," an specter Mr.
Yeltsin's blunt style serves all too well to reinforce.
More to the point, Mr.
Kravchuk also is pointing to his republic's economic uncertainties.
He notes that its pre-eminence, for example, at producing over 90 percent of the nation's locomotives is rooted in the fact that the parts for these locomotives come from 800 factories across the union.
The concrete truth of this interdependence is what prevents Mr.
Yeltsin from skewering, as he might like, the credentials of Mr.
Kravchuk and other leaders of the major republics now attempting to survive their past lives in the Communist hierarchy.
As leader of Russia, the largest republic with the largest needs, President Yeltsin has to look beyond the many hypocrisies and ironies of the political storm if its centrifigal threat to Soviet life is ever to be eased.


The Biology of What It Means to be Gay
On Friday, a noted neurobiologist announced that he had detected a slight difference between the brains of homosexual and heterosexual men.
The region he examined is a part of the hypothalamus, located on the floor of the brain, and it is barely the size of a kosher salt crystal, but the report has unleashed emotions as big, murky, contradictory and impassioned as those in any discussion of human sexuality are likely to be.
Many gay men said they welcome proof that might convince mainstream, straight society of what they themselves have always believed: that their sexuality is profoundly inscribed in their being, and is not a perversion brought on by willful disregard of social norms, a sordid upbringing or too much time spent playing with dolls.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bowdoin; For Moderation, Ban on Drinking Lifted on Campus
By lifting a ban on alcohol at campus events, Bowdoin College is going against a national trend toward cracking down on student alcohol abuse.
But policy drafters say they believe that by providing a social alternative to fraternity parties and by encouraging moderation in drinking, the new regulations will stem overconsumption at the college.


U.S. Goalkeeper Named to FIFA All-Stars
Goalkeeper KYLE CAMPBELL of La Jolla, Calif., was named to the FIFA under-17 world championships All-Star team on Friday.
FIFA is the sport's international administrative and governing body.
Campbell was the only American on the squad, and was selected from among more than 280 of the world's best players under the age of 17 in the tournament, which ends Saturday.
Campbell helped the United States team win its first three games before a penalty-kick shootout loss to Qatar.


The Diplomat and the Prima Donna: M. Butterfly at Westport Playhouse
OUT of an astonishing true story, David Henry Hwang fashioned an astonishing play.
Although "M. Butterfly" is bloated with ideas, messages and interpretive possibilities, Mr.
Hwang has crafted an uncommon stage adventure from reconstructed truth.
As an ambitious finale for its 61st summer, the Westport Country Playhouse, in just two weeks, got together a play of intellectual weight and theatrical reach in a creditable production -- an under-the-wire substitute for a canceled comedy.


NEW SUMMARY
Soviet Turmoil 10-14
The new shape of the Soviet Union after the collapse of the Communist state will be debated Monday at a crucial Congress of Peoples Deputies.
Preparation for the session began as two more republics broke away. 1


On the Edge of Innocence: Waiting for a New Dickens
It may be true that the poor are with us always, but good books and films about them are not.
Struck by their absence, some critics have argued that America needs a new Charles Dickens, an artist who can transform society's understanding of the poor and trigger new action.
Perhaps the Dickenses are arriving.
Recent months have brought unusual new books and films that travel to some of the country's most forbidding neighborhoods and return with vivid and surprising tales.


Enriching the Dialogue Between People and Books
To say of a library that it is the heart and soul of a community is to utter a cliche, and an unconvincing one at that.
Who really builds libraries anymore in the belief that they will be the symbolic anchors of towns, or campuses, or urban neighborhoods?
These days a library is lucky if it can get enough money to buy books.
But if it seems naive to say that architecture can still matter in the realm of housing books -- that it can actually enrich the interaction between people and books, and even go so far as to strengthen the whole role of books in our culture -- a pair of newly finished libraries give hope.
Outwardly, the two could not be more different.
One is a brand-new building, far from the city, which has been built as the architectural centerpiece of a magnificent New England prep-school campus.
The other is the restoration of a branch of the New York Public Library on a busy crosstown street in the heart of Manhattan.
The new building serves a group of students in an environment that is unashamedly elitist; the restored building serves a diverse group of urbanites from central Harlem down through the Upper East Side.


'M. Butterfly' at Westport Playhouse
OUT of an astonishing true story, David Henry Hwang fashioned an astonishing play.
Although "M. Butterfly" is bloated with ideas, messages and interpretive possibilities, Mr.
Hwang has crafted an uncommon stage adventure from reconstructed truth.
As an ambitious finale for its 61st summer, the Westport Country Playhouse, in just two weeks, got together a play of intellectual weight and theatrical reach in a creditable production -- an under-the-wire substitute for a canceled comedy.


Becker Upset at the U.S. Open


With Bells and Whistles, It's Subaru!
THE car outside is beautiful.
Perlescent white.
Low, sleek and expensive.
It has a 230-horsepower six under the sloping hood and it stands on wide 16-inch tires.
It has an air bag and antilock brakes, all those good things.
Safety stuff.
But I am afraid to drive it.
That is because it also has a killer alarm system.
The car is a luxury Subaru and, yes, it has finally come to pass.
From the company that gave us "inexpensive and built to stay that way," we have a pricey bauble indeed -- which may be why the alarm is designed to keep us all away.


Catastrophe Under Union Square; Crash on the Lexington IRT: Motorman's Run to Disaster
He began drinking in the early morning when he got home from work, just a few sunrise beers to unwind after a long night hurtling through the dark subway tunnels.
But by early afternoon, investigators said, he had switched to Dewar's White Label Scotch and he drank until after 3 P.M., when he went to bed.
It was sweltering in New York that day, last Tuesday, and Robert E. Ray slept through the worst of the heat, rising at 10:30 P.M. to prepare for his final graveyard workshift of the week, eight hours in the dead of night at the controls of a train roaring up and down the Bronx, Manhattan's East Side and Brooklyn.


A.M. Goldberg, 67; Union Lawyer Led J.P. Stevens Fight
Arthur M. Goldberg, the union lawyer who was the chief legal strategist in a crucial and successful organizing campaign at the J. P. Stevens Company, died on Tuesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 67 years old and lived in New York City.
He died of general sepsis, his son Jonathan J. (J. J.) Goldberg of New York City said.


Francesca di Pianura Wed to E. B. Dunn in Milan
Francesca de'Grassi di Pianura and Edward Benedetto Dunn were married yesterday in Milan, Italy.
The Rev.
Giovanni Torre, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Pietro in Sala.
The bride and bridegroom are 26 years old.
She is the daughter of Countess Benita de'Grassi di Pianura of Milan and the late Count Corrado de'Grassi di Pianura.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Dunn of Rye, N.Y.


Cool Hide-Out


In the Nation; Snakeskins And Democrats
Huckleberry Finn and his friend Jim found out the hard way that picking up a snakeskin brings a power of bad luck.
So far as is known, none of today's Democrats has touched a rattler's epidermis, or looked at a new moon over his left shoulder, or shaken out a tablecloth after sundown -- acts that can put the evil eye on a body, as Huck and Jim well knew.
Still, no such foul events as those of recent months have befallen an American political party since way back in 1988, when the Democrats, snakebit even then, nominated Mike Dukakis for President.
Huck Finn, ever alert to the signs, surely would have recognized that as a powerful bad'un.


Tough Times for Trees in the Northeast
TREES in the Northeast are in trouble.
For some species, few adult examples are ever seen.
American chestnuts hardly exist anywhere.
Elms are rare.
Red pines have almost completely succumbed to scale.
And now hemlocks and dogwoods are threatened.
These are two of the most prized ornamentals for the home landscape as well as popular denizens of the forest.
Perhaps the hardest hit of all is the Eastern hemlock.
Foresters who know this tree well have reported seeing light in deep forests where there was none before, because the hemlocks have died.


Dutch Brewery Now a Museum
The Heineken brewery in Amsterdam has reopened as a museum.
The building at Stadhouderskade, constructed in 1932, was closed three years ago when Heineken built a bigger, more modern plant outside of Leiden, with better accessibility for large trucks.
The museum, which opened in May, provides information on the history of the Heineken company and its brewing process.
Until Sept. 16 there will be six guided tours on weekdays: at 9, 9:45 and 10:30 A.M., and 1, 1:45 and 2:30 P.M.
From Sept. 16 to May 14, there are three daily tours, only in the morning.
The museum, near the Liedesplein in central Amsterdam, is closed on weekends.


MILLIONS EXPECTED IN CRASH LAWSUITS
As the first lawsuits in the Union Square subway crash head for the courts, experts on personal injury suits say the question is not whether the Transit Authority will owe money to those involved in the accident, but how much.
"If I was taking cases on contingency basis, I would want to take this case," David Leebron, a professor at Columbia Law School, said Friday.
"It looks like a fairly easy case."


Fanciers Will Get Their Fill in Eight Shows
With 8 shows in 10 days, drawing 14,628 dogs, this is the busiest time of the year for exhibitors in the metropolitan area.
It all began last Friday, with New Brunswick's 27th all-breed fixture, in Jamesburg, N.J., with 1,285 entries, and builds to a climax for 2,479 dogs and their owners next Sunday at the Westchester Kennel Club Dog Show in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Situated amid 151-year-old linden trees on 67 acres, the historic Lyndhurst estate is a venue befitting Westchester's stature as the most prestigious show in the East.


Driver's Ed, Athletics and Where Else?
WHEN Jennifer Featherstone, a junior at Long Beach High School, learned that she would not be able to take driver's education this school year because of district budget cuts, she was angry and disappointed.
"We circulated a petition to try to keep it, but it didn't work," she said.
"Students now will have to pay between $150 and $300 for private courses, and many of them can't afford that expense."


Dollar Drops Just a Little
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
136.83
136.90
143.80
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7470
1.7480
1.5755
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1416
1.1444
1.1574
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6809
1.6775
1.8905
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$348.00
$353.50
$382.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Katherine Southall, Physician, Is Wed
Dr.
Katherine Jean Southall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carey Thomas Southall of Columbia, Mo., was married in New York yesterday to Peter Henry Hansen, the son of Geraldine Hansen of New York and the late Henry Hansen.
The Rev.
David S. Lothrop, a chaplain at the Church Center for the United Nations, performed the ceremony at the center.
The bride, 32 years old, is a physician at Bellevue Hospital in New York and an assistant clinical professor of medicine at New York University.
She graduated and received an M.D. from the University of Missouri, where her father is a professor of education.
Her mother, Lola Southall, is a supervisor for the Missouri State Division of the Aging in Columbia.


Warsaw Government Survives Test
Poland's Solidarity Government survived a tense parliamentary confrontation with ex-Communists today when Parliament refused to accept its resignation.
The vote strengthened the Government of Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki and eased a three-day standoff that had threatened Poland with its worst political crisis since the overthrow of the Communist Government in 1989.
It removed the prospect of a period of weak government and political instability in the prelude to the country's first fully free postwar parliamentary elections, which are scheduled for Oct. 27.


A Hotel Is Not a Home
The revelation that New York City officials are secretly booking homeless families into commercial hotels at up to $100 a night is surely cause for alarm.
This desperate tactic suggests that the homeless problem is getting worse, not better, and that government programs at all levels still fall miserably short.
After a dramatic decline in 1989 and 1990, the number of homeless families in the city's shelter system has risen sharply, in part because of the recession.
A year ago, some 3,450 families lived in temporary apartments while waiting for a permanent home.
The figure is now up to 4,750, 450 short of the 1987 record.


Quotation of the Day
"We will strive to work in such a way that the next junta, if it ever comes, will close Pravda first." --The former Communist Party newspaper, on its reappearance in Moscow.  [ 1:6. ]


More Cruises In Glacier Bay?
Those who want to see glaciers and humpback whales may get more opportunities to see them under a new rules proposed in Congress that would open Glacier Bay National Park in Alaska to more frequent visits by cruise ships.
If approved, the number of cruises could nearly double, to 180 from 107 a year.
The changes are contained in bills that were sponsored separately in July by Representative Don Young and Senator Frank Murkowski, both Republicans of Alaska.
Tourism in Alaska, particularly in the Glacier Bay National Park, has been on the upswing, and there is new evidence that humpback whales are growing more accepting of cruise ships in the bay, where the whales spend June, July and August.


Camera
In war, they also serve who stand and wait.
Not so in war photography, where there is no substitute for being on the spot.
Indignant words continue to pour out against military censorship that denied photographers access to the action of the Persian Gulf war.
Such words, however, do not come from anyone at Sygma, a picture agency in Paris.


Mutual Funds; Julian Lerner's Lessons of the 30's
While many managers of mutual funds cut their teeth on the 1980's bull market, Julian A. Lerner says his investment style was shaped by the Great Depression and World War II.
Mr.
Lerner, who has run the Houston-based AIM Charter Fund for nearly a quarter-century, manages the fund defensively to avoid big losses.
But this has not prevented him from thriving in bull markets.


Richer Vein In the Mother Lode
To the Editor:
Now that David Schiff has stumbled upon big-band swing, he is compelled to denigrate the Great American Symphonies and apotheosize the Jimmie Lunceford Orchestra  [ "In the 30's, Black Swing Was Golden," July 28 ] .
He praises the "elegant precision" of the Lunceford band, yet mocks Howard Hanson's "terrifying professionalism." He praises black swing music for heroically "laughing at life" during the brutal, racist 1930's, but the symphonies are dismissed as "escape routes" from experience.
Double standards, anyone?
This is musical correctness at its best.


Party Occupies State Legislature in Mexico
Scores of ruling-party militants, apparently enraged at the Government's decision to renounce victory in elections for the governorship of central Guanajuato state, continued today to occupy the state legislature.
Between 50 and 100 partisans of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party stormed the Congress in the city of Guanajuato on Friday as legislators were about to elect an opposition leader as interim governor.


Clothes That Please Both Generations
Selecting back-to-school wardrobes can be a lesson in compromise: a bit of the classic, a bit of the new.
With planning, closets can hold items that both parents and children like.
Well-tempered trendiness is the mood at Saks Fifth Avenue.
For a neutral look with a concession to the funky, a denim jacket for girls by Ultra Pink ($95) has quilted olive green nylon on the back and side panels.
The sleeves are decorated with needlepoint and embroidery in motifs like stars, peace symbols and hearts.
The jacket has matching jeans ($74) with embroidery along side seams and back pockets, but without the quilted nylon.


Corporations Are Stuck in the 50's
To the Editor:
Paul Leinberger and Bruce Tucker miss the point in trying to answer why the corporate world has "become so irrelevant" to many of talented workers in their late 30's and early 40's.
Many of us have turned to our own businesses and to family because we have lost not only interest, but heart, in work as it exists in most organizations.
Life goes on there as though nothing has changed since the "organization man" was the typical worker in the 50's.


There's Value in Shoeless Joe's Name
The autograph of the man who wrote the Fifth Symphony isn't nearly as valuable as that of the man who batted .356.
According to the "Price Guide to Autographs," Beethoven's autograph is worth only $3,300, while an item signed by SHOELESS JOE JACKSON -- immortalized by the 1919 Black Sox scandal and his .356 lifetime batting average -- goes for $23,000,


Answering The Mail
Q.
Our finished basement, which is used as a guest, computer and sewing room, shows no signs of leaks; however, it gets very humid in the summer, so much so that mold grows on the furniture, records and books.
This area adjoins an unfinished part of the basement that contains the laundry.
We have thought of running a dehumidifier all the time to control the mold, but I think this would be quite expensive.
Is there anything else we can do to solve the humidity problem?
A.
If the walls are finished or covered with paneling of some type, there may be seepage through the foundation walls that you cannot see.
Also, check the outside to make sure that all surface water drains away from the foundation, especially water pouring out of the downspouts during a heavy rain.
Finally, if the laundry area has a clothes dryer, make sure it is vented directly to the outside.
Otherwise, this could be the source of the humidity.


Soviets Trying to Find Party's Assets
The Communist Party Central Committee dry cleaners on Kutuzovsky Prospekt stopped taking dirty laundry this week.
Chauffeurs came to work at the Central Committee car park, but their fleet of 570 black Volgas that once used to zip through the city with all the impudence of their Communist masters stood idle.
Across the country, wherever party bosses and apparatchiks used to work, gather, order new furniture, repair their shoes, check their blood pressure or spend their holidays, life ground to a halt as investigators tried to get a fix on what the Communist Party was worth.


Coslet in the Cockpit: As Year Two Unfolds, He's Getting Comfortable
On a clear, bright day a few weeks ago at the Jets' training camp here, Coach Bruce Coslet walked onto the practice field to a chorus of "Happy Birthday" sung by fans who had come to watch the workout that day.
It was his 45th birthday.
A smile made its way across his face, further narrowing the razor gaze that takes shelter under his blond brow.
After playfully scolding the culprits who put the crowd up to the surprise rhapsody, Coslet blew the whistle to start practice.


A Trim for Team
To the Sports Editor:
While the squabble between the Yankees and Don Mattingly over a haircut may seem like a minor contretemps or tempest in a teapot, in reality it represents considerably more.


Anna Wikstrom Weds Kevin Crowley in Sweden
Anna Margareta Wikstrom was married yesterday in Stockholm to Kevin Francis Crowley.
The Rev.
Lars-Erik Svard, a Lutheran minister, officiated at the Danderyd Church.
Mrs.
Crowley, 33 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Per Wikstrom of Djursholm, Sweden.
A graduate of the International Center of Photography in New York, she is a photographer in New York.
The bridegroom, 34, is the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel F. Crowley.
He is a consultant with Banking Spectrum in New York.
He graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in labor relations from Rutgers University.


Wall Street; Not a Very Good Year, Looking at Volume
It was light in August -- all year, in fact, in terms of market volume.
Outside the United States market, trading volume so far this year has been anemic.
Hardest hit is Japan, where market scandals have combined with doubts about the pace of economic recovery to drive market volume down more than 38 percent since the first of the year, said Laszlo Birinyi of Birinyi Associates, a market research firm in New York.


The Ethnic Fighting in Yugoslavia Begins to Look Like War
All summer long, the fragile unity that has bound Yugoslavia's six republics in a loose federation of disparate and often distrustful nationalities has been unraveling in ethnic fighting -- first in sporadic clashes in Slovenia, more recently in grimmer scenes of steadier combat in Croatia that, by last week, had begun to recall the full-bore fighting of an earlier generation in the farms and villages of Europe.
The conflict has its roots in separatist drives on the part of Slovenes and Croats who fear a new sense of assertiveness by Serbs in the post-Communist era; the situation is complicated by the fact that large numbers of Serbs have settled amid the other nationalities over the centuries.
Since June 25, when Croatia and Slovenia declared their independence of the central Yugoslav Government, ethnic Serbs living in Croatia have revolted and about 350 people have died in violence in that republic, while more than 125,000 have left their homes.
Last week, scores of people died in new clashes despite efforts to enforce a cease-fire between units of the federal army and the separatist republic's militia.
The army claims only to be trying to separate Croatian units from the rebel forces of ethnic Serbs; last week, however, a European Community envoy, Henry Wijnaendts, agreed with Croatian accusations that the Serb-dominated army was taking the side of the Serb rebels.
As the latest cease-fire came apart last week, tanks rolled, mortar fire resounded and Yugoslav army jets bombed targets in and near Vukovar and other Croatian villages.
The most realistic prospect seemed to be for more fighting, on an even grimmer scale.


He Runs, They Cheer, He's Happy
When Thurman Thomas was growing up in Missouri City, Tex., 15 miles southeast of Houston, a visit to his grandfather Preston Thomas always provided the best of times.
There was this long hallway in Preston Thomas's home, and Thurman was 5 or 6 years old when his grandfather began a game that became a childhood ritual.


Sports of The Times; Tradition Continues To Glow After Dark
When they first started staging night matches at the United States Open back in 1975, it seemed like money-grubbing at its worst.
The practice seemed particularly sleazy to those faithful fans who had to pay for the complete set of night matches just for the privilege of buying tickets to the day matches, as they had been doing since the days of Pancho and Little Mo.


G. W. Abele Wed To Miss Traxler
Katherine Ann Traxler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Traxler of Palos Verdes Peninsula, Calif., was married yesterday to George William Abele, a son of John J. Abele of Baldwin, L.I., and the late Ruth Ann Abele.
The Rev.
Richard G. Prindle performed the ceremony at St.
John Fisher Roman Catholic Church in Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif.
The bride, 26 years old, and the bridegroom, 27, are associates in the Los Angeles law firm of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky &amp; Walker.
They received law degrees from the University of California at Los Angeles.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of the University of Notre Dame and a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a physicist at the Aerospace Corporation in El Segundo, Calif.
Her mother, Lucie Traxler, is a nurse.


CAMPUS LIFE: Boston; Librarian Helps Foil the Theft Of Irish Artifacts
A contemporary pi rate who had tried to sell to Boston College stolen Irish gravestones with an estimated value of up to $150,000 was sentenced last week by a Federal court in Boston.
The defendant, Peter Kenny, a 68-year-old Irish citizen, was turned over to the Immigration and Naturalization Service for deportation on Wednesday.
Mr.
Kenny also was sentenced to a four-month term in Federal prison, which he had already served since his arrest in April.
He had pleaded guilty on July 25 to smuggling stolen goods into the United States.
The gravestones have been returned for display at the National Museum in Dublin.


Style Makers; Donna Goldberg, Child Organizer
Donna Goldberg, 47 years old, has been a librarian at the Dalton School on the Upper East Side of Manhattan for six years.
Two years ago, she began teaching "The Organized Child," a course for children aged 6 to 18.
"These are the kids that never have a pen or paper," Mrs.
Goldberg said.
"Teachers' threats are no use because these children can't focus."


THE GREAT ALASKA DEBATE
Thanks to Timothy Egan for accurately reporting on the debate over the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge ("The Great Alaska Debate: Can Oil and Wilderness Mix?" Aug. 4).
The pictures of wilderness and wildlife were important for the nation to see.
You did not include photos of such byproducts of oil development as chemical spills, toxic waste, air pollution, industrial garbage heaps.
Inclusion of such pictures would have left readers with an easy answer to the question of whether oil and wilderness can mix.
JOHN LAWLER
Anchorage


A More Pernicious Bias
To the Editor:
It is incomprehensible even to supposedly insensitive whites like me that Gish Jen can write an article challenging the movies' bias against Asians without once mentioning that, in all those Charlie Chan films she finds so demeaning to Asians, a menial character, played by the likes of Willie Best or Mantan Moreland, shucked, shuffled and jived around like a popeyed fool, reflecting a far more pernicious bias against blacks.


Parties for AIDS and the Culinary Arts
Dionne Warwick was handed a bouquet as she stepped off the ferry to attend Fire Island Pines's fund-raising weekend for AIDS.
The events started on Aug. 23 in the Long Island community with a $500-a-ticket dinner dance at John Whyte's Botel.
Ms.
Warwick gave a concert, and the proceeds from it and the other weekend events were divided between the Community Based Clinical Trials Program of the American Foundation for AIDS Research and the Warwick Foundation's Minority AIDS Project.
The foundation was started by Ms.
Warwick in 1988.
On Aug. 24, the James Beard Foundation held a Chefs and Champagne benefit under a tent at the Water Mill, L.I., home of Mark Humphrey, an art dealer.
Guests sampled a grand buffet laden with dishes from such restaurants as Remi, Mondrian and the Union Square Cafe.
A champagne table was stocked with Domaine Carneros by Taittinger.


'Undead Artists,' Gallery's Choice of Works by New Members
MANY apply for membership at City Without Walls here, and all are chosen -- at least for inclusion in the gallery's slide registry.
Exposure is something else, and rightly so.
Once a rough and tumble collective on Halsey Street, now an "urban gallery for new art and artists," City Without Walls has appearances (and standards) to keep up in its storefront premises at 1 Gateway Plaza.
Under its director, Stephen Sennott, it does just that.
Guest curators of the gallery's group shows scan the files, making their own decisions, but when time comes for the annual new members' show, a small jury that includes Mr.
Sennott does the choosing.


RETOOLING
When she bought her first house, Helen Bransford, a jewelry designer, began looking for elegant hardware -- hinges and finials, drawer pulls and picture hooks.
"When I couldn't find anything I liked," Bransford says, "I began to make it myself."
Now, like a growing number of artists and designers, Bransford is producing her own line of hardware.
"There's far more fashion in this business now," says Walter Ress, general manager of Simon's Hardware in Manhattan.
As you can see from the pieces shown here, modern hardware is more than simply nuts and bolts.


Companies Juggle to Adapt to New Limits on Student Hours
COUNTY businesses with many young employees are preparing to meet new state regulations that take effect today sharply limiting the number of hours youths can work while school is in session.
The laws, which were supported by parent-teacher organizations countywide to allow 16- and 17-year-olds more time to study, include provisions that make the state's Child Labor Law one of the strictest in the United States.


Plunk Toys With Toronto, but Not With Victory
Talk about an extreme contrast in pitching styles.
Yesterday at Yankee Stadium, there was Toronto's Jimmy Key, who surrendered only two hits in five innings while toying with New York, and there was Eric Plunk, who walked four and was touched for five hits in five innings by the Blue Jays.
So why was the score tied at that point?
Because Plunk toyed with Toronto.
Whenever someone reached base against him, Plunk suddenly became Eric the Great and did not let the Blue Jays budge past third.
He struck out six and stranded nine runners in the first five innings.
Or did the Blue Jays strand them?
Was Plunk that good or was Toronto that bad?


Jet Noise And the Economy
In a recent letter to the New Jersey editor responding to the article "Jet Noise: A New Battle Looms," James Muldoon, general manager of the aviation technical services division of the Port Authority, said that "we are hopeful that the Port Authority will adopt regulations that the states will view as appropriate and effective."
Considering the past performance of the New Jersey Assembly, this may be of little comfort to North Jerseyans, whom the extended East Coast Plan has blessed with constant jet noise and fuel residues.


U.S. Men Gain 400-Relay Final in a Flash, but Women Fall Flat
Each of the United States teams made a strong impression in the semifinals of the 400-meter relays today at the world track and field championships.
The men ran the second-fastest time in history.
The women botched a handoff and failed to finish.
The men ran a brilliant race, both in time, 37.75 seconds, and technique.
All three handoffs were smooth, enabling the anchor runner, Mike Marsh, to cross the finish line without challenge.


Results Plus
GOLF Brooks Takes Lead  Mark Brooks shot a two-under-par 70 to overtake Robert Gamez for the third-round lead of the Greater Milwaukee Open on yesterday as gusty winds sent scores soaring.
Brooks, who started tied for second at 14-under par, holed a wedge shot from about 60 yards for an eagle on the par-5 No. 16 to go 16 under and parred the last two holes for a three-day total of 200.
Gamez, who went into the day leading at 17 under, had to settle for a 74, putting him in a tie with Jeff Maggert for second, as winds gusting to about 35 miles per hour swirled around the 7,030-yard Tuckaway Country Club course.
Maggert birdied three holes and bogeyed two to finish with one-under 71.
Next at 13-under was Mark Hayes, who shot a 73, followed by Hal Sutton at 11 under after a 74.(AP) Birdies Help Henning: Harold Henning birdied three straight holes on the back nine and George Archer sank a 25-foot birdie putt on the final hole to tie for the lead after two rounds of the GTE North Classic at Indianapolis.
Henning, who had an eagle on the ninth hole, finished with a seven-under-par 65 and Archer had a 66 for a 36-hole total of 132.
Dale Douglass was one stroke off the pace at 133 at the 6,670-yard, par 72 Broadmoor Country Club course after carding a 67.
He was followed by Jack Kiefer at 134 with Lee Trevino, who had his seventh consecutive sub-70 round which is the longest of the year on the Seniors Tour, fifth at 135. (AP)


Black Heritage
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's "Tracing the Trail of Black History" (Practical Traveler, July 14), is an informative and useful article.
I would like to bring to your attention a marvelous resource of black history and culture that the article overlooked.
The Smith Robertson Museum and Cultural Center in Jackson, Miss., houses collections, including an incredible array of quilts, and exhibits depicting black Mississippi's struggles, achievements and experience.
The building, built in 1894, was the first public school for black children in Jackson and opened as a museum in 1984.
It is situated between the downtown business district, the Capitol and historic, but currently forlorn, Farish Street (once the Sweet Auburn of Jackson). (Smith Robertson, one of Jackson's first black elected officials, served as an alderman during Reconstruction.)


Stay Tuned for the Opera at 11
"The Death of Klinghoffer" is bound to shake people up.
At least its title and concept will.
The new John Adams opera is about the 1985 hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro by Arab terrorists, and the murder of Leon Klinghoffer, a wheelchair-bound American Jew who was among the passengers.
The incident, brashly proclaimed in the title, is still fresh in the mind.
The Klinghoffer family still walks among us.
And the geopolitical tensions of which Mr.
Kling hoffer became a casualty are still very much in the news.
For opera, a medium that has traditionally treated fiction, fantasy, myth or ancient history, Leon Klinghoffer's tragedy is too close for comfort.
Yet for a growing number of composers, too close for comfort is an ideal distance for an opera subject.
In addition to "Klinghoffer," which will have its American premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Thursday, the repertory of operas about recent events includes Mr.
Adams's first opera, "Nixon in China" (1987), John Moran's "Manson Family" (1990), about the California mass murderer Charles Manson, and Anthony Davis's "X" (1986), about the black-nationalist leader Malcolm X. And though not about truly current events, Philip Glass's "Satyagraha" (1980) about the early struggles of Gandhi, is close enough to warrant inclusion.


Look to the Women
To the Editor:
As reader, writer and (city rooftop) gardener, I was charmed by Michael Pollan's utterly lovely essay "A Gardener's Guide to Sex, Politics and Class War" (July 21).
But I'd like to address his concern that "gardens are largely absent from American poetry and fiction." Here, as in garden writing per se -- as Mr.
Pollan rightly points out -- we must again look to the women.
From Emily Dickinson up through today, gardens and gardening have been celebrated as the subject of work by women poets.
Among them/us: Marianne Moore, Sylvia Plath, Marge Piercy, Grace Paley, Adrienne Rich and Alice Walker (whose books include "Revolutionary Petunias" and "In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens").
The title (and title poem) of my own recently published collection is "Upstairs in the Garden."  ROBIN MORGAN  New York


Corrections
A report on Aug. 11 about the wedding of Joyce Booth to Todd Beamon omitted information about the bridegroom's mother.
She is Lena A. Triplett of Milwaukee.
She is employed by the Allen-Bradley Company there.


CAMPUS LIFE: Lehigh; Aid Is Promised To All Students After Admission
Lehigh University is guaranteeing financial aid to all students admitted to its freshman class who need it.
The change to giving financial aid to all who need it, or a need-blind policy, comes at a time when other selective liberal arts colleges are operating under tight budgets and a few have abandoned this kind of program because of increased costs.


A European Country Inn Comes to Life
LABOR DAY signals season's end for many Hamptons establishments.
The highly touted super-chefs are returning to their winter jobs, and the cadre of snappy servers is going back to college.
But Mirko's in Water Mill is a noteworthy exception.
This most atypical of Hamptons restaurants is also one of its best.
Mirko Zagar is owner and chef, and his wife, Eileen, is pastry chef and cheery hostess in charge of the well-trained dining-room staff.
Service is perfect.
It is friendly without being intrusive, efficient but never cold.


Homer, Richelieu and Etiquette
To the Editor:
Cardinal Richelieu could not possibly have effected the rounding of dinner-knife points in 1669, as Margaret Visser states.
He died in 1642.
WILLIAM HEINZEN  Philadelphia


Redrawing the Cultural Map Of Russia, Inch by Laborious Inch
When the exiled cellist Mstislav Rostropovich flew to Moscow from Paris to spend the crucial night of Tuesday, Aug. 20, at Boris Yeltsin's side, he personified the craving for freedom that has been in this century the mark of the creative artist in Russia.
The spectacular failure of the attempted coup in Moscow proved all over again that once people have learned to read, hear, listen and see, they cannot be gagged forever.
Who can doubt that the newborn freedom of public discussion under Gorbachev played a cardinal role in last week's sensational events?
We are speaking, after all, of a people that after 74 years had learned to answer back.
They will not forget how to do it.
Between them, television, the fax machine and word of mouth have banished fear.
They who once felt alone are alone no longer.
In Moscow and Leningrad, as not so long ago in Prague, Berlin and Leipzig, watchers and readers realized that the truth, freely arrived at, will set them free.


Coins
A Bite of Gold
As Conrad Reed was wandering his father's farm near Fayetteville, N.C., in 1799, he spotted a large yellow rock along Meadow Creek.
He took it to his father, John Reed, who wondered if the find was gold.
A local silversmith told him it wasn't.


Making the Going Easier in the Mud
A pair of "shoes" that enable one to negotiate bog, marsh and mud flat, a newly designed stripping basket for fly fishermen, a five-piece, two-handed fly rod, and dry flies whose hooks have enlarged eyes are among the new products that have titillated this venerable outdoorsman.
More than 35 years ago, when the muddy bottom in a remote New Hampshire trout pond kept me from wading out far enough to reach rising trout with a fly rod, I had what I thought was a brilliant idea.
I returned to that pond the next weekend with an old pair of bear paw snowshoes, strapped them on and sallied forth.
I got about 10 feet from shore before I was hopelessly mired.
I was only sinking a few inches into the mud, but that was enough to create a suction I couldn't break.
After some furious tugging, I snapped the bindings and floundered ashore on my belly, leaving the snowshoes behind.


Did the Big Bang Happen?
To the Editor:
I was surprised to see that The Book Review chose Paul Davies to review my book, "The Big Bang Never Happened" (July 28).
Since Mr.
Davies is a leading proponent and popularizer of the big bang theory, and since his own work was criticized in my book, he seemed hardly a likely person to write an objective review.


Differing Demands Of Black Groups Challenge Dinkins
Even though the rocks and bottles are no longer flying and the storm of words has abated, the events of the last two weeks show that the administration of David N. Dinkins is engaged in a battle for control of Brooklyn's Crown Heights that stands as a major test of his political strength.
There are three distinct contending factions in the black community: the middle class, who represent the Mayor's base; the radical element that includes leaders like the Rev.
Al Sharpton, who are a direct challenge to his leadership; and the disaffected youths of Crown Heights in Brooklyn who pledge allegiance to no one.
Together or singly, each side has the power to disrupt and erode Mr.
Dinkins's support among voters.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Figs' Winter Coat  Q. When is the proper time to cover a fig tree, and what material should be used?
When should the tree be uncovered? -- Frank Gaeta, Huntington, L.I.


Q and A
Restriction on a Sublet  Question: After marrying, more than a year ago, I sublet my co-op apartment rather than sell it in a poor real estate market.
Originally, the co-op board imposed a one-year restriction on subletting.
The co-op changed that restriction to allow two-year sublets.
I do not expect the real estate market to improve soon and feel the rule will force me to sell at a loss.
As an original tenant-purchaser when the building went co-op nine years ago, do I have any legal ground to dispute this restriction? . . .
Deborah Epstein, Manhattan


Nashville
To the Editor: I've got to protest Norman Kotker's pallid and condescending description of the Nashville Parthenon (Travel, July 21).
It is grand to look at.
The color and other small departures from the original don't matter.
You settle against the flute of a column, watch your fellow tourists and think about 5th-century Greece and 20th-century America.
You wish you could hear all the discussions that generated the Parthenon in 1897, the rebuilt version in 1931 and the colossal copy of Athena just completed.
You realize that all your clever conclusions about the region's culture can't encompass the Nashville Parthenon.
Mr.
Kotker and the illustrator M. E. Cohen pretty much missed all the wonder and the humor.
MARION N. WINSHIP Philadelphia


Scouting Respects Faith of Others
I was delighted to read "Scouting Is Flourishing by Emphasizing Old Values"  [ Aug. 4 ] .
An important value, which is a central tenet of Boy Scouting, is that a Scout is reverent, the 12th point of the Scout Law.
We are proud that in the Nassau County Council we have strong and active committees, representing the Roman Catholic, Protestant and Jewish communities, promoting a return to the traditional religious values and practices of our faiths.


Indoors With Frank Lloyd Wright: Furnishings Fit for Preservation
In 1977, the decorative-arts specialist David A. Hanks organized the first full-scale exhibition devoted to the decorative designs of Frank Lloyd Wright for the Renwick Gallery in Washington.
Wright's ingenious architecture, which grew out of the American landscape, had long been admired.
But this show documented the attention he lavished on interiors where, client permitting, no object was left out of the unified design -- not even the gowns worn by clients' wives.
As a result of that show, Wright's objects -- chairs, windows, light fixtures and metals vases -- took on a life of their own.
Formerly discarded or even destroyed by subsequent owners, these embellishments created a lucrative market, especially after Christie's first Wright auction in 1983.
Since then, with ever-escalating prices, the sum of the decorated parts is often greater than the integrated whole.
To a sad degree, this development has hastened the dismantling of important Wright interiors.


Craig Haskell Wed to Denise Stanford in Carolina
Denise Stanford, a daughter of JoAnn Stanford of Fayetteville, N.C., and the late Rev.
James Stanford, was married yesterday to Craig Haskell, a son of Dr.
Barbara Haskell and Jack Haskell of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
Bill Wolfe performed the ceremony at the Orange United Methodist Church in Chapel Hill, N.C.
The couple both received law degrees from the University of North Carolina and are associates at Raleigh, N.C., law firms.
The bride, 30 years old, is with Bailey &amp; Dixon.
The bridegroom, 25, is with Theodore A. Nodell Jr. &amp; Associates.
Ms.
Haskell graduated from the University of North Carolina.
Her mother teaches elementary school in Fayetteville.


About to Be Wed


Gay Soldiers, Good Soldiers
Do homosexual personnel, male and female, threaten the effectiveness of the armed forces?
Or is it shortsighted prejudice for the military services to ban homosexuals and to discharge those discovered in its ranks?
That long-festering issue has emerged with new force in recent weeks, requiring Defense Secretary Cheney to explain anew to Congress and the public just why homosexuals are deemed "incompatible with military service."


Tough Times for Trees in the Northeast
TREES in the Northeast are in trouble.
For some species, few adult examples are ever seen.
American chestnuts hardly exist anywhere.
Elms are rare.
Red pines have almost completely succumbed to scale.
And now hemlocks and dogwoods are threatened.
These are two of the most prized ornamentals for the home landscape as well as popular denizens of the forest.
Perhaps the hardest hit of all is the Eastern hemlock.
Foresters who know this tree well have reported seeing light in deep forests where there was none before, because the hemlocks have died.


U.S. Warns on Jamaica, Mexico
Crime in Kingston, the capital of Jamaica, "is a serious problem for some travelers and exceeds the level of criminal activity elsewhere in the Caribbean," says a travel advisory from the United States State Department.
Urging visitors to exercise caution, the advisory, dated Aug. 14, says they should not walk around the city at night and avoid public transportation other than licensed taxis.
The department urged similar caution in Jamaica's north coast tourist areas, particularly "at isolated villas and small establishments" and advised avoiding public transportation.


Colombian Drug Cartels Push Into Venezuela
Seeking to avoid the sustained police crackdown in Colombia, drug traffickers are increasingly routing cocaine shipments through neighboring Venezuela.
The surge in the drug trade here has been reflected in a jump in seizures, a wave of death threats against judges and a series of trafficking scandals touching the nation's political and military elite.
Suddenly residents of oil-rich Venezuela are fretting about the "Colombianization" of this traditionally easygoing nation.


Tough Times for Trees in the Northeast
TREES in the Northeast are in trouble.
For some species, few adult examples are ever seen.
American chestnuts hardly exist anywhere.
Elms are rare.
Red pines have almost completely succumbed to scale.
And now hemlocks and dogwoods are threatened.
These are two of the most prized ornamentals for the home landscape as well as popular denizens of the forest.
Perhaps the hardest hit of all is the Eastern hemlock.
Foresters who know this tree well have reported seeing light in deep forests where there was none before, because the hemlocks have died.


Health Care Trips To Barbados
Two Barbadian nurses now living in New York are organizing Barbados vacations for the disabled and others whose medical conditions make it difficult to travel.
Their company, Tomorrow's Level of Care, or T.L.C., offers packages consisting of seven nights' accommodations, nursing services for an hour a day, airport transfers, baggage handling and taxes.
Prices range from $465 for a single room at the Ariel Apartments or Fleetview Apartments, both on the east coast of Barbados, to $979 a person for a double room at the Tamarind Cove Hotel, on the west coast north of Bridgetown.
Air fare is not included.
Other hotels available are the Hilton, Grand Barbados, Sandy Beach, Colony Club, Glitter Bay and Heywoods.
Additional nursing help is available at $20 an hour.


Cardiac Arrest Death Results in Subway Inquiry
A subway passenger was pronounced dead of cardiac arrest at the last station on the No. 4 line in the Bronx Friday morning, six stops after the train's crew first reported to the command center that he was in distress, Transit Authority officials said yesterday.
The authority has started an investigation into the delay in getting medical aid to the stricken man, and the president of the transit police union has charged that the man's death might have been averted if the Transit Police had the authority to order trains to stop.


Making a Difference; Cadillac Answers a Foreign Challenge
Two years ago, John O. Grettenberger promised that Cadillac would deliver a car to compete with the Lexus and Infiniti luxury cars from Japan.
Many doubted that Cadillac was up to the task.
But some former critics are now describing the 1992 Seville and Eldorado models, arriving in showrooms this week, with words usually reserved for Japanese and European automobiles.
The new Seville STS "is an extremely competent car that really puts the sport into sports sedan," Automobile magazine says.


Heidi Pilpel to Wed Michael Bergman
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome S. Pilpel of Morganville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Heidi Ellen Pilpel to Michael Daniel Bergman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Bergman of Philadelphia.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Pilpel, 25 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Rutgers College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from New York University, where she was an editor of The Law Review.
In October, she is to become an associate at the Washington law firm of Dickstein, Shapiro &amp; Morin.
Her father is a vice president of the New York investment banking firm of Kleinwort Benson.


Freedom for Lithuania Means New Challenges
Outside the Lithuanian Parliament building stands a wooden post that is a symbol of this country's break with the Soviet Union.
Hundreds of Lithuanians have nailed their Soviet declarations, military medals, portraits of Lenin and Communist Party cards to the post, each nail an effort to seal the coffin of Lithuanian Marxism.


INSIDE
Serbia Accepts Truce Plan
Serbia, Yugoslavia's largest republic, accepted a European Community plan to send observers to oversee a cease-fire in Croatia.
Page 3.
Prisoner Deporting Begins
One day after a prison uprising by Cuban detainees ended, authorities sent 31 of them back to Cuba.
Page 19.
A 400-Year-Old Spy Story
A researcher thinks he has found his man in an Elizabethan-era spy caper: an Italian priest who was a double agent for England.
Page 9.


Under New York Law, Few Drivers in Fatal Accidents Go Free
The racial disturbances in Crown Heights have put New York State's traffic laws under new scrutiny, with blacks blaming the police for not arresting the Hasidic Jewish man whose car fatally injured a black child in the Brooklyn neighborhood.
But some national traffic-safety experts say the state's laws are more stringent than those elsewhere and give drivers involved in fatal accidents less chance of getting off without being charged.


Dr. Neila Nichani Wed to David Smith
Dr.
Neila Nichani, a physician in Washington, and David Garland Smith, a retired Foreign Service officer, were married yesterday at the Dacor Bacon House in Washington by the Rev.
Kathryn Bailey Moore, a United Methodist minister.
Dr.
Nichani-Smith, who was a hospital administrator in Bombay, India, is also a clinical pharmacologist.
She graduated from Elphinstone College in Bombay and received degrees in medicine and pharmacology from the University of Bombay.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vasant Gadgil of Pune, India.
She was a widow.


Man Killed, 2 Hurt In Queens Shooting
A party at a social club in Astoria, Queens, early yesterday dissolved into a shooting spree that left one man dead and several others seriously injured, the police said.
Oscar MacArthur, 26 years old, of 2-10 Astoria Boulevard, was killed after a fight between two groups of friends at Caroline's Club, at 3-4 27th Avenue, spilled out onto the sidewalk and erupted into a shootout.
Another man, Lawrence Singletary, 26, was also hit by a bullet.
The police would not say where he was hit or at which hospital he was treated.


When 'Real' Numbers Are Unreal
The recession that has now ended -- cross your fingers as you read this -- was worse than either of the past two big recessions.
That statement is absurd by the conventional measure used by economists, that of "real" economic growth.
By that standard, this recession was a mild one.
The second quarter gross national product level was just 1.1 percent lower than the peak quarter, the third quarter of last year.
By contrast, the peak-to-trough falls in the previous two downturns were 4.4 percent in 1974-75 and 3.4 percent in 1981-82.


County Savors Victory in Waste-Disposal Suit
COUNTY officials were jubilant last week about their victory in a lengthy legal dispute in which a Federal Appeals Court decided that Westchester was not responsible for disposing of all the county's garbage.
The ruling lifted a $1 million contempt citation imposed by a lower court.


50 Years After Pearl Harbor, Reconciliation Is Still Elusive
When the solemn observances of the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor are over this Dec. 7, the American survivors will hold a final banquet at the Sheraton Waikiki Hotel.
The hotel is owned by a Japanese company, Kokusai Kogyo of Tokyo.
This circumstance underscores the powerful cross-currents pulling at Hawaii as it prepares to commemorate that infamous day at a time when the Japanese have achieved with yen what their fathers could not with bombs.


Prime Time Vs. the Art of Ridicule
Explaining why the Public Broadcasting Service canceled "Stop the Church," a 24-minute documentary that was scheduled to be shown last week, John Grant, the PBS vice president for scheduling and programming administration, said it "simply crosses the line of being responsible programming into being ridicule." In other words, television executives are nervous about ridicule, except when it is directed at permissible targets like George Bush or John Sununu.
"Stop the Church," a report on how Act-Up, an AIDS activist group, planned to disrupt services at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in 1989, is a nonstop diatribe against the Roman Catholic Church and John Cardinal O'Connor.
The ridicule, which comes as a relief, consists of Tom Lehrer's rendition of "The Vatican Rag," a zippy takeoff on Roman Catholic worship that rubbed sensitivities when it was introduced three decades ago.
That song is the only breath of wit in a work so shrill with self-righteousness that one wishes Mr.
Lehrer would return to direct his talents at the activists, who could then be counted on to demand that such insensitivity be banned from the tube.


Two Notre Dame Players Are Arrested
The season opener isn't until Saturday, but the Notre Dame football team has already been thrown for some off-field losses.
First, starting tackle, GEORGE WILLIAMS, was felled by "personal problems" a week ago and might miss the season.
Then on Friday night, RICK MIRER, a quarterback, and DEMETRIUS DuBOSE, a linebacker, were among three students arrested for public intoxication and disorderly conduct at an off-campus party, South Bend.
Ind., police said.
JOHN HEISLER, the Notre Dame sports information director, said it would be premature to speculate on how the arrests could affect Saturday's opener against Indiana.
"I think right now everybody, our athletic director and coach are still interested in finding out information before anyone makes any judgments," Heisler said.


Back to Basics As the Bell Rings for '91
As the National Football League enters its 72d season today, one axiom still holds: What worked last year is often copied the next.
What worked for the defending Super Bowl champion Giants was a brand of football that was a throwback to the 1920's: Keep it simple.
Keep it on the ground.
Throw only when you must.
At all costs, hold on to the football.


In Vermont Schools, Test on How Well Students Think Draws New Interest
As the nation's students return to classes, Vermont is expanding an experimental program in learning and evaluating mathematics and writing skills.
Some experts believe the program may revolutionize testing and teaching in the United States.
The state's experience with the method is seen by many educators and lawmakers around the country as a preview of what could be in store for the nation if President Bush gets the national testing program he wants as part of his comprehensive education legislative package, America 2000.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Aug. 18 misstated the date of the last performance this year of "Richard III" by the Rhode Island Shakespeare Theater.
It will be on Sept. 29, not Aug. 29.


Pascal Beaute Is Wed To Kathleen M. Daly
Kathleen Marianne Daly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Daly of Oakwood, S.I., was married yesterday to Pascal Beaute, a son of Lillian Beaute of Sochaux, France, and the late Michel Beaute.
The Rev.
Jean-Pierre Beaute, a Roman Catholic priest who is an uncle of the groom, performed the ceremony at the Ste.-Croix church in Sochaux.
The bride, 31 years old, is a registered nurse at Valley Hospital in Las Vegas, Nev.
She graduated from the Beth Israel School of Nursing.
Her father is an assistant pressroom foreman at the New York Times printing plant in Carlstadt, N.J.
Mr.
Beaute, also 31, is the banquet chef at Bally's Casino in Las Vegas.
He is a graduate of L'Ecole Hoteliere de Poligny at Jura, France.
His father was an engineer at the Peugeot factory at Sochaux.


Navigating the System
EAST SIDE: Most service is suspended on the Lexington Avenue line , Nos. 4, 5 and 6, in both directions between Grand Central and Fulton Street on the East Side of Manhattan.
Passengers traveling south from the Bronx can take the No. 4 train from Woodlawn to 59th Street where they can transfer to the Broadway N and R trains to Lower Manhattan
Service on the No. 6 train will be available to Grand Central in Manhattan for passengers traveling from Pelham Bay in the Bronx.
At 59th Street, those riders should transfer to the Broadway line's N or R trains to go further south.
A free shuttle bus will run east along 23d Street and north along Third Avenue between the 23d Street station on the Broadway line R and N station and the 86th Street station on the Lexington Avenue.
The shuttle will run south along Lexington Avenue to 27th Street.
WEST SIDE: To accommodate additional riders on West Side lines, No. 5 trains in both directions will be rerouted to the No. 2 line between Nevins Street in Brooklyn and 149th Street in the Bronx.
MORE INFORMATION: Additional information is available through the Travel Information Center between 6 A.M. and 9 P.M. at 718-330-1234.


Technology; The Best of Tapes and Disks
The search for the best way to store the massive amounts of data generated at an ever more rapid pace by the world's computers has entered a new phase.
The most popular systems for large computer users these days are magnetic tape cartridges similar to those used in video-cassette recorders.
The tape cartridges have recently lost some ground to higher capacity laser-based compact disks like those used to record music and movies.
Now comes a marriage of these two technologies: laser-based tape systems.
Such optical tape systems can store on a single 12-inch reel the same amount of data that goes on nearly 170 12-inch compact disks or 5,000 magnetic tape cartridges.


A Domestic Policy Is Coming Soon
To the Editor:
You quote President Bush in a Kennebunkport, Me., news conference on the Democratic opposition: "I think they've come upon a theme. Go after the President on no-domestic-policy. And I will be retaliating at the proper time" (news article, Aug. 17).


Q and A
Duty-Free Items
Q.
Recently on returning from Turkey I was charged duty on a rug I had bought but told that jewelry could be brought in duty-free.
Could you clarify duty-free allowances for Israel, Egypt and Turkey?
I have heard there are exemptions for products from developing countries. -- Bruce Shipman, Roxbury, Conn.


Is There a Correct Way to Be Black?
REFLECTIONS OF AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION BABY
By Stephen L. Carter. 286 pp. New York:  Basic Books. $23.


A Philosopher Is Called a Spy For the Queen
Once again, newspapers in London are filled with revelations of intrigue and espionage, including the unmasking of a "second man" in a spy ring operating close to the heart of Her Majesty's Government.
But this time the news is more than 400 years old and the accusations the work of a dogged British historian.
He claims in the latest issue of a British scholarly journal that the philosopher Giordano Bruno, an Italian priest, was probably the spy who betrayed French and Catholic secrets to his English handlers in the court of Queen Elizabeth I.


Home of the Little League Struggles to Be Home of a Minor Team, Too
For one week every August, this central Pennsylvania city is transformed into a baseball paradise, where the game's most gifted 12-year-olds gather for an international feast of competition and goodwill.
But Williamsport's connection to the national pastime runs deeper than the Little League World Series.
Minor league baseball has been a part of life here for decades, a part of life that is now threatened by the economic realities of the game.


New Season Invites Optimism
ADD the anticipation of two premieres by renowned playwrights (Edward Albee and Marsha Norman) to the opening of a $4 million theater (the Crossroads in New Brunswick), and the new season invites optimism after last year's severe letdown.
It was easy to find a reason for the New Jersey theaters' hard times last season.
The one most often heard was that it was all about money, or a shortage thereof.


Boating; Fall Boat Shows Will Feature Hype
A sagging marine market has put new life into the coming boat-show season, which moves into full swing next month.
Manufacturers and trade organizers are finding they must look for new ways to sell their wares along waterfront sites.
The fall boat shows are ablaze with hype, much of it directed at the first-time buyer.
Free sailing lessons are offered, as well as seminars for fishermen and demonstrations for navigators on a wide array of new marine electronics.


Money Funds: Fees Reflect Service
Regarding money fund services, investors pay for what they get.
A recent analysis by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report in Holliston, Mass., compared the expense ratios -- the ratio of fund expenses to average net assets -- of 603 taxable and tax-free money market funds with the funds' minimum investment amounts and check-writing privileges.
The conclusion: the easier it is for an investor to open an account or write a check against the account, the higher the cost to that investor and therefore the lower the fund's return.


POSTINGS: Renovation Funds; Bed-Stuy Loans
Bedford-Stuyvesant property owners who have been turned down for home-renovation loans from conventional lenders will be able to take advantage of the new Neighborhood Housing Services program in their Brooklyn community.
Neighborhood Housing Services of New York, the parent group, with offices at 121 West 27th Street in Manhattan, operates loan programs for both homeowners and owners of small apartment houses.
The loans average $10,000 and can be used for small improvements as well as major renovations, and will be available to creditworthy owners who can show they have been refused loans by conventional lenders.
The service has so far lent more than $6 million throughout the city.
The loans, offered at interest rates below the current market and with repayment terms varied according to ability to pay, come from a revolving fund created with tax money and private donations, principally from banks.


Jill Cioffi, a Medical Student, Is Wed
Jill Suzanne Cioffi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas A. Cioffi of Norwalk, Conn., was married there yesterday to Ian Walter Barringer, a son of Sandra Dean Barringer of Augusta, Me., and Richard E. Barringer of Hallowell, Me.
The Rev.
Robert J. Valentine performed the ceremony at St.
Jerome's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 23 years old, is studying for a medical degree at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine of the City University of New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Public Safety in Hartford.
Her mother, Arline M. Cioffi, is a real-estate broker with the William Pitt Agency in Norwalk.


The Day's Highlights
The Break-Up Continues
THE CENTRIFUGE WHIRLS ON: Two more republics declared their independence from the Soviet Union, meaning only 5 of 15 Soviet republics still proclaim formal membership in the union.
Page 1.
U.S.
PREPARES TO RECOGNIZE BALTICS: Administration officials said President Bush would formally recognize the independence of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania on Monday.
Page 1.
LITHUANIANS' MONUMENTAL TASK: Many people in Vilnius, the Luthuanian capital, are beginning to express apprehension about the fact that building a modern independent nation will require much more than simple patriotism.
Page 12.
MOLDAVIANS LOOK TO SWITCH HORSES: People in the Moldavian republic say reunion with Romania is as inevitable as the reunification of the two Germanys.
Page 13.
Unraveling the Mess in Moscow
THE ICEBERG OF PARTY PROPERTY: A large segment of the Soviet economy has ground to a halt as investigators begin their inventory of seized Communist Party assets.
Page 1.
Wanted: A New New World Order
RETHINKING U.S.
POLICY: Events in the Soviet Union undermine the assumptions on which American foreign policy goals have long been based.
But so far Washington is focusing mainly on the short term.
Page 14.


Combine Higher Taxes and Savings Incentives; Toll of Reaganomics
To the Editor:


CAMPUS LIFE: Texas; A Model Mascot Gets a Makeover (Horns and Paint)
Set atop Bevo's Bookstore on the west end of the University of Texas campus, a fiberglass statue of the school's longhorn mascot had seen better days.
After years of vandalism and kidnappings, the replica's pointed horns were drooping and its paint was flaking.
For the 120-pound, three-foot-tall steer, it was time for a makeover.


The First Picture Shows
THE EMERGENCE OF CINEMA
The American Screen to 1907.
History of the American Cinema, Volume One.
By Charles Musser.
General editor, Charles Harpole.
Illustrated. 613 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $60.
THE TRANSFORMATION OF CINEMA, 1907-1915
History of the American Cinema, Volume Two.
By Eileen Bowser.
General editor, Charles Harpole.
Illustrated. 337 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $60.
AN EVENING'S ENTERTAINMENT
The Age of the Silent Feature Picture, 1915-1928.
History of the American Cinema, Volume Three.
By Richard Koszarski.
General editor, Charles Harpole.
Illustrated. 395 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $60.


In the North, Two Elegant Inns . . . And Two More in the South
MY image of Vermont came from chic Bennington, all red brick and folk art.
The details I remembered, from college days near the New York-Vermont border, were relentlessly cheerful -- painted wooden sheep on the lawns, grape-vine wreaths with dried flowers, the scent of rose potpourri, and old red barns converted into antiques stores.
When an opportunity came recently to visit southern Vermont for a weekend, my husband and I wanted to find two inns that gave glimpses into the rural Yankee life of working farms and steepled villages.


Homer, Richelieu and Etiquette
To the Editor:
Molly O'Neill's review of Margaret Visser's book "The Rituals of Dinner" (July 28) reminds me of what is perhaps the most famous instance in literature of a diner wanting to avoid becoming the piece de resistance of his host's dinner: the Polyphemus episode in Book Nine of the "Odyssey." In Homer, however, the emphasis is on the underlying ritual of hospitality rather than on the etiquette of table manners.
Odysseus has his first clue that the Cyclops Polyphemus may not turn out to be the perfect host when the one-eyed giant commits the faux pas of inquiring about his guest's name and origins before offering him the hospitality of his cave.
Odysseus' suspicions receive grisly confirmation when Polyphemus nonchalantly seizes six of Odysseus' men and dashes out their brains on the floor of the cave.
He then proceeds to devour all six of the victims like so many tasty morsels and, after he is done, washes them down with a drink of milk.


Katharine Hepburn: The Movie
Most movie stars come down off the screen for interviews.
They walk into a restaurant, act at drinking a cup of coffee, then walk back into their real lives.
With Katharine Hepburn, the process is reversed.
To cross the threshold of her Manhattan town house, where she has lived for 60 years, is to enter a Katharine Hepburn movie.


11 Latin Americans Interpret 'Spirit of the Figure'
LATIN AMERICAN artists are becoming more visible in Connecticut and much of the credit should go to Benjamin Ortiz, an assistant curator at the Barnum Museum in Bridgeport.
The latest production of Mr.
Ortiz, who also organizes shows of contemporary Hispanic art for other institutions, is "Spirit of the Figure," "Espiritu de la Figura," at the Aetna Gallery in Hartford.
Of the 11 artists represented, 4 come from Chile, 3 from Cuba, 2 from Mexico and 1 each from Puerto Rico and Argentina.
All are now living in Connecticut.
Though the show's broadsheet includes statements by the artists, it says nothing about their backgrounds.
But it seems safe to assume that, as with the "Paper Visions" show that Mr.
Ortiz did for the Housatonic Museum of Art in Bridgeport a year or so ago, most of the contributors trained in their native lands.
Still, there is nothing in the show that could not have been produced by a sensibility conditioned in the United States.
At the same time, there is a sense of artists struggling to adjust to a new norm without losing their souls.


BEST SELLERS: September 1, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war, and a floundering President may not be able to cope.
2
2
25
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
3
10
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
4
4
5
MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) A woman probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck Florida judge. (LP)
5
5
6
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
6
6
15
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
7
7
17
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
8
10
10
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple off Bermuda raises a question: is a creature from the deep responsible?
9 *
9
10
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
10
8
6
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye Spenser learns much about his own past while helping a young man track down his mother, who has disappeared.
11
11
75
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
12
14
4
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Doubleday, $18.) A young woman who has always been able to wrap men around her finger meets her match on a visit to her hometown.
13
12
6
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Fine/Putnam, $21.95.) The United States Air Force comes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
14
15
15
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of two perpetrators of an insurance scam.
15 *
13
17
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) Inspired by his grandfather, a London vendor, a man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
6
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
2
1
11
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
3
3
11
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
4
4
41
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
5
1
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies.
6
5
9
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
7
6
16
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
8
10
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
9 *
7
8
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The downfall of the mobster Paul Castellano.
10 *
8
9
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
11
9
16
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How President Bush and his commanders have made military decisions.
12
10
9
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
13 *
15
13
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
14 *
14
8
UNDER THE INFLUENCE, by Peter Hernon and Terry Ganey. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized account of Anheuser-Busch.
15
12
3
AND THE BEAT GOES ON, by Sonny Bono. (Pocket, $19.95.) The veteran pop star and current Mayor of Palm Springs, Calif., recalls his roller-coaster career with and without Cher.
16 *
7
PAUL HARVEY'S FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, edited by Paul Harvey Jr. (Bantam, $15.) Anecdotes told by the radio broadcaster.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
3
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
2
8
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
3
122
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's advice about how to make a personal fortune.
4
4
30
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An illustrated book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5
3
43
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) Ms.
Tyler's 12th characteristically heartbreaking novel celebrates family life without omitting the pain and boredom at its center; her hero, feeling responsible for his brother's death, takes unusual measures -- including religious ones -- to redeem himself.
THE STARCHED BLUE SKY OF SPAIN: And Other Memoirs, by Josephine Herbst. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) Fascinating autobiographical fragments from the Spanish Civil War and other scenes by the blazing radical writer from Sioux City, Iowa.
THREE BLIND MICE: How the Networks Lost Their Way, by Ken Auletta. (Random House, $25.) An account of the decline of the Big Three since 1984, replete with detail that gives cause for wonder how the networks maintained their oligopoly as long as they did.
INHERIT THE MOB, by Zev Chafets. (Random House, $19.) A hilarious novel in which a respectable journalist's uncle Max dies, leaving him the last of the great American Jewish gangs.
THE GOLD BUG VARIATIONS, by Richard Powers. (Morrow, $25.) With stunning virtuosity, Mr.
Powers's novel employs every trick of structure, metaphor and pun to inspect the career of a young scientist who ends up a dead-end computer programmer.
PATCHWORK, by Karen Osborn. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A strong first novel of three women who grow old in a Southern mill town, looking for autonomy in a man's world.
IN THE EYE OF THE STORM: The Life of General H. Norman Schwarzkopf, by Roger Cohen and Claudio Gatti. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.95.) Solid, readable reporting by a Times reporter and an Italian journalist who provide numerous insights into the general's origins, character and psychology.


Nashville
To the Editor: Norman Kotker writes that the Nashville Parthenon is the wrong color.
This statement is based on his assumption that the Athenian Parthenon, "made of gleaming white marble," was as devoid of color in the fifth century B.C. as it is today.
Modern scholars are not certain about the complete program of color used in decorating the Athenian Parthenon, but it is now widely accepted that major portions of the structure were embellished with red, blue, green and gold paint, not to mention metal attachments.
DANIELLE NEWLAND Bryn Mawr, Pa.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept.


Racial Equations
To the Editor:
In his review of my novel, "Slow Motion Riot" (July 21), Selwyn Raab wrote, "Mr. Blauner's portrayals of King and other black characters as psychotic predators border on racist typecasting." This is a very serious charge, and one that I don't think is supported by even a cursory reading of the book.
What Mr.
Raab neglects to mention is that there are at least a half-dozen significant black characters in the novel who are far from psychotic and far from predatory, including a law student, a civil service supervisor and a field service officer.
He also fails to figure into his racial equation the fact that the third most important character is a white criminal from an upper-income bracket.


Canadian Tax
To the Editor: With reference to the article by John Brannon Albright commenting on the difficulty of getting a refund on Canada's new tax (Practical Traveler, July 7), we were in Quebec in June for several days.
We received the GST Goods &amp; Services Tax Rebate for Visitors brochure and were able to obtain the Federal tax refund at the border.
Beyond that, the leaflet gave no addresses for the various provinces where one could obtain a refund of their tax.
The hotel personnel had no information or advice on this either.
MARION CONROY Southbury, Conn.
John Brannon Albright replies: As the article said, it is necessary to write to the individual provinces for applications and instructions on claiming refunds of provincial taxes.
For Quebec, the address is Ministere du Revenu du Quebec, 3 Complexe des Jardins -- Tour Nord, C.P. 3000 Succ. des Jardins, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H5B 1A4.


Yes, Tomatoes Can Fire the Imagination
THE high season for tomatoes fires the imagination of some cooks.
At a recent dinner, I tasted a soup made from green tomatoes, decorated with a spoonful of sherbet made from yellow tomatoes.
It looked like a painting -- and was about as easy to digest as one.
But when they are prepared in more conventional ways, it is hard to tire of tomatoes, whether they show up in sandwiches, soups, sauces, as a salad or a breakfast dish.
Green tomatoes (not to be confused with Mexican green tomatoes called tomatillos, which are a cousin of the cape gooseberry) are no exception.
My favorite way to eat them is fried.


Jerome Gary and Ms. Lambert to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Jordan Bennett Lambert Jr. of Helena, Ark., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Mary Martha Lambert and Jerome DuVivier Gary, the son of Mrs.
Marquette de Bary of New York and Southampton, L.I., and David DuVivier of Princeton, N.J.
Ms.
Lambert, 39, is a film director in Los Angeles whose credits include "Siesta," "Pet Sematary" and "Grand Isle." She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father is the president of the Lambert Corporation, a farming and real estate company in Helena; he is a former board member of Riceland Foods and is a member of the White River Levee Board.


Waltrip Profits From Being His Own Boss
Darrell Waltrip was supposed to learn some hard lessons this season.
He left the Rick Hendrick team after 1990 to start his own Nascar team, and more than one owner said Waltrip would spend a lot and get meager results.
But going into today's Heinz Southern 500 in Darlington, S.C., the 21st race in the 29-race Winston Cup stock-car series, Waltrip is one of only six drivers who have won more than once this year.
He is seventh in the point standing, and was as high as third a few races ago before two bad crashes set him back.


Wall Street; Add Aircraft to the Ailing-Asset List
One of the big lessons of the 80's is that trouble travels.
Shrinking real estate values in New England can cause bank stocks to fall on Wall Street.
Deteriorating junk bonds on Wall Street can send insurance companies into bankruptcy in California.
Declining prices at art auctions in New York can leave Tokyo tycoons short of cash.
With that lesson in mind, two analysts at Fitch Investors Service, a Wall Street credit-rating agency, have spent a good part of the summer tracking the travels of weakening commercial aircraft loans.
With unsold and unleased aircraft going begging, Nancy Stroker and Valerie Gerard suspect that many of those idle planes will ultimately be written down -- or written off -- with unhappy consequences for the profitability of the companies that financed them.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ONE STUCK DRAWER.
Written and illustrated by Laura Nyman Montenegro.
Houghton Mifflin. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) The secondhand dresser Sophia loves has one stuck drawer; even so, she doesn't have the money to pay for it.
The secret, of course, is hidden in the drawer.
It's a strange fantasy, illustrated in suitably dark, mysterious shades.


'Trumped!'
To the Editor:
In her review of "Trumped!" Susan Lee cited Donald Trump's need to alter "Trump's Castle" to "Trump Castle." It was reminiscent of a story (apocryphal?) bearing on Oscar Wilde's similar obsession.
The guest at a country house for a weekend, Wilde was queried by his hostess when he came down to dinner: "Mr. Wilde, what did you do this morning?" "I put a comma in" was the reply.
"And, Mr. Wilde, what did you do this afternoon?" With a sigh Wilde responded, "I took it out again."  ROBERT K. ROBISON  Bronx


Jackson Gets Go-Ahead For Return to White Sox
The Chicago White Sox today pronounced Bo Jackson fit and said he would be activated in the next few days.
The club trainer, Herm Schneider, told the White Sox that Jackson was physically and mentally ready to play almost eight months after he seriously injured his left hip playing football for the Los Angeles Raiders.


Lighter Bags, Shorter Trips
WHEN the travel industry bites a lemon, luggage makers pucker; since fewer people are taking vacations, luggage sales are expected to be down 5 percent for 1991.
But as the luggage market adapts to tough times, it is producing changes that will interest people who are preparing to pack for school or others who, like me, have decided their current bags are too battered to continue.
The strong trend in consumer choices is away from hard suitcases and toward duffel bags, mainly big, some of which can be carried either by shoulder strap or handles, or enlarged versions of gym bags, soft satchels, big pouches, boat bags and the like.
This shift is a direct outgrowth of the virtual halt in foreign travel during the Persian Gulf war and the continuing impact of the recession.


LOOSENING THE STRAIGHT JACKET
"DOES IT MAKE ME LOOK YOUNGER?"
Richard C. Helmstetter, the 49-year-old president of Callaway Golf, a leading sporting-goods manufacturer, deliberates a beat before replying with an unqualified "yeah." The source of his more youthful look is the suit he's wearing.
Broad at the shoulders and tapered at the hips, it's designed to make the most of his frame.
"It's not exactly trendy," says Helmstetter, who may be better known to golf fans as the inventor of Big Bertha, a wide-body driver.
"But it brings me closer in style to a lot of bright young guys I do business with."


TOP DRAWS
From pet rocks to tom cruise to plaid sheets, it's amazing what people will subject themselves to just because everybody else does.
One of my friends crankily dubs this sensibility "the lemming phenomenon," which ignores the fact that every once in a while there's something out there that actually deserves to be a best seller.
The success of a few gag-inducing perfumes notwithstanding, best-selling cosmetics generally fall into this narrower though more felicitous niche of deserved best-sellerdom.
After all, one can pretend a liking for a Hollywood hunk or a dumb book, but the use of cosmetics represents a more primal commitment -- one that's about how you look, how you
smell
.


No. 2 Dodgers Are Trying Harder
FRIDAY NIGHT
Tim Belcher raised more than a few eyebrows in the Los Angeles Dodgers' clubhouse last week in St.
Louis when he said they would be better off in second place in the National League West.
After Los Angeles fell out of first, it was up to Belcher to give his teammates more than a verbal prompting in their attempt to regain the division lead from the Atlanta Braves.
The right-hander backed up his words on Friday night with a four-hitter and a season-high 10 strikeouts in a 2-0 victory over the Cubs.


Rutgers On Top In Big East Kickoff
The game, a sloppy one played in heat and humidity, did not do justice to the occasion, which was the inauguration of the Big East Football Conference.
Certainly the eight members of the Eastern league that for so many decades was an unrealized dream will stage more compelling contests than the one played today by Rutgers and Boston College.
At least Rutgers, which won the first intercollegiate football game ever played with a 6-4 victory over Princeton 122 years ago, achieved another milestone.
The Scarlet Knights defeated the Eagles, 20-13, this afternoon before a crowd of 22,185 spectators at Rutgers Stadium for the first Big East triumph.


Visitor Programs For the Elderly
The recent article about volunteers who visit the elderly was timely ("Volunteer Visitors Befriend the Elderly").
We hope that we will be more successful in reaching the isolated, frail senior if the public is made aware of the problem.
The article mentioned Mercer County, but failed to inform county residents of the excellent visitor services available to them.
HomeFriends, a program of the Princeton Senior Resource Center, has a very successful friendly visitor program, which is partly financed by the United Way.


RECORD BRIEF
Nikki D: 'Daddy's Little Girl'
Def Jam 44031; all three formats.


McDonald's in Queens Is Robbed
The robbers had disguised themselves in the red-and-white striped uniforms of the McDonald's they had just robbed in Whitestone, Queens, hoping to aid their escape.
But it did not work, the police said.
Officers arrested two suspects early yesterday before they could get away with a small mountain of cash.


Rooting Out Prejudice
To the Editor:
Another approach to presenting Asian-Americans as "more recognizably human" would be the appearance of Asian-Americans in the theater, embodying roles of
all
types in both the classics and new works.
Known as the now-controversial "colorblind casting," audiences are asked to accept people of color in roles whose essences do not rely on race.
This is a powerful tool in inviting them to see us for our similarities rather than for our differences.
Perhaps then the power of our image as
people
could signify a move away from the existence of recognizable stereotypes as the only thing they know of us.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; The House of Harry Thaw's Half-Brother
This is another in a series of columns answering questions about New York's changing streetscapes.  4 East 89th Street
Q.
I have never seen a picture of the house occupied by my grandfather's brother, Stephen Birch, at 4 East 89th Street.
Can you find one? . . .
William W. Collins, Judson Realty, Manhattan.


Jets vs. Tampa Bay: Now, It's Interesting
Last year, the Jets and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers played two games and neither one meant a thing: not Tampa Bay's 23-14 victory in the teams' preseason closer, nor the Jets' 16-14 triumph in the regular-season finale, with both teams out of playoff contention.
Both games were played in Florida.
The Jets and the Buccaneers will play another game today, and this time it will mean plenty.
The game, a 1 P.M. interconference matchup at Giants Stadium, is the regular-season opener for the two teams, and for just about every person on the field this is the first day in the rest of their careers.
Butterflies anyone?


On the Street; Tiny Riders, Big Ambitions
The Lilliputian riders, pristine in their formal riding clothes, starred at the opening day of the Hampton Classic horse show in Bridgehampton, L.I., last Sunday.
In the lead line competition, children under 5 years old, all correctly seated in the saddle atop their ponies, were led by their teachers around the show ring.
Agneta Currey, chairwoman of the event, accompanied her 3-year-old granddaughter, Alexa Chapman, top right.
Not to be missed were the twins on matching brown-and-white ponies led by identically dressed trainers.
Little girls wore their hair braided and tied with flowing ribbons or ribbon cockades.
They wore white turtlenecks monogrammed with their initials and tiny black leather gloves to complete their riding attire.
The show, benefiting the Southampton Hospital and the United States Equestrian Team, ends today.


Nancy Aries Is Wed To Ronald David Koff
Nancy Jane Aries, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter L. Aries of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married last evening to Ronald David Koff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Zale Koff, also of New Rochelle.
Rabbi Abraham Klausner performed the ceremony at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y.
The bride, 24 years old, is a sales coordinator for Zodiac Entertainment, a television production company in New York.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is the president of Aries Realty, a shopping-center development company in Greenwich, Conn.


Susan Wetchler To Marry in Fall
Susan Cathy Wetchler, a New York hotel executive, and Robert Chung Wei, a New York banker, have announced their engagement.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Wetchler, 34 years old, is the director of sales and marketing at the Hotel Wales.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in hotel administration from Cornell University.
She is the daughter of Barbara Dunne Wetchler of New York and the late Dr.
Bernard B. Wetchler, a surgeon.


Teachers Flunk Democrats (And Vice Versa) in Jersey
With costs soaring and performance declining, New Jersey schools reopen this month amid a political free-for-all that began in earnest last month.
The warring sides appear less concerned about why schoolchildren can't learn than about who is to blame.
Scholastic Aptitude Test scores released last week showed New Jersey students lagging behind an already declining national average.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Our finished basement, which is used as a guest, computer and sewing room, shows no signs of leaks; however, it gets very humid in the summer, so much so that mold grows on the furniture, records and books.
This area adjoins an unfinished part of the basement that contains the laundry.
We have thought of running a dehumidifier all the time to control the mold, but I think this would be quite expensive.
Is there anything else we can do to solve the humidity problem?
A.
If the walls are finished or covered with paneling of some type, there may be seepage through the foundation walls that you cannot see.
Also, check the outside to make sure that all surface water drains away from the foundation, especially water pouring out of the downspouts during a heavy rain.
Finally, if the laundry area has a clothes dryer, make sure it is vented directly to the outside.
Otherwise, this could be the source of the humidity.


Data Update
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
July 91
July 90
Change
New York
442.8
399.7
11%
New Jersey
157.8
115.8
36%
Connecticut
79.6
78.2
2%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.39
9.36
10.49
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.10
7.16
8.40
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.24
9.25
10.30
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.96
7.06
8.12
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.30
9.30
10.36
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.94
6.97
8.32
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.50
9.50
10.65
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.59
7.62
8.57
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.62
5.72
7.93
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.12
9.12
9.85
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Accessibility: The Missing Link?
To the Editor:
In his essay "Lower Skyline, Higher Aspirations"  [ Aug. 11 ] , Paul Goldberger praises the Riverside South plan that was recently unveiled for the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
Artistically, this latest reincarnation for the former Penn Central yards shows great improvement over the previous versions.
However, it still lacks a major component for environmental success because transportation has not been considered.


Knockout to Egan
To the Sports Editor:
A.
J.
Liebling would have been shocked had he read George Vecsey's column ("Fistiana Has Gone Software," The Times, Aug. 14) stating that he had coined the phrase "the sweet science" to describe boxing.
In his 1956 book on boxing, "The Sweet Science," Liebling attributed the phrase "sweet science of bruising" to Pierce Egan (1772-1849) whom he described as "the greatest writer about the ring who ever lived." Mr.
Egan's words appeared in 1824 in a London publication, Boxiana.
JOHN MCCORMACK Dallas


Janna L. Collins, A Nurse, Is Wed
Janna Lynn Collins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Collins of Marietta, Ohio, was married there yesterday to Dr.
William Todd Zempsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton L. Zempsky of Woodbridge, Conn.
The Rev.
F.
Dale Parson performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Zempsky, 25 years old, graduated from Johns Hopkins University and is a nurse in neonatal care at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
Her father is a consulting engineer with the Shell Chemical Company in Belpre, Ohio.


Making a Difference; On the Spot At the Trial of Keating
William Hodgman, a 38-year-old deputy district attorney, has tried more than 140 felony cases.
But he has probably never faced a case more widely watched than his current assignment -- prosecuting Charles H. Keating Jr., the former owner of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, on securities-fraud charges.
In his opening statement to the jury in State Superior Court here last week, Mr.
Hodgman said Mr.
Keating had overseen a scheme to raise money for Lincoln and its parent company, the American Continental Corporation, by selling junk bonds issued by American Continental to depositors in Lincoln branches in California.


Rescuers Hunt for Boy In Empty Water Main
Rescue workers searched through empty water main pipes in the Bronx last night looking for a youngster still lost after two of his playmates were pulled to safety.
The youths' misadventure began early in the afternoon, when five or six boys entered the pipes through an open pit in the street that was surrounded by a flimsy fence of orange plastic mesh.


Jane Sommers Wed to Robert Kelly Jr.
Jane Walker Sommers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Feldher Sommers of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to Robert Quayle Kelly Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kelly of Littlehampton, Sussex, England.
The Rev.
Fran Olson performed the ceremony at the University Presbyterian Church in Chapel Hill, N.C.
Mrs.
Sommers-Kelly, 28 years old, graduated summa cum laude from the University of North Carolina and was until recently a vice president of J. P. Morgan in New York.
This month she is to begin studies at the European Institute of Business Administration, in Fontainebleau, France.
Her father, who is retired, was an officer with the Central Intelligence Agency.
The bridegroom, 30, also graduated from U.N.C.
Until recently, he was the afternoon program host on WVOX and WRTN, radio stations in New Rochelle, N.Y.
His father, who is retired, was a commander in the British Navy.
His mother, Cynthia Kelly, is a social worker with the Sussex County Council.


Drinking, Driving and Death Underground
Just after midnight Wednesday, rescue workers responding to a Lexington Avenue subway derailment descended under Park Avenue into hell.
Flashlights playing about the smoky tunnel revealed hundreds of tons of mangled metal, dozens of bloodied passengers and, here and there, body parts.
It was the worst New York City subway accident in 63 years.
Five people were killed, more than a hundred others were injured and many fingers were pointing toward the motorman, 38-year-old Robert Ray.
Mr.
Ray, uninjured, had spoken briefly to police at the scene and then disappeared.


The Sons of the Organization Men
To the Editor:
Your article on the children of William H. Whyte's "Organization Man" ("The Sun Sets on the Silent Generation," Forum, Aug. 4) reminded me of a story mining men liked to tell about Senator William A. Clark of Montana, who made a fortune in copper from "the richest hill on earth." His Senate seat once achieved, the Senator became a tight man.
One day in Butte his barber asked him: "Senator, how come your son always tips me a dollar and you only tip me a dime?"


Answering The Mail
Q.
Our finished basement, which is used as a guest, computer and sewing room, shows no signs of leaks; however, it gets very humid in the summer, so much so that mold grows on the furniture, records and books.
This area adjoins an unfinished part of the basement that contains the laundry.
We have thought of running a dehumidifier all the time to control the mold, but I think this would be quite expensive.
Is there anything else we can do to solve the humidity problem?
A.
If the walls are finished or covered with paneling of some type, there may be seepage through the foundation walls that you cannot see.
Also, check the outside to make sure that all surface water drains away from the foundation, especially water pouring out of the downspouts during a heavy rain.
Finally, if the laundry area has a clothes dryer, make sure it is vented directly to the outside.
Otherwise, this could be the source of the humidity.


Beading: 'Therapeutic' Retail Activity
The urge to adorn oneself is basic.
So is the creative impulse.
Now outposts around Manhattan are catering to both as bead-stringing becomes the latest family activity.
Business is good at the three-week-old Bead Store, 1065 Lexington Avenue (at 75th Street).
So good, in fact, that the owner, Jodi Ross, plans to open another store in SoHo.
"It's a playroom for all ages," she said.


Miller Highway: Here Today, Gone . . .
To the Editor:
In his discussion of the Riverside South project, Paul Goldberger scants a major issue.
The Miller Elevated Highway, from 59th to 72d Streets, is now being rebuilt.
In three or four years, and after an expenditure of $40 million, we will have a new concrete roadway, wider and straighter, and a rustproofed and painted steel structure.
Will we then tear it down, as required by Riverside South, and build a new road at grade a few hundred feet inland, at a cost of well over $100 million?
Can we afford such profligacy, when many city bridges are in a dangerous condition?


Ron Oester to Manage in Minor Leagues
RON OESTER is starting over in the place where his career began.
The former Cincinnati Reds' second baseman, who has spent 17 of his 35 years in the Cincinnati organization, will manage Billings, Mont., of the Pioneer League next season.
"Billings is the place I started as a player," Oester said.
"Now I'm going to get my start managing there. My goal is to manage in the big leagues." (AP)


Sports of The Times; Handley Relies On Blackjack Thinking
Ray Handley's other game is blackjack.
But he's not a high-roller.
As a gambler, he's serious but sensible.
When he visited Atlantic City shortly after receiving a hefty salary increase as the Giants' new coach, he didn't increase his gambling money.
"I bet," he said, "the same way I did before."


Holiday on Tomorrow
TRAFFIC ALERT West Indian Carnival and Parade: Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn will be closed tomorrow from Utica Avenue to Washington Street from 10 A.M. to late evening.
HOLIDAY SCHEDULES Monday is Labor Day.
Here are holdiday schedules.
NEW YORK Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed Parking: Sunday rules.
Sanitation: No pickup, recycling or street cleaning.
Schools: Closed.
Financial markets: Closed.
Transportation: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday scheudle.
NEW JERSEY Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Closed.
Transportation: N.J.
Transit on weekend schedule.
CONNECTICUT Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Closed.
Transportation: Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Pure Mathematicians
To the Editor:
John Allen Paulos repeats the folklore that G. H. Hardy "reveled in the uselessness of pure mathematics" and concludes that Hardy would have been pleased at the paucity of applications of Ramanujan's work.


Rhonda B. Lupin Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Lupin of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Rhonda Beth Lupin, to Ilan S. Nissan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Nissan of Dix Hills, L.I.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Lupin, 26 years old, is a retail sales associate at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is a senior partner in the accounting firm of Smolin, Lupin in West Orange, N.J.
Mr.
Nissan, 27, is an associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
He graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany and received a law degree from Boston University.
His father is the president of I &amp; L Stationery Inc. in Valley Stream, L.I.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FISH'S PERSPECTIVE
"The Dirty Water Blues" was composed by the staff of the Maritime Center in Norwalk and it is sung by a motorized 12-foot-long salmon to visitors as they emerge from the elevator to see a new exhibit, also called "Dirty Water Blues." The song and the exhibit sum up the problems of water pollution for marine life in Long Island Sound.


'Assassins': Now Dead Right
Late in the Stephen Sondheim-John Weidman one-act musical "Assassins," eight characters who either killed or tried to kill an American President form a motley chorus to bellow out "Another National Anthem." John Wilkes Booth, John Hinckley Jr., Sara Jane Moore and several lesser-known aspirants to historical notoriety complain about not getting the "prizes" they had hoped to win for their violent deeds.
Instead of being steeped in Broadway and operatic traditions, "Another National Anthem" sounds closer to one of Tom Waits's lurching quasi-Salvation Army Band marches.
With its galumphing oom-pah-pah bluntness, the song stands as the most radical departure by the composer, who has pointedly reined in his characteristic European musical influences.


Soviets Prepare to Design a New System
As two more republics joined the mass exodus from the dissolving Soviet Union, the nation's legislature set the scene today for a crucial Congress of People's Deputies to debate a new system of government after the collapse of Communist authority.
The congress, the highest constitutional authority in the faltering union, is to open Monday with an agenda that includes a report by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev on his vision of a new Soviet community, the composition of a recast legislature to preside over the transition, and an appeal from the Baltic republics to formally recognize their freedom.


In the North, Two Elegant Inns
THE approach to The Inn at the Round Barn Farm in Waitsfield, Vt., through a covered bridge, past two red barns, can obscure the fact that the agricultural roots of the town, population 1,300, have been all but obliterated by the ski and tourist industry.
Indeed, inn guests sipping their morning coffee on the patio, looking out over the terraced lawn and flower gardens, the ponds by which plump ducks preen and the pasture in which a herd of Holsteins grazes daintily, feel part of a pastoral idyll in which reality is hard-pressed to intrude.
Creating this idyll, however, had everything to do with reality, as the owners, Doreen and Jack Simko and their daughter, Anne Marie, will attest.
Buying the farmhouse -- built in sections in 1810 and 1860 -- the Simkos were obliged in 1986 to lay a new foundation, put on a new roof and gut the interior in the 18 months before they opened.
The barn, an imposing 12-sided, Shaker-style building erected in 1910, needed another two years of repairs and refurbishing.
The couple used the earnings from their floral business in central New Brunswick, N.J., now run by two of their sons, to finance the work.


Bridge
Home-court advantage is not usually considered a significant factor in bridge competition, but it seems to be relevant in junior international play.
Four years ago, the Dutch won the first World Junior Team Championship in the Netherlands, two years ago the British won in England, and 10 days ago an American squad took the third title in Ann Arbor, Mich.
Twelve teams competed for six days, resulting in a surprising sweep for the four English-speaking teams.
Canada took the silver medal, Australia the bronze, and another American team came infourth.
Norway, in fifth, was the top scorer among the three European teams, which had been favored at the start.


How to Push Through A State Income Tax
"Make no mistake," said Lowell P. Weicker Jr. in his television and print ads in last year's campaign to be Connecticut's governor.
"I'm not 'for' an income tax."
Mr.
Weicker, a former Republican running as an independent, won a three-way race for governor without getting a single member of his tiny party into the legislature.
Today, he stands triumphant over the nation's newest state income tax.
He proposed it a month after taking office, and then insisted upon its passage through a summer-long deadlock with the legislature, during which he vetoed three state budgets and let the government partially shut down for lack of funds.


Strike 1.55 Million
Brien Taylor pitches baseball; his mother, Bettie, pitches him.
They both have major league talent.
Last week, largely as a result of his mother's negotiating skill, the New York Yankees agreed to pay the 19-year-old Mr.
Taylor a $1.55 million signing bonus, the most ever commanded by an amateur baseball draftee.
An offer of $650,000 had been on the table for weeks, with Mrs.
Taylor hinting that it might not be enough to keep her son from going on to college in September.
Mrs.
Taylor held firm at the family home in Beaufort, N.C., and the Yankees blinked.
Scott Boras, a sports agent who advised the Taylors, said that when Mrs.
Taylor met with the Yankees' general manager, Gene Michael, she was "fully apprised" of the value of her son's 98-mile-an-hour fastball.
When Mr.
Taylor arrived for the ceremonial contract signing, Mr.
Michael recalled, "He told me, 'I never saw this many cameras.' " Mr.
Michael added, "I never saw that many myself." Mr.
Taylor will begin pitching for a Yankee farm team sometime later this month.


Tower Tours
To the Editor: Though there are numerous bus companies in the San Francisco Bay Area, the Gray Line dominates.
Tower Tours has brought together several smaller operators, one of which, Super Sightseeing, became our transportation arm.
Your article (Travel Advisory, July 28) listing Super Sightseeing in a chart of sightseeing tours by bus in seven cities has led to an identity crisis.
We have decided to operate as Tower Tours; our address is 97 Jefferson Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94133; (415) 434-8687.
DAVID P. JONES General Manager, Tower Tours San Francisco


Abortion Issue Gets Attention
I note that the thorny and controversial issue of abortion seems somehow to always find its way into print in the Long Island Weekly.


A Painter of Heroic Women In a Brawling, Violent World
Subjugated, exploited, perhaps even abused by her irascible, libertine artist father.
Raped at 18 by one of her father's colleagues, forced into silence, then forced into a marriage to restore her lost honor after a scandalous public trial.
A successful painter at 20, equaling and at times eclipsing her father's fame.
Separated from her husband at 27.
Courted and patronized by aristocrats, nobles and intellectuals until her death at 59.
This was the life of Artemisia Gentileschi, the 17th-century painter and prototype of the modern emancipated woman who is the subject of an enormously successful retrospective, featuring 22 of her paintings, more than half her known opus, at the Casa Buonarotti in Florence. (The exhibit was originally scheduled to run through Nov. 4, but it will probably be extended and almost certainly will travel to other cities, both in Europe and the United States, although its itinerary has yet to be set.)


Southeast's Builders Hungering for Credit
Sam Hammond usually builds 10 houses a year in this northwestern South Carolina city and its vicinity.
But so far this year, he has built just one.
And he had to use his own money to do it.
Several hundred miles south of here in Fort Myers, Fla., a golf course and surrounding middle-income housing development probably will not be built at all.
Larry Swank, a builder and developer in Nappanee, Ind., and four others cannot borrow the money to buy the land.


LONG ON APPEAL
A long skirt is a drag -- unless it looks like these.
While most skirts are still a bit above the knee, designers are feeling the urge to drop the silhouette downward.
When a skirt is narrow and equipped with a slit, or draped insouciantly up on one hip, it's a sexy bit of style.
In Paris, Azzedine Alaia is making curvaceous creations in stretch fabrics, their midcalf hemlines sliced with zippered slits.
They look new -- and powerfully feminine.
In New York, Donna Karan and Isaac Mizrahi are showing longer skirts for resort wear.
These wrap sinuously around the hips and open at the back or side to reveal the legs.
The length is intriguing, and worth investigating as an alternative to the prevailing snappy short hemline.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 11 about Westchester's participation in a network that locates lost Alzheimer's patients misstated the telephone number for the organization, the national Alzheimer's Alert Program.
It is (800) 733-9596.


McEnroe Is Tough, But He Still Manages To Flub the Big Points
On fire throughout the match but ashen after it, John McEnroe walked away from the 1991 United States Open, probably his next-to-last Open, with the vacant stare of a sleepwalker.
It was 1:28 in the morning; McEnroe had just spent a hot summer Friday night working in Michael Chang's favorite mode, overtime, and the 32-year-old New Yorker was having a hard time comprehending that his efforts had been for naught.


'Trumped!'
To the Editor:
The review by Susan Lee (July 14) of my disgruntled former employee's book is laughable.
It is obvious that she is not a fan of Donald Trump.


Home Runs Pace the Giants
Left-hander Bryan Hickerson pitched seven shutout innings in his first major league start and Matt Williams and Kevin Mitchell hit their 25th homers today to power the San Francisco Giants to a 6-1 victory over the St.
Louis Cardinals.
Hickerson (1-0) made his first start after 11 relief appearances this season, striking out five and walking none.
The Cardinals, managing only five hits off three San Francisco pitchers, lost their fourth straight game.


SCIENCE FICTION
THE GARDEN OF RAMA (Bantam, $20) by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee is the third in a series of novels that began in 1973 with Mr.
Clarke's "Rendezvous With Rama." The original Rama was a massive cylindrical spaceship that blundered into our solar system and allowed itself to be searched by human explorers before blasting off again into interstellar space.
Although its level of technology was far superior to anything on Earth, Rama was otherwise an enigma; there was no sign on board of its creators and no clue as to its ultimate destination or purpose.
"Rama II," by Mr.
Clarke and Mr.
Lee, published in 1989, brought Rama back for a second look; this time when the mysterious ship left the solar system (to avoid a phalanx of nuclear-tipped missiles launched from Earth) it carried three unwilling human passengers.
The new novel begins with a birth.
In her diary Nicole des Jardins, a life scientist and the wife of Richard Wakefield, a computer scientist, describes the delivery of a daughter with the help of Gen.
Michael O'Toole, a sensitive friend of the family.
The first hundred pages describe the attempts of this plucky little band to survive inside an alien artifact whose self-regenerating systems offer both life-saving resources and deadly dangers.
Feeling an obligation to provide a more varied gene pool for their descendants, the three adults play a conscience-stricken game of procreative musical chairs.
Just when it appears that they have succeeded in making their house in space a home, Rama arrives at a space station so vast that the state of Rhode Island could fit into one of its decks.


For Writer's Block, a Writer's Bloc
When Ernest Lehman stayed at the Savoy in London last spring during the filming of his adaptation of Noel Coward's comedy "Hay Fever," he had the hotel install in his room a private phone line and a computer modem.
Over the next seven weeks, through all hours of the day and night, Mr.
Lehman ran up $693 in trans-Atlantic phone calls -- an amount he says he hasn't even told his wife about -- just to stay in touch with fellow Hollywood writers through a special electronic bulletin board back in Los Angeles.
"I knew that if I had trouble with the script or trouble with the producer -- which I did -- or trouble with the director, I had a whole support network," says Mr.
Lehman, who also wrote the screenplays for such memorable films as "North by Northwest" and "West Side Story."


THE BREAKFAST CLUB
MORNING HAS BROKEN, AND THE RAY STONE Breakfast Club is at one with nature.
The sky is cloudy, and so are we.
The dew hangs heavy, and so do we.
The brook babbles, and so do we.
Nature abhors a vacuum, and in dawn's early gray light we are plugging it up.
It is Labor Day; summer sinks.
Come suppertime, backyard barbecuers will be stoking up seasonal farewells all over the place.
But no vespers for the breakfast club; we'll be eating leftovers.
Life is an abiding picnic, and morning shows the way.


Japanese Wins Marathon
Hiromi Taniguchi, the home crowd's idol, braved the heat today to win the men's marathon at the world track and field championships.
The 31-year-old Japanese chemical worker, who has won the Tokyo marathon twice, knew all the tricks of the course and coped with the weather -- 86 degrees at the 6 A.M. starting time -- as he displayed a devastating kick to finish in 2 hours 14 minutes 57 seconds.


Jean Tinguely, Playful Sculptor of Scrap Contraptions, Dies at 66
Jean Tinguely, a Swiss-born sculptor who was best known for building whimsical self-destructing contraptions out of scrap parts, died Friday at a hospital in Bern, Switzerland, He was 66 years old.
A hospital spokesman in Bern told The Associated Press that Mr.
Tinguely died of complications from a stroke suffered Aug. 18.


A SHOP RAT'S TALE
I am sure the story of Ben Hamper's life touched numbers of your readers, since so few of us have been spared the assembly-line rigors at one time or another ("A Shop Rat's Tale" by John Marchese, Aug. 11).
My own experience occurred first at Beechcraft and then at Boeing, where I advanced from counting countless thousands of thin aluminum sheets (I had no idea why I was doing this, but assumed that, at some point, what I had counted became part of a B-52) to becoming a metal-saw operator.
This involved turning 12-foot angles of aluminum into 1 3/8-inch angles of aluminum, minute after minute, for eight hours a day.
In desperation, I volunteered to be drafted into the Army, after first making sure that serious shooting of human beings in Korea had ceased.
Basic training was exhilarating, but in time the Army, too, became an assembly-line experience, as did college later (on the G.I. Bill) and my first newspaper jobs, and on and on.


CAMPUS LIFE: Pennsylvania; Medical Students Take Health Care Into Community
Students at the University of Pennsylvania Medical School live in a neighborhood with a poor health profile.
Infant mortality is high - 35 to 50 deaths in 1,000 live births - and so is the incidence of heart disease and cancer.
But for three years, Penn medcal students have been working to change these grim statistics, volunteering to take health care out of the hospital and into the communty.
This summer, as part of that effort, 18 first-year medical students were paid to work in the West Philadelphia neighborhood in jobs like screening blood pressures in soup kitchens and visiting elderly people who had been injured.


POSTINGS: New Home for the Aged in Coney Island; Sunset for the Old Half Moon Hotel
The long-standing plans by the Metropolitan Jewish Geriatric Center to replace its aging home for the elderly in the former Half Moon Hotel in Coney Island are moving to the construction stage.
An Oct. 16 groundbreaking is set for the new Shorefront Jewish Geriatric Center.
The center plans to spend between $10 million and $12 million from its capital development fund to build the new seven-story, 360-bed project.
The site is adjacent to the current center in the old hotel, now known as the Parshelsky Pavilion.
Its configuration, among other defects, cannot accommodate the group's plans to develop new facilities for patients with Alzheimer's disease and other sensory disorders.


Two-Income Families Work Twice as Hard
To the Editor:
American families dedicate more hours to work than their parents.
The family of the 50's and 60's usually had one worker putting in 50 to 60 hours per week.
Today, most families have two members who together commit 60 hours and more likely 80, leaving 20 hours less for family and community.
Workers are not necessarily looking harder for "self-fulfillment"; they are looking for ways to commit the same amount of time to their families as they received.
Corporations should recognized this gain and policies like flex-time that allow workers to commit without burning out at 35 or neglecting the next generation.
JIM FLANDERS Ann Arbor, Mich., Aug. 5


Chess
Three of the quarterfinal matches for world championship challengers were completed Aug. 22 in Brussels.
Anatoly Karpov of the Soviet Union defeated Viswanathan Anand of India, 4 1/2-3 1/2; Nigel Short of Britain triumphed over Boris Gelfand of the Soviet Union, 5-3, and Jan Timman of the Netherlands took advantage of lapses by Viktor Korchnoi of Switzerland to win, 4 1/2-2 1/2.
The only tie match tie after the regulation eight games was between Artur Yusupov and Vasily Ivanchuk of the Soviet Union.
This necessitated a pair of tiebreak games at the rate of 60 moves in 45 minutes, then 20 moves every 15 minutes thereafter.
Yusupov won the first and drew the second on Aug. 24 to to reach the semifinals.


Bookshop Founded to Help the Homeless Gets Its Eviction Notice
NEED a new copy of "The Quick and Easy Gas Grill Cookbook" or a battered version of "War and Peace"?
How about all seven volumes of Winston Churchill's "History of World War II" or a first edition of one of Erle Stanley Gardner's thrillers?
They are free at the Free Books Store on Main Street in White Plains, a five-year-old project that has raised more than $90,000 for homeless projects in the county.
The trouble is, Free Books is about to become homeless itself.


What's a Stethoscope For? Blowing Bubbles
The urgent voice of the paging operator resounded through scores of public-address speakers in the sprawling New York Hospital complex on Manhattan's East Side one recent afternoon:
"Dr. Stubs and Dr. Bobo, call 6-5-2-5-6. Dr. Stubs and Dr. Bobo, call 6-5-2-5-6."


Attica Town Struggles to Forget 1971
This is a company town. And it was 20 years ago that it became famous as one.
The lives and livelihoods of its 6,000 residents still revolve around one business: locking up some of the state's worst offenders, who account for 2,000 of the town's population.


All About/Home Fragrance; A Waft of Potpourri, of Mint -- The Scent Trade Grows
Little did interior designer Claire Burke of Minnetonka, Minn., know when she began giving away sachets stuffed with rose petals, cinnamon bark, lavender and sweet herbs that she would launch a revolution in home fragrance.
After the interior designer's friends began asking if they could buy them, she and her husband invested $10 in potpourri ingredients, stuffed them in apothecary jars and sold them in the local gift shop.
These days, Ms.
Burke's business, Claire Burke, is owned by FMG Tsumura, the American subsidiary of Tsumura of Japan.
It sells more than $70 million worth of home fragrance a year, according to industry analysts.
Imitated by hundreds of tiny companies around the country, it has spawned an industry that is difficult to measure but may be as big as $350 million.


French Satire


Aides Say Bush Is Ready to Grant Recognition to Baltics Tomorrow
President Bush will extend formal recognition to Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia on Monday regardless of whether the Soviet legislature acts to grant Baltic independence by then, Administration officials said today.
The officials said that although Mr.
Bush had been withholding formal recognition of the three republics, out of deference to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, he had decided that he is giving Soviet legislators enough time to act.


THE GREAT ALASKA DEBATE
In Egan's article, the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is described as "a sort of frozen Eden." Poetic, but the reality is that the coastal plain is an arctic desert, covered by snow and ice for most of the year.
The picture on the cover of your magazine of rugged mountains and sparkling lakes bathed by golden sunlight is a summer view of the southern edge of the 19-million acre refuge and is not representative of the coastal plain (100 miles to the north) where drilling would take place.
Egan sees oil as a substance that "spawns trouble -- wars, foul air and dirty water." We see oil as an energy source that provides Americans with a high standard of living and contributes to our nation's well-being.
ARTHUR E. F. WIESE Vice President, American Petroleum Institute
Washington


A Team Effort For Hearing Program
As project director of the Adelphi University-Winthrop University Hospital collaborative program for early detection of hearing impairment in infants, I commend you for featuring it  [ "Testing High-Risk Newborns' Hearing," June 30 ] .
This program, Project Talk With Me, is financed by the Zlinkoff and Dolen Medical Research and Education Foundations through a grant begun and administered by Adelphi University's School of Nursing.


Canadian Tax
To the Editor: I am quite puzzled by the difficulties recounted by the Mittmans in Mr.
Albright's article.
My experiences have been quite the contrary.
During a recent driving trip in Quebec Province, I purchased a pair of shoes and encountered no difficulty obtaining a GST refund application at the duty-free shop at the Champlain, N.Y., border crossing.
The form was readily available and printed in English.
It took just a few minutes to complete, and I am assured that my refund will be in U.S. dollars.


In Women's Tennis, She's Over the Hill at 21
After four years of high school in Fountain Valley, Calif., and three years at Stanford University in Palo Alto, Debbie Graham has decided to begin her career as a professional tennis player, hoping for a shot at the top of an increasingly lucrative sport.
But she has a problem.
At 21, she may be too old.
As a junior, she was a star of the United States Tennis Association's player development program.
As a scholarship player at Stanford, she was the 1990 National Collegiate Athletic Association singles champion.
Playing this year's women's circuit on a part-time basis during spring and summer, she raised her ranking from 161 at the end of 1990 to 47 before her second-round loss to Martina Navratilova last week in the United States Open.


World Markets; How Safe Is the Dollar Harbor?
In the long run, one of the casualties of the demise of Communism in what was the Soviet Union could be the American dollar.
Long the safe harbor at times when the cold war seemed in danger of heating up, the old greenback will no longer have the bogyman of Communism to chase frantic investors its way.
Investors will not need a safe harbor as often, and this means one of the props that have helped support the dollar over the long term may be gone.


Vast Influence of Procter &amp; Gamble Revives Old Questions in Cincinnati
From its twin towers marking the start of downtown to the corporate-subsidized flowerpots that brighten the sidewalks, the imprint of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company on this city is as strong as a Pete Rose slide into second base.
Until this summer, few people here questioned the company's influence in the city where it was founded, in 1837.
But the news that the Cincinnati police had conducted an electronic search of all telephone records in the metropolitan area at the behest of Procter &amp; Gamble to help stop news disclosures brought to the surface an old but seldom-discussed complaint.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 260,000
171 Larch Road
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; fireplace, new eat-in kitchen, family room, porch, beamed ceilings; taxes $5,350.
Cross River, N.Y. 400,000
3 Southwind Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 13-year-old colonial; fireplace, bay window, eat-in kitchen, deck, 2.1 acres; taxes $7,543.
Rye, N.Y. 850,000
2 Beary Court
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, new colonial; 2 fireplaces, study, family room, breakfast nook, deck, taxes not yet assessed.
Bristol,Conn. 119,000
24 Roberge Road
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; hardwood floors, formal dining room, living room with bay window; taxes $1,864.
Essex, Conn. 125,000
85 River Road
2-bedroom, 1-bath, apartment-style condominum; eat-in kitchen, patio, monthly common charges $171; taxes $1,042.
Old Saybrook, Conn. 110,000
66 Church Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 32-year-old ranch; walk-up attic, aluminum siding, needs work, 1/5 acre; taxes $1,239.
OTHER AREAS Baldwin, L.I. 187,000
68 Park View Place
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Islip, L.I. 173,000
128 South Bay Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $4,900.
Howell, N.J. 135,000
6 Stockport Way
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old split level; family room, garage, c/a; taxes $3,000.


POSTINGS: Roosevelt Island Conversion; Office Space in the 1789 Blackwell House
Those in the market for unusual office space might want to consider a fresh offering from New York State -- the Blackwell House on Roosevelt Island, a 202-year-old landmark farmhouse built by the family that owned the island for the entire 18th century.
The state, through its Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation, which is responsible for developing the island, says it is looking for a commercial tenant.
Likely candidates include an architecture or design firm or not-for-profit organization.
The two-story frame house was built in 1789 by Robert Blackwell, an English farmer whose family had bought the island -- and named it Blackwell Island -- from Dutch pig farmers in 1686.
The Blackwells farmed fruit trees and mined quarries on the island until they sold it to New York City for $32,000 in 1828.


Victory Is Short of Singapore Premier's Hopes
The political survival of Singapore's Prime Minister was in doubt today as his party, though victorious in general elections on Saturday, found it had failed to achieve the margin of victory he had sought.
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong had introduced a more tolerant style of government and made it the central issue in the election, which he called only nine months after taking office.
Mr.
Goh had succeeded the domineering and still-powerful Lee Kuan Yew, the founding Prime Minister of this prosperous Pacific country.


Industry Fails as Cure-All for Western China
While the newly prosperous residents of China's coastal towns build lavish brick homes and dream of sending their children to graduate school abroad, the still-poor inhabitants of western China patch their mud huts and sometimes think of an education as merely an optional extra that in any case ends in the fifth or sixth grade.
Life in the hamlets of western China, like this one in Qinghai Province, is clearly getting better, and it is now common to see television antennas sprouting from mud-wall villages.
But the pace of development is far slower here than in eastern China.


Commercial Property: Construction Costs; For Some, a Lucky Time to Be Building
IT may sound implausible -- with lenders balking, tenants vanishing, bankruptcies increasing and foreclosures looming -- but the construction climate in New York City hasn't been this good in years.
Building costs have dropped to where they were in the mid-80's, construction executives say.
Steel is cheaper.
And while labor is not cheaper on the face of it, productivity has improved.
Savings might amount to $10 or $20 or $30 a square foot, which has multimillion-dollar implications, given the scale on which New York builds.


Prosecutors Tell of Colombo Family Murder Plot
Victor Orena, reputedly the acting boss of the Colombo crime family, has narrowly escaped an assassination plot, according to a court document.
The plot stemmed from a power struggle between Mr.
Orena and a group loyal to Carmine Persico, the convicted Colombo boss now serving a long prison sentence, the document said.
It noted that the information about the alleged murder plot came from confidential informants.


Breaking Away


New Theater for Denver Complex
The Denver Performing Arts Complex will open a new 2,800-seat proscenium theater on Nov. 1, and celebrate with 10 days of festivities.
Completion of the Temple Hoyne Buell Theater brings to nine the number of performing spaces at the complex and makes total audience capacity there second in the country only to Lincoln Center's in New York.
The Buell was built within the shell of the old Denver Arena and is connected on one side to the 1908 Auditorium Theater.
In the glass-roofed multilevel glass galleria, one of the key design elements in the new theater, visitors can see the city skyline and the Rocky Mountains from various vantage points.


A Battle for Control of the World's Largest Tin Mine
In 1987, an Amazon woodcutter working on a wilderness ridge here cut down a massive tree.
Reaching between the roots, he plucked out a black rock, heavy with tin ore.
Four years later, the ridge has vanished into a 20-square-mile moonscape carved out of the rain forest.
It is now the largest tin mine in the world.


Gooden Sent Home As Shoulder Worsens
Amid rising concern about the pain and possible damage in his right shoulder, Dwight Gooden returned to New York today and promptly underwent extensive testing to determine the future for his season.
The star right-hander for the Mets, who left a start Aug. 22 after complaining of stiffness in his pitching shoulder, told the organization's medical staff Friday that he was experiencing more than normal discomfort 24 hours after a workout in Atlanta.


When Is Old?
Clearly, America is graying.
What's not so clear is just when people should start thinking of themselves as getting on in years.
A story in The Times last week reported that several companies are running ads addressed to the millions of baby boomers, the oldest of whom are now about 45.
Advancing age, the ads observe, has widened their bottoms.
The message from a maker of blue jeans: "You're not a kid anymore"
That's bound to depress many a yuppie; Americans by and large dislike being reminded of advancing age.
The letters sent by the American Association of Retired Persons to potential members when they turn 50 produce a degree of hyperventilation comparable to a draft notice or a tax audit.


Nancy Barry Wed To Philip Manor
Nancy Patricia Barry, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Joseph Barry of Duxbury, Mass., was married yesterday in Chester, N.J., to Dr.
Philip Craig Manor, the son of Paul Manor of Columbus, Ohio, and the late Lola Manor.
Kenneth Caro, the Mayor of Chester Township, performed the ceremony at his home.
Mrs.
Manor, 44 years old, is the executive director of Unity Concerts of New Jersey in Montclair and is the president of the board of the Cape and Islands Chamber Music Festival in Orleans, Mass.
She graduated from Connecticut College and received a master's degree in arts education from New York University.
Her father is a private consultant to several shoe companies in New England.


Versailles Treaty Squeaks By
Versailles Treaty, who has become one of the summer's star fillies, opened racing's busy Labor Day weekend by winning the Gazelle Handicap at Belmont Park by half a length yesterday for her third straight victory in a Grade I stakes.
The 3-year-old daughter of Danzig carried high weight of 123 pounds for a mile and an eighth with no apparent strain, measured the field in the homestretch and nailed Grand Girlfriend by half a length at the wire, with Immerse nearly two lengths farther back.
Wide Country, who has won seven of eight starts this year, faded to fourth.


Kate Kuhn Weds Derrik Woodbury
Dr.
Mary Cathryn Kuhn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Kuhn of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday in Halifax, Vt., to Dr.
Derrik Fairfield Woodbury, the son of Elaine C. Woodbury of Lake Orion, Mich., and Dr.
Ralph F. Woodbury of St.
Clair Shores, Mich.
Jean Wilson, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at Rowemont, the home of the bride's grandfather George A. Rowen.
The bride, who is 30 years old and is known as Kate, is a senior resident in anesthesiology at the University of Connecticut Medical School Hospital in Farmington.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her medical degree from Connecticut.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the Rowen-Leahy Corporation, a distributor of construction equipment in Newington, Conn.


Yes, Tomatoes Can Fire the Imagination
THE high season for tomatoes fires the imagination of some cooks.
At a recent dinner, I tasted a soup made from green tomatoes, decorated with a spoonful of sherbet made from yellow tomatoes.
It looked like a painting -- and was about as easy to digest as one.
But when they are prepared in more conventional ways, it is hard to tire of tomatoes, whether they show up in sandwiches, soups, sauces, as a salad or a breakfast dish.
Green tomatoes (not to be confused with Mexican green tomatoes called tomatillos, which are a cousin of the cape gooseberry) are no exception.
My favorite way to eat them is fried.


Hirsute Diversion
To the Sports Editor:
The controversy over the Yankees' decision to bench Mattingly because his hair was too long was an entertaining diversion from the recession, AIDS, the burning oil wells in Kuwait, etc.
However, this incident raised a frightening question: "Has George Steinbrenner regained control of the Yankees?" Stump Merrill and Gene Michael both seem to be pragmatic, easygoing baseball men who would not normally be inclined to go to extremes to humiliate the key player on the teamfor such a trivial infraction.
TIMOTHY HORRIGAN Orford, N.H.


Kimberly Parker Is Married on L.I.
Kimberly Rebecca Parker, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Milton Parker of Roslyn, L.I., was married last night to Seth Matthew Ingall, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Ingall of Highland Park, Ill.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The couple graduated from American University, where Mr.
Ingall is a law student and the managing editor of The Administrative Law Journal.
Mrs.
Ingall, 23 years old, is the assistant director of public relations for Bloomingdale's White Flint store in Kensington, Md.
Her father is an associate director of anesthesiology at the Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn.
The bridegroom, 25, is also a law clerk in McLean, Va., for the Government Employees Insurance Company.
His father is the chairman of pediatrics at the Evanston (Ill.) Hospital.
His grandfather the late David Lloyd Kreeger was the chairman of Geico and an art collector and philanthropist.
He was the president and chairman of the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, the president of the Washington Opera and the president of the National Symphony Orchestra.


Previn Returning To Caramoor for Jazz
Earlier this summer, Andre Previn made his Caramoor debut conducting and playing chamber music at six concerts over three weekends; now the multi-talented pianist-composer is about to return to Katonah.
This time he is performing in a jazz concert with the guitarist Mundell Lowe and the bassist Ray Brown.
The program, on Saturday at 7 P.M. in the Venetian Theater, is a benefit for the Rippowam Cisqua School in celebration of its 75th anniversary; the reservations number is 232-1252.


Focus: The Southeast; Home Builders Are Hungering for Credit
SAM HAMMOND usually builds 10 houses a year in this northwestern South Carolina city and its vicinity.
But so far this year, he has built just one.
And he had to use his own money to do it.
Several hundred miles south of here in Fort Myers, Fla., a golf course and surrounding middle-income housing development probably will not be built at all.
Larry Swank, a builder and developer in Nappanee, Ind., and four others cannot borrow the money to buy the land.


Replacing Rotted Wood Subsills
OLDER brick houses and apartment houses often have wood subsills beneath windows.
When the subsills rot, they must be replaced to prevent moisture damage.
Partly because lumber is no longer milled in sizes similar to those of most wood subsills, replacing them usually requires ingenuity.
But you may not find the job as difficult as it sounds.


Lynne Armour Has Wedding
Lynne Ann Armour, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert Armour of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr.
Armour, was married in Tarrytown, N.Y., last evening to Jeffrey Marc Schwartz, the son of Mrs.
Robert Levin of New York and Lawrence Schwartz of Coronado, Calif.
Cantor Robert Applestone performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill.
Mrs.
Schwartz, 29 years old, is an account executive at Grey Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Clark University.
Her father was the president of Chematar Inc., a chemicals trading company in New York.


This Week: Lawn Update
Early September is the best time to renovate the lawn.
Before you reseed, consider hardier tall fescues, disease-resistant, drought-tolerant grasses that don't require much fertilizer.
To dry flowers for winter arrangements, follow this advice from Alice Anne Humphrey, a horticulture consultant for Cornell Cooperative Extension: The easiest to dry are everlasting or strawflowers, like gomphrena, sea holly, money plant, love-in-a-mist, Chinese lantern, artemisia and statice.
Cut flowers that are halfway open on a dry, hot, sunny afternoon.
Tie the stems together and hang them upside down in a cool, dry, dark place.
Avoid direct sun, which will cause the colors to fade.


Christopher M. Minot, Sculptor, Weds Fannie H. Iselin, Law Clerk, in Maine
Fannie Humphreys Iselin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Jay Iselin of New York and Vinalhaven, Me., was married yesterday at the North Haven (Me.) Baptist Church to Christopher Manning Minot, a son of George Minot of Santa Barbara, Calif., and North Haven, and the late Helen R. Minot.
The Rev.
John Crocker Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Minot, 27 years old, is a clerk for Judge James T. Moody of Federal District Court in Hammond, Ind.
She graduated from Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., and Harvard University and received a law degree from Northwestern University.
Her father is the president of Cooper Union in New York.
Her mother, Josephine Lea Iselin, is a partner in the New York law firm of Lankenau &amp; Bickford.


Bank Crash
To the Editor:
Two errors, one of commission, one of omission, in your story on Aug. 18 headed "The First Domino in the Depression."


CAMPUS LIFE: Pennsylvania; Medical Students Take Health Care Into Community
Students at the University of Pennsylvania Medical School live in a neighborhood with a poor health profile.
Infant mortality is high - 35 to 50 deaths in 1,000 live births - and so is the incidence of heart disease and cancer.
But for three years, Penn medcal students have been working to change these grim statistics, volunteering to take health care out of the hospital and into the communty.
This summer, as part of that effort, 18 first-year medical students were paid to work in the West Philadelphia neighborhood in jobs like screening blood pressures in soup kitchens and visiting elderly people who had been injured.


Ms. Matus to Wed David A. Barnett
November wedding plans for Beth Jayne Matus and David Andrew Barnett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Barnett of Rye Brook, N.Y., have been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Eli J. Matus of Lido Beach, L.I.
The couple, both 26 years old, graduated from Brooklyn Law School.
Ms.
Matus is an associate at the New York law firm of Bisceglia &amp; Oppenheim.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the vice president of Creative Fur Processing in Middlesex, N.J.
Her mother, Alma Matus, teaches art at the East Elementary School in Long Beach, L.I.


Symphonic Attractions for a New Season
MANY symphonic attractions await concertgoers in the new season.
For its Oct. 5 opening at the Garde Arts Center the Eastern Connecticut Symphony has asked Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. to narrate Aaron Copland's "Lincoln Portrait." The orchestra's programming throughout the season hews very close to the traditional, but the group's music director, Paul Phillips, has come up with several fascinating contrasts.
In the opening program, for instance, two other American favorites by Copland lead to Dvorak's "New World" Symphony, while on Nov. 23 four French pieces preface Elgar's quintessentially English "Enigma Variations." The January concert introduces the winner of the orchestra's annual young artists competition, and a Beethoven-Schubert program in March will include the Mystic River Chorale.
For a brochure or any other information call 443-2876.


Combine Higher Taxes and Savings Incentives
To the Editor:
"Pinch-Hitting for the Democrats: Invest in the Future? Yes, but How?" (editorial, Aug. 11) never proposes a solution to the pitiful United States personal savings rate.


A Who's Who of Hate
The members of America's racist right inhabit a murky world of conspiracy, suspicion and paranoia.
There are not one but several Ku Klux Klans, pockets of goose-stepping Nazis in the American heartland, extremist outlaws tied to groups like Posse Comitatus, Aryan Nations, skinheads and a host of others.
There is the White Aryan Resistance, which last year was assessed $3 million in punitive damages in a civil suit for inducing skinhead thugs to beat an Ethiopian man to death on the streets of Seattle in 1988; there are the ministers of the Christian Identity movement who preach that Jews are the sons of Satan, and there are all sorts of racist cousins preaching hate under different names.
Even for journalists who cover these groups, it is hard to know who's who.
Fortunately, James Ridgeway, the Washington correspondent for The Village Voice, has written an excellent overview of the subject, BLOOD IN THE FACE: The Ku Klux Klan, Aryan Nations, Nazi Skinheads, and the Rise of a New White Culture (Thunder's Mouth, Cloth, $29.95; Paper, $19.95).
The provocative title refers to one racist formula for distinguishing who is "Aryan" and who is not: whether the person blushes, or gets "blood in the face." Mr.
Ridgeway includes this and other tidbits in "Blood in the Face," which is almost a guidebook through the nether regions of the racist universe.
Here is the Order, a splinter group of the Aryan Nations, whose adherents machine-gunned the Denver radio talk show host Alan Berg in 1984.
Here is Gordon Kahl, a member of Posse Comitatus who was involved in a shoot-out that left three law enforcement officers dead before he was shot to death in 1983 in Arkansas.
Here are the preachers, the Kluxers, the fighters and the talkers, the panoply of the racial right.


Brooklyn Landlord Shot to Death
A 65-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday in the shooting death of his landlord and the wounding of the landlord's live-in companion after an argument at their home, the police said.
The suspect, whose name was not immediately released by the police, was captured in a rear bedroom of the house in the Bay Ridge section after the police obtained a key to the residence from a neighbor.


A Dinner Guest Gets His Just Desserts
"WHODUNNIT" by Anthony Shaffer, now at Theater Three in Port Jefferson through Sept. 21, is a comic spoof of the detective thriller genre a la Agatha Christie.
Reality and illusion run rings around truth and fiction in this play, in which no one is who he or she seems to be.
Makeup, wigs, false eyebrows and phony accents are employed with quick-change artistry as the mystery of who did what to whom deepens.


To Masur, Welcome -- And Advice
DEAR MAESTRO MASUR:
Now that your arrival as music director of the New York Philharmonic is imminent, I imagine you are besieged with all sorts of knowing advice and sage warnings.
The New York music world's breath has been held for a long time, and with the suspense coming to end, all sorts of warm breezes will, no doubt, be swirling around.


At London Hotel, Room and Events
London's Hyde Park Hotel has introduced a series of summer and fall programs that combine stays at the hotel with tickets and transportation to major events.
On Sept. 28, for example, a one-night stay is coupled with orchestra seats at the Royal Opera House, London, for a performance of "Rigoletto." Guests will be served dinner in the hotel, taken to the opera house by chauffeur-driven car, and then served dessert and coffee in the hotel bar.
They will also have Champagne during the interval.
The price is about $402 a person.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Purchasing index, percent change
51.8
52.2
Thursday
Auto sales, annualized in millions
6.2
6.6
Friday
Unemployment, in percent
6.8
7
Change in consumer credit, in percent
-1.83
0.0
Monday: Markets closed for Labor Day  Tuesday: Value of new construction  Wednesday: House finance subcommittee hearing on Salomon Brothers Inc.
Thursday: Plant and equipment expenditures in second quarter *
Productivity and costs  Friday: Report on commercial loan activity  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Bessmertnykh Asserts Reformers Copy Stalin
Former Foreign Minister Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh of the Soviet Union said in remarks published today that denunciations and accusations after last week's failed coup smacked of Stalin's purges.
"This is a direct copy of what happened in 1937," Mr.
Bessmertnykh said in an interview published in the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda.
"Even when the President says the Emergency Committee are criminals -- he has no right to do that." The year 1937 marked the height of Stalin's purges.
Hundreds of thousands of people were arrested or summarily shot.


Robert Frost's Vermont
IN 1920, 44-year-old Robert Frost moved from New Hampshire to Vermont "to seek a better place to farm and especially grow apples." For the next four decades, Frost lived principally in Vermont, becoming the official poet laureate of the Green Mountain State.
Frost wrote much of his verse in a log cabin in Ripton in central Vermont.
His ashes lie beneath the ground in Old Bennington.
He ended his Pulitzer Prize-winning poem, "New Hampshire," with the ironic words, "At present I am living in Vermont."
Because Frost was a farmer first, poet second (he owned five farms, all in Vermont), his poems are more than rooted in the state's landscape, they are the landscape: its stony and frugal soil, its sculptured, shimmering green glens bespeaking a timeless and mystical perfection, and its early winter melancholies.
Frost's words, like sharpened farm implements, sifted meaning from this both severe and tender physical reality.


Replacing Rotted Wood Subsills
OLDER brick houses and apartment houses often have wood subsills beneath windows.
When the subsills rot, they must be replaced to prevent moisture damage.
Partly because lumber is no longer milled in sizes similar to those of most wood subsills, replacing them usually requires ingenuity.
But you may not find the job as difficult as it sounds.


Making a Difference; A Backer for a Renegade
R.
ANDREW HELLER, who was regarded as far out when he worked for I.B.M., received a $40.2 million vote of confidence last week from Fujitsu.
The Japanese company made the investment in return for a 44 percent stake in Mr.
Heller's new venture, Hal Computer Systems, based in Campbell, Calif.
The deal also calls for a technology exchange between Fujitsu and Hal, which plans a complete line of new computers, from work stations to mainframes.


EXPERTS QUESTION STAGGERING COSTS OF TOXIC CLEANUPS
A decade after Washington declared war on businesses that expose the public to hazardous wastes, environmental experts are questioning the unquestionable: Is it worth spending a staggering $300 billion to $700 billion to restore waste sites to pristine condition?
While acknowledging that no level of exposure to dangerous chemicals is desirable, the experts argue that the risks should be put in perspective.


Athletics and the Tigers Play Version of Home Run Derby
Round 1 of Cecil versus Jose goes to . . . Mark McGwire.
McGwire's three-run home run with two out in the 10th inning Friday night gave the Oakland Athletics a 6-3 victory over the Detroit Tigers in a battle of the home run hitters.


In Celebration of the Bad Girl
Television, these days, is full of them.
Where did they come from, these fast-talking, wisecracking, brilliantly satiric, funny women?
They all seem to be a generic mid-30's to mid-40's and have repealed the restrictions that proclaim Good Girls cannot be funny, a rule as tight and unnatural as a girdle, and far more difficult to shed.
At what point was Good Girl Annette Funicello replaced by Madonna? (I keep a close eye on both, these two being the only Italian-American women I remember seeing on the small screen.) Both Annette Funicello and Madonna have the same general shape, but Madonna encases her breasts in steel.


Apples, Oranges And Ripe Plums
To the Editor:
David Schiff's recent discovery of the Jimmie Lunceford band reminded me of my own discovery of Lunceford more than 40 years ago.
But why Mr.
Schiff should use Lunceford to trash the works of Roy Harris, Howard Hanson and other symphonic composers of the 1930's is a matter I shall not take up except to say that the comparison makes me think of apples and oranges.


Cable TV Boosterism
To the Editor:
I much appreciated Hans Fantel's article on the crowding of the FM dial  [ "In Radio, Sometimes Two's a Crowd," Aug. 4 ] .
I live in a suburban area 70 miles south of San Francisco, and my preferences are almost exclusively confined to two classical music stations emanating from the city and a public-radio outlet affiliated with the San Francisco school district.


'Bloody Mary Is The Girl We Love'
To the Editor:
In her article "Challenging the Asian Illusion"  [ Aug. 11 ] , Gish Jen says that the musical "South Pacific" perpetuates the myth that the Asian woman is "more delicate, more willing to sacrifice for her man, more docile." This may be true of the daughter, Liat, but what about her mother, Bloody Mary, who outfoxes the whole American Navy?
Is she not a 1944 prevision of those stubborn little Vietnamese women of 1965 who played a major role in defeating the entire American Army?
JAMES A. MICHENER Texas Center for Writers Austin, Tex.
The writer is the author of "Tales of the South Pacific," on which the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical was based.


CAMPUS LIFE: U.C., Irvine; Imagine Storing Proust In Just a Crumb of Cake
Tinkering with lasers as win dows into chemical reactions has yielded a potentially major advance in computer science for Prof.
Peter Rentzepis.
The chemistry professor and researcher at the University of California at Irvine has invented a laser-based device that can store 6.5 trillion bits of information -- the equivalent of one million novels -- in a computer memory unit the size of a sugar cube.
That is 2,000 times more data than top-of-the-line personal computers can currently store on their hard disks.


31 Inmates in Prison Siege Are Returned to Cuba
Thirty-one Cuban detainees were returned to Cuba yesterday, a day after Federal assault teams ended an uprising at an Alabama prison by 121 inmates trying to block the deportations.
The Cuban detainees, shackled and heavily guarded, were taken from the Talladega Federal Correctional Institution to the municipal airport in Birmingham, Ala., early in the morning and put on a plane to Cuba, a spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service said.


David Bowie Makes News With Noise
Sometimes you have to destroy a song to save it.
Not obliterate it entirely -- just maul it, sandblast it, chew it up around the edges.
That's a lesson rock-and-roll periodically learns and forgets and learns again, from the likes of Link Wray (a fuzz-tone pioneer) and Jimi Hendrix and the Velvet Underground and the New York Dolls and Husker Du and Public Enemy: there's nothing like a blast of noise to toughen a lyric, ennoble a melody and make a singer sound trustworthy.
For David Bowie, noise has been as revitalizing as the blood he drank when he played a vampire in "The Hunger," and there's plenty of noise on his latest effort, "Tin Machine II" (Victory Music/PolyGram 311 511 216; cassette and CD).
Since the late 1960's, Mr.
Bowie's music has oscillated between elaborate theatrical set pieces and noisy rock.
His music periodically works itself up to overproduction -- that's when he starts doing the Jacques Brel and Anthony Newley numbers -- until his next project blasts away the contrivances with a guitar assault.


Pure Mathematicians
To the Editor:
There is one sentence in John Allen Paulos's review of Robert Kanigel's book "The Man Who Knew Infinity" (July 21) that gives a wrong impression.
He wrote that the mathematical genius Srinivasa Ramanujan "returned to India, did a last, dazzling bit of work on so-called mock theta functions and died."


No Longer Just Another Name on the Entry Sheet
On the day after, his pride was still much in evidence.
"Ask me more questions, some fun questions," Mike Powell said during a news conference today, the next-to-last day of the world track and field championships.
His smile was nearly as wide as the landing pit that caught his world-record long jump of 29 feet 4 1/2 inches on Friday night.


The Executive Life; A Charitable Overlay For 90's Networking
On a breezy August evening, a crowd of businesspeople gathered at a penthouse above Central Park to sip gin and tonics, watch the sun set over the Manhattan skyline and gossip about the scandal at Salomon Brothers, the botched Soviet coup and the bankruptcy of real estate developer Peter Kalikow.
Then a tall brunette dressed in black called for attention.
"We're here tonight to do something great for civilization," said Carol Treadwell.
"We're going to participate in the event of a lifetime, and help save the earth in the process."


Erin M. Brogan Weds K. P. Tracy in Chicago
Erin Marie Brogan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George E. Brogan of Evergreen Park, Ill., was married yesterday to Kerry Patrick Tracy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard B. Tracy of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Patrick Marshall performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church in Chicago.
The bride, who is 28 years old, is an assistant to the executive editor of Vogue magazine in New York.
She graduated from John Carroll University.
Her father is a lawyer in Chicago.


Serbia Says It Is Accepting European Peace Proposal
Serbia, Yugoslavia's largest republic, announced today that it was accepting a European Community plan to send foreign observers to oversee a cease-fire in Croatia and set up an arbitration commission to resolve the overall Yugoslav crisis.
"The basic elements of this document, which are the result of France's plan and support, are acceptable for Serbia," said Serbia's Foreign Minister, Vladislav Jovanovic, on Belgrade television tonight.
"We consider that it is reasonable, balanced, and does not favor any one side."


Flights of Fancy To the Land of Truth
Indian women wear tutus not only in this life but also after death.
Japanese women wear tutus to weddings.
At least, they were doing so in two ballets recently performed at Lincoln Center.
"La Bayadere," choreographed by Marius Petipa in St.
Petersburg in 1877 to a score by Leon Minkus, tells a story of love, deceit and redemption that takes its characters from India to the afterworld.
This Russian classic has been part of American Ballet Theater's repertory since 1980, and the company performed it this summer at the Metropolitan Opera House.


Farm Bosses Want Kuhn, but Majors Balk
If a group of minor league owners and officials have their way, Bowie Kuhn, who was commissioner of the major leagues for 15 years, will become president of the minor leagues.
But the outlook doesn't look good for Kuhn's return to baseball.
Kuhn, who left the sport in October 1984, said he had not decided if he would take the position, but he said he was being urged by some minor league people to do so.


The Kick That Floored the 49ers
It was a game to remember, and the Giants have remembered.
"Besides the Super Bowl," Steve DeOssie said, "that was the highlight of my career."


Luke Chung and Beth Ritchie Marry
Beth Angela Ritchie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Michael Ritchie of Uniondale, L.I., was married yesterday to Luke Tsun Chung, a son of Dr.
Wen-Yi Chung of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Mrs.
Chung.
The Rev.
Raymond Collins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Good Counsel Church in Vienna, Va.
Mrs.
Chung, 24 years old, is the assistant director of corporate and foundation support at the Nature Conservancy in Roslyn, Va.
She is a graduate of Columbia College and studied in the honors M.A. program at Cambridge University in England.
Her father, a former Navy pilot, retired as an aerospace engineer from the Grumman Corporation in Bethpage, L.I.


New Yorkers, etc.
It isn't only the people we hold in no particular regard who break promises.
The nicest people do it constantly.
Tell them they are guilty in this area and they would be highly indignant.
For the most part, they are completely unaware of what they have done or, more accurately, what they have not done.
What is a promise?
The dictionary offers a variety of choices beyond the definitive "oral or written agreement." There are, for example, several more generalized definitions, like "indication" and "basis of expectation." And it is on these less specific definitions that so many people fail miserably.
Chances are that almost everybody has at least one friend or relative who deserves honorary status in the category of people who break promises or, to put it more kindly, who do not carry through with what they have led one to expect.


Yes, Tomatoes Can Fire the Imagination
THE high season for tomatoes fires the imagination of some cooks.
At a recent dinner, I tasted a soup made from green tomatoes, decorated with a spoonful of sherbet made from yellow tomatoes.
It looked like a painting -- and was about as easy to digest as one.
But when they are prepared in more conventional ways, it is hard to tire of tomatoes, whether they show up in sandwiches, soups, sauces, as a salad or a breakfast dish.
Green tomatoes (not to be confused with Mexican green tomatoes called tomatillos, which are a cousin of the cape gooseberry) are no exception.
My favorite way to eat them is fried.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SCARSDALE IN THE PAST
A 46-star flag waved over Scarsdale on Independence Day 1907, and in the 1860's the Quaker Ridge school consisted of one room.
Automobile accidents on the Bronx River Parkway were not quite so devastating in 1929 as they are today, and in the 1890's tennis players at the Fox Meadow courts wore some mighty cumbersome outfits.


Talking: Co-op Loans; A Complex Web of Obligations
WHEN a loan is taken to finance -- or partially finance -- the shares to a New York City co-op apartment, certain obligations are assumed by the shareholder and the co-op corporation.
Many go well beyond what would normally prevail if the loan were financing any other sort of real property.
Many people fail to understand this, said Lawrence Chaiftez, president of the 130-unit co-op at 69 West Ninth Street in Manhattan.


Replacing Rotted Wood Subsills
OLDER brick houses and apartment houses often have wood subsills beneath windows.
When the subsills rot, they must be replaced to prevent moisture damage.
Partly because lumber is no longer milled in sizes similar to those of most wood subsills, replacing them usually requires ingenuity.
But you may not find the job as difficult as it sounds.


Javelin Thrower Now a South African
The American-born javelin thrower, TOM PETRANOFF, has been granted South African citizenship, clearing him to represent the country in international competition, a government official said Friday.
Petranoff, 33 years old, has lived in South Africa since 1988, the year he was suspended from international competition for six years for violating a ban on competing in the country. (AP)


In Moldavia, A Hankering for Attention
In the five days since its declaration of independence from the Soviet Union, the Moldavian republic has become a little annoyed with the world's failure to recognize it.
After all, its residents ask, were they not, like the newly recognized Baltic states, annexed by Stalin under the secret protocol of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact?
So far, only Romania, which ruled this territory from 1918 to 1940, has recognized its independence.
This week, while Moscow was trying to collect itself after the failed coup attempt, Soviet Moldavia and Romania were moving quickly to cement a relationship that was renewed two years ago.


Correction
A chart last sunday about Notre Dame's television ratings included several errors.
Following is the corrected chart.


Making a Difference; Indian Gaming Head
When the Bush Administration approached him in 1989, Anthony J. Hope did not quite see the virtue of taking a job running one of the newest Federal agencies, the National Indian Gaming Commission.
It was an agency, conceived in controversy during the Reagan Administration, that had languished without champion, chief or staff.
"I was trying to turn it down," he said.
But the 51-year-old Mr.
Hope, a lawyer, was finally intrigued by the chance to build an agency from scratch.
Confirmed in May, 1990, he is charged with overseeing the gambling enterprises of American Indian tribes.


POSTINGS: For First-Time Buyers; Sonny Mae Workshops
The slump in residential prices throughout the region has given people in the market for housing more leverage than they have had in years.
But buying a home can be a daunting experience for newcomers to the scene.
The State of New York Mortgage Agency, which offers low-interest loans to qualified first-time buyers, tries to demystify the home-buying process in the workshops it holds frequently throughout the state.
The September schedule includes workshops in Hempstead, L.I., on the 17th; Saugerties, in Ulster County, on the 23d; Yonkers on the 24th and Brooklyn on the 25th.


Combine Higher Taxes and Savings Incentives; We Need Stable Prices
To the Editor:
Jeff Madrick gives insufficient attention to the risks of rising prices in "Recovery? The Economy Is a Mess" (Op-Ed, Aug. 14).
The real achievement of the United States economy has been to contain inflation amid global inflation while suffering from a huge budget deficit, a weak dollar and increased local taxes.
Any of these could have pushed the economy back to the double-digit inflation of the 1970's and early 80's.


Agassi, In Red, White And Blue
Tom Gorman, the captain of the United States Davis Cup team, phoned Andre Agassi yesterday to assure the slumping player he was still a member of the squad for the semifinal match against Germany in Kansas City, Mo., which begins on Sept. 20.
"I wouldn't change players at this point unless something real drastic happened," Gorman said.
"The only concern I had was if there was a problem with his health. As far as I know, Andre is healthy."


Ms. Loomis Weds John B. Paterson Jr.
Samantha Lee Loomis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur H. Loomis of New Canaan, Conn., and Chatham, Mass., was married yesterday in Chatham to John Barstow Paterson Jr., a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Paterson of Barre, Vt.
The ceremony was performed by the bridegroom's father and the Rev.
Thomas Gallen at the First United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Paterson, 26 years old, graduated from Colgate University.
She is the travel advertising manager at Audubon magazine in New York.
Her father owns and publishes Garden Design magazine in Westport, Conn.


DISCOVERING COLUMBUS
In this season of popular Columbus-bashing, it was reassuring to read John Noble Wilford's article "Discovering Columbus" (Aug. 11).
Wilford's treatment of the historical Columbus is evenhanded, giving credit for his tremendous accomplishment of sailing westward over uncharted seas to discover a continent unknown to Europeans and at the same time pointing out his failure as a colonial administrator and his penchant for grasping for personal wealth.


User's Guide: The Income Tax And, Oh, the Details
JUST before Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. signed the state's new income tax law, he paused and said that he believed the act would leave Connecticut "facing toward the future." Even his opponents on the tax issue agreed, though the debate still rages over whether the new horizon is better or worse than the old one.
For people who live or work in Connecticut, however, the issues are much more down to earth.
When the lofty pronouncements of the politicians have been long forgotten, Connecticut will still be left with a far more complicated tax system -- especially over the next few months -- than the one it muddled through with for all the previous years.


How European Railroad Bandits Strike
To the Editor:
Re "Return of the Highwayman: Tourists Are Prey in Europe" (front page, Aug. 16): Sleeping cars are not the only targets of thieves on European railroads.
In November 1989 my bag was stolen from the nonstop extra-fare supertrain from Paris to Lyons.
The overhead baggage racks, the aisles and the space between seats, even in first class, are too narrow for a 26-inch bag, and I had to put my suitcase on the open baggage rack at the end of the car, near the door.
When I arrived in Lyons, it was gone.


Karen Srour Wed To Brian S. Bronk
Karen Stephanie Srour, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ramon Srour of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Brian Scott Bronk, the son of Mrs.
George L. Farr of Greenwich, Conn., and Ronald D. Bronk of Yorktown Heights.
The Rev.
Joseph Farone performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Bronk, 23 years old, graduated from Colgate University.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. degree in chemistry at Tufts University.
Her father is a vice president of Citibank in New York.


Blonde Ambition
Times must be tough in the one-income Bumstead household, which includes a couple of adolescent mall-hoppers, Cookie and Alexander, and a litter-dropping mutt named Daisy.
Anyway, after six decades of vacuuming the living room, playing bridge and sending Dagwood downstairs to investigate noises in the night, Blondie is getting a job.
That's earth-shaking, in the view of Dean Young, who took over the strip after his father, who created it, died in 1973.
"This is the biggest thing to happen to Blondie since the birth of Cookie Bumstead back in '42," Mr.
Young said last week.
Actually, her job hunt appears consistent with Blondie's early search for the good life.
She first appeared in 1930 as Blondie Boopadoop, flapper about town with an eye out for a rich bachelor.
She snared Dagwood, feckless heir to the Bumstead Locomotive fortune.
But Dagwood was disinherited after their marriage in 1933, and the Bumsteads have lived paycheck-to-paycheck ever since.
The Young family, on the other hand, has doubtless prospered.
The comic strip appears in more than 2,000 newspapers in 55 languages.


Managing; Pairing Up for Better Understanding
He was a black engineer, eager to learn the commercial end of the business.
His new boss was a white marketer, eager to teach.
The Monsanto Company figured them for a perfect match.
They weren't.


Strike the Gold Runs As 3 Owners Squabble
An executive coup has been staged by two not-so-silent partners in a feud that has embroiled the owners of Strike the Gold since the colt won the Kentucky Derby last May.
The battle has been over who calls the shots on the most visible race horse in America, a horse owned by three New York businessmen and golfing partners.
One of the three men, Giles Brophy, a dealer in government securities, has been the most visible of the partners, and the racing world has buzzed all summer with reports that the partners have been feuding.


Off Course
FROM USAIR'S GLASS-ENCLOSED TOWER, Greater Pittsburgh International Airport seems asleep.
Nearly 40 airliners nuzzle quietly along wharflike terminals, like giant, docile porpoises.
The planes are taking on passengers, but the tower crew can't see the activity.
What is visible through the tower's panoramic windows at 4:30 P.M. on a busy weekday is a vast, empty airfield.
But then the porpoises, twin-engined DC-9's and Boeing 737's, come alive.
At 4:35, the first backs away from the terminal.
"Gate One is pushing," says Kim Hunter, the young tower chief.
In minutes, more than 30 planes are under way.
Swarming and mingling, they seem almost to greet each other before falling gradually into line and taxiing to the runways.
A USAir fleet is departing, and for the fifth time since early morning a deserted airport becomes a congested one.


Miss Thomases, Manager, Is Wed
Stephanie Ellen Thomases, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Koch of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday to William Martin Hutchison 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hutchison Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
David Bryce, a Unitarian minister, and Rabbi Roy Rosenberg performed the ceremony at the Belle Haven Club in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Hutchison and her husband, who are both 29 years old, graduated from Northwestern University.
She received an M.B.A. from Cornell University.
She is a program manager for A.T.&amp;T. in Basking Ridge, N.J.
Her father owns Kopaco Packaging, a corrugated-container company in Pine Brook, N.J.


Senior Center Group Tries to Ban Member
A group of elderly people is trying to ban a woman from the senior center's luncheons and bingo games because the woman uses profanity and makes ethnic slurs.
In a petition given last week to the town manager and the center director, 124 people asked that 70-year-old Jean Frisbie be banned from the activities.
They say her outbursts have ruined the atmosphere at the center.


Passing the Torch


Tough Times for Trees in the Northeast
TREES in the Northeast are in trouble.
For some species, few adult examples are ever seen.
American chestnuts hardly exist anywhere.
Elms are rare.
Red pines have almost completely succumbed to scale.
And now hemlocks and dogwoods are threatened.
These are two of the most prized ornamentals for the home landscape as well as popular denizens of the forest.
Perhaps the hardest hit of all is the Eastern hemlock.
Foresters who know this tree well have reported seeing light in deep forests where there was none before, because the hemlocks have died.


Farewell, Red Menace: U.S. Starts Altering Its Perspective on the World
Just when the United States had adjusted to the idea that the Kremlin had turned from implacable enemy to benign adversary, the breathtaking events in the Soviet Union have forced the country to confront the possibility that soon there may be no adversary there at all.
The sudden prospect that the Soviet Union will cease to exist in its current form has implications that go far beyond Soviet-American relations, and the Soviet upheaval has already forced the Bush Administration to begin re-examining its fundamental policy goals.


Choosing to Live Pleasantly
To the Editor:
Paul Leinberger and Bruce Tucker's article on the differences in attitude between members of the present generation and their parents is full of confusions, probably a reflection of the confused minds of the young people they interviewed.


Johnson Struggling To Get a Grip on Slide
Howard Johnson has fought himself as well as opposition pitching.
He has fought defeatism in his own heart, as well as the poisonous air of resignation that has swept through the Mets' clubhouse.
He has fought for rest and for relief.
"And I am tired," Johnson said.


How a Major Research Institute Got to Long Island
MAXIMIZING the life span of humankind may not have been on the mind of Jeffry Picower the night in 1988 that he walked into Sandro's, an expensive Italian restaurant on Manhattan's upper East Side.
But on that night, destiny (and mutual friends) introduced him to the man, Dr.
Anthony Cerami, a world-class scientist, who would help him part with $10 million for just such an ultimate purpose: unlocking scientific mysteries to find cures for many of the diseases that retard human life.


China Reports on Condition of 2 Jailed Dissidents
In what appeared to be a response to foreign criticism that it is treating prisoners poorly, the Government has released a brief report on the prison conditions of two prominent dissidents who began a hunger strike more than two weeks ago.
The prison conditions of the two dissidents, Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, have become the latest symbol of human-rights abuses in China, and the treatment of the two men has been raised a number of times recently by visiting foreign delegations.


A Philosopher Is Called a Spy For the Queen
Once again, newspapers in London are filled with revelations of intrigue and espionage, including the unmasking of a "second man" in a spy ring operating close to the heart of Her Majesty's Government.
But this time the news is more than 400 years old and the accusations the work of a dogged British historian.
He claims in the latest issue of a British scholarly journal that the philosopher Giordano Bruno, an Italian priest, was probably the spy who betrayed French and Catholic secrets to his English handlers in the court of Queen Elizabeth I.


New &amp; Noteworthy
The closest of strangers: Liberalism and the Politics of Race in New York, by Jim Sleeper. (Norton, $11.95.) An editorial writer for Newsday laments the racial separatism he believes is shattering New York City's ethnic mosaic.
Last year our reviewer, J. Anthony Lukas, said this "mournful and angry book . . . offers a number of important insights."
THE GENERAL IN HIS LABYRINTH, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
Translated by Edith Grossman. (Penguin, $9.95.) Weakened by disease and rejected by his countrymen, Simon Bolivar sails from Bogota down the Magdalena River, reliving in dreams and memories the victories that made him liberator of a continent.
Last year our reviewer, Margaret Atwood, said that in this novel Gabriel Garcia Marquez "wades into his flamboyant, often improbable and ultimately tragic material with enormous gusto, heaping detail upon sensuous detail, alternating grace with horror, perfume with the stench of corruption, the elegant language of public ceremony with the vulgarity of private moments, the rationalistic clarity of Bolivar's thought with the malarial intensity of his emotions."


Mr. Manners
After losing his job at the end of 1988, Lon B. Perry considered taking his life.
Then he decided to take other people's money instead.
Over the next two years, he held up at gunpoint about 100 hotel guests in Texas and Louisiana and was so consistently polite, even apologetic, that the police came to call him the "gentleman bandit." The 49-year-old computer programmer even took his victims' names and addresses, promising to pay them back some day.
But this summer, a man named Michael Harvey was charged with the gentleman bandit's crimes, and Mr.
Perry concluded that the whole business had gone far enough.
After his lawyer negotiated a plea bargain, Mr.
Perry surrendered to the police last week.
He pleaded guilty to two robberies in exchange for a 35-year sentence that will make him eligible for parole in about eight and a half years.
"Under no circumstances," he said, "would I let Mr. Harvey go to prison for something I did."


Speeders Beware: New Device Looms
IN an intensified effort to discourage speeders, state transportation officials are experimenting with computer-enhanced radar photography that could make conventional radar detectors obsolete.
The new computerized radar system, which is being tested by the New Jersey State Police in several locations, allows the authorities not only to record the speed of a vehicle, but also to make a photograph that could later be used in court.
The radar, known as photo-radar, has been hailed by law-enforcement officials as an effective and economical way to curtail speeding.


Hard Work in Soviet Union Lies Ahead
To the Editor:
The jubilation over the dissolution of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the declaration of independence by a number of republics should not overshadow the tremendous economic, social and political problems facing the Russians and the many other nationalities of the Soviet Union.
An entire superstructure of a state with 11 time zones and some 60 languages has collapsed.
Food and housing shortages, the tremendous rise of crime and the black market, the total worthlessness of the currency, the sudden unemployment of millions of unproductive bureaucrats, as well as the question of nuclear stockpiles throughout the territory -- all of these have to be addressed immediately.
Border, ethnic and religious disputes and differences, in addition to centuries of mistrust and hatred, may create a far more explosive situation than in Yugoslavia or anything else seen in this century.
The United States, Japan, the United Nations and the European Parliament and the European Community should all act together and without delay.
Recognition of independence and congratulatory messages will not be enough.
They should offer immediate financial and technical assistance, and be prepared to resolve border disputes, along with a rush of immigration and future population transfers.
GEORGE BOURNOUTIAN  Professor of Russian and Soviet History, Iona College


This Time, Lenin's City Takes Upheaval in Stride
Feliks Narodinsky lifted his trumpet and let the slow notes of Gershwin's "Summertime" drift across the River Neva from the gates of the Fortress of SS.
Peter and Paul.
The notes floated past rotund sunbathers, toddlers chasing dogs, vendors selling maps of old St.
Petersburg and Jehovah's Witnesses looking for converts.
In Leningrad, beneath a warm sun, the living was easy today -- or at least no harder than usual.


Noted With Pleasure
Lives Like Short Stories
Short stories, Andre Dubus argues, come closer than novels to matching the pace, passions and textures of our lives.
This is from his collection of essays, "Broken Vessels" (Godine).


Correction
Because of a transmission error, the Garden Q. &amp; A. column last Sunday misstated the title of a book.
It is "Bug, Slugs and Other Thugs," by Rhonda Massingham Hart (Storey Publishing).


For Seattle, a Wave of Harbor Projects
NOW that this city and its residents have agreed on how to shape the harbor's future, the Port of Seattle is proceeding with nearly $600 million in development for the colorful Elliott Bay waterfront.
The port is modernizing aging piers and acquiring land for the growth of container shipping.
In a departure from its normal activities, it is moving into commercial real-estate development.
The port was set up as a public body by Seattle and King County residents in 1911 with a five-member commission independent of the city and county.


Lawrence Speiser, 68, a Civil Liberties Lawyer
Lawrence Speiser, a leading civil liberties lawyer who successfully represented himself in a 1958 Supreme Court case involving loyalty oaths, died at his home in Washington on Friday.
He was 68 years old.
Mr. Speiser died of cancer, said his son, Matt.


Roxanne de Guzman a Bride
Roxanne de Guzman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodolfo de Guzman of Wharton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Mark Taylor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Taylor of Denville, N.J.
The Rev.
John Tarantino officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Taylor, 30 years old, is an associate manager for Prudential Property in Newark.
She graduated from Ateneo de Manila University.
Dr.
Taylor, 33, is an intern at the Navy hospital in San Diego.
He graduated from Villanova University and received his M.D. degree from Brown University.


Tech Notes; Bantam Missile
The Army and Hughes Aircraft are testing a miniature rocket, developed for the "Star Wars" space defense system, that weighs only 12 pounds and is steered by tiny thrusters, less than an inch long and weighing only 3.5 grams.
Each produces one pound of thrust when fired in pulses that last one-thousandth of a second.
The missile, which will not carry a warhead, is intended to strike a target at a velocity sufficient to destroy it.
It has been named LEAP, short for Lightweight Exoatmospheric Projectile.
LEAP was tested in June inside a hangar at Edwards Air Force Base in California.
Its engine lifted the craft 10 feet into the air and held it there for the seven-second test.
The six attitude-control thrusters fired 1,200 times to keep the craft properly oriented while its onboard computer tracked a simulated target outside the hangar.


Soviet Squad Quits Vilnius
A squad of elite Soviet troops who have been accused in violent acts against Lithuanians suddenly left Vilnius today aboard a special flight to Moscow.
The troops were part of the Interior Ministry's OMON unit, whose members wear black berets and have been much feared here and in other Soviet republics.
OMON is the Russian acronym for Special Militia Task Force.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Copenhagen
When it was announced, a good many years ago, that R.K.O. intended to produce a movie starring Danny Kaye as Hans Christian Andersen the Danes waxed so indignant that they sent a delegation to investigate what Hollywood planned to do to the Danish master of the fairy tale.
The gift horse in whose mouth they looked gave them the song "Wonderful Copenhagen," an incredible boon to Danish tourism, and their capital has been trying to live up to that label ever since.
The Tivoli Gardens embody the Danish fairy tale spirit; it is a tinseled dream complete with boy soldiers in guardsmen's uniforms, commedia dell'arte, cabaret and classical concerts, mock Oriental palaces and floral extravaganzas.
Its 28 restaurants, ranging from casual beer gardens to Copenhagen's most expensive, can feed 10,000 people in one sitting.
In the evening Tivoli is illuminated by strings of 110,000 light bulbs but nary a neon sign, and four nights a week fireworks rattle the windows of nearby hotels.
True, Tivoli has its share of rides and merry-go-rounds, but it is much more pleasure garden than carnival and attracts retirees as much as children.
You'll have to hurry to catch Tivoli this year.
It closes Sept. 15, but it will reopen again, as it has for 149 years, on April 29.
Admission is $4.35, calculated at 6.9 kroner to the dollar.


The Vote That Saved the Army in the Days After Pearl Harbor
To the Editor:
In "Did We Almost Lose the Army?" (Op-Ed, Aug. 12), Thomas H. Eliot, Democrat from Massachusetts in the House of Representatives, 1941-43, writes of the one-vote margin by which the active-service component of the Selective Service Act of 1940 was extended in August 1941, four months before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
He argues against "the notion that if one House vote had gone the other way, the Army would have been virtually disbanded by the time Japan struck."


A SHOP RAT'S TALE
In the five years since his parting of the ways with Mother Jones magazine, Michael Moore has put forth at least a dozen highly inventive versions of how and why he was fired.
In your article, he offers yet another imaginative version.
When board president Adam Hochschild initiated the discussions that led to Moore's termination, Hochschild was not waving a copy of Ben Hamper's column.
Hamper was not a factor in the decision.
This, however, is not the first of Moore's accounts to involve Hamper.
In his film "Roger &amp; Me," Moore claims he was fired because he "wanted to run a picture of a Flint buddy and unemployed autoworker on the magazine's cover." Hamper, in fact, appeared on the cover of our Sept./Oct. 1986 issue, the first of the three issues Moore edited.
Only in a mind as inventive as Moore's could he be fired for
wanting
to do what he had already done three months earlier.
RICHARD REYNOLDS Communications Director, Mother Jones
San Francisco


Becker And Thigh Lose to Haarhuis
Boris Becker, caught in his own personal haze on another in the string of sultry summer days that has made this United States Open the ultimate in pressure cookers, made a third-round exit yesterday that could cost him his beloved No. 1 ranking.
But in rollicking contrast, the Jimmy Connors revival rampage proceeded at full sizzle.
The five-time champion has now -- according to another of yesterday's victors, defending champion Pete Sampras -- assumed unofficial "ownership" of this slam.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 1, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
2
2
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon and his relationships with five women.
3
5
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop on the trail of a Florida con man.
4
2
TIME BOMB, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.99.) A child psychologist tracks down the perpetrators of crimes spawned by hatemongers.
5
5
THE FIRST MAN IN ROME, by Colleen McCullough. (Avon, $6.95.) The rivalry of two men in the Roman Republic in 110 B.C.
6
7
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $5.95.) A woman schemes to get control of a movie studio.
7
15
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
8
10
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) A get-together in a Scottish town.
9
32
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers. 10
1
PRIME DIRECTIVE, by Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens. (Pocket, $4.95.) The former crew members of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise try to discover why their careers were ruined.
11 *
1
UNDER SIEGE, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $5.95.) Chaos in Washington when the kingpin of the Medellin drug cartel is brought there for trial.
12
10
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A reprint of a 1980 novel about a shy boy and his evil best friend.
13
46
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
14
7
THE PRIZE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.50.) In 1066, a Saxon woman marries a Norman warrior.
15
6
TEXAS!
CHASE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) The romance of a widower and an old friend who was involved in his wife's death.
16 *
4
SPY SINKER, by Len Deighton. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.95.) A female spy's adventures.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
15
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
10
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
3
7
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
408
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
5 *
93
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
8
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
7 *
24
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
8 *
2
THE DOCTOR, by Edward E. Rosenbaum. (Ivy, $4.99.) A physician's experiences as practitioner and patient; originally published in 1988 as "A Taste of My Own Medicine."
9
48
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
10
14
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
57
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
37
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
16
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
4
5
THE FAT-BURNING WORKOUT, by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.95.) A program designed to trim the body and tone muscles.
5
3
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Correction
An article Sunday about the growing market for compact disks misstated the profitability of Time Warner Inc.'s music division over the last two quarters.
The division made a profit.


Replacing Rotted Wood Subsills
OLDER brick houses and apartment houses often have wood subsills beneath windows.
When the subsills rot, they must be replaced to prevent moisture damage.
Partly because lumber is no longer milled in sizes similar to those of most wood subsills, replacing them usually requires ingenuity.
But you may not find the job as difficult as it sounds.


Mixed Mendelssohn


Soviet Events Spark Interest In Making Visits
While large numbers of Americans have expressed interest in visiting the Soviet Union since the failure of the Aug. 19 coup, tour operators say the volume of visitors is not likely to match that in Berlin in 1989 following the collapse of the Berlin Wall.
According to representatives of 10 companies offering tours to the Soviet Union, a string of cancellations because of the coup was followed quickly by a small flurry of inquiries and bookings when it became clear the coup had collapsed.
The State Department, which warned against travel to the Soviet Union on Aug. 19, downgraded its advisory to a caution the day afer the coup failed.


Fresh Air Fund Campers Get Used to Home
Eleven-year-old Derrick Russell stood in the middle of the George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal, his mother and his luggage surrounding him.
After two weeks of camp in Fishkill, N.Y., being back in New York City took a little getting used to.
"In New York, buses go by and you don't feel like you're in the woods," said Derrick, who lives in Rosedale, Queens.


Youth Groups Edge Closer In Brooklyn
As the clamor fades after the violent outbursts in Crown Heights last month, small groups are beginning to take small steps toward closing the chasm between the blacks and Hasidim who share the Brooklyn neighborhood.
After series of meetings held in sites considered to be neutral ground -- the local station house, a school and the Brooklyn Children's Museum -- city officials say that a number of community groups have expressed interest in initiatives to reconcile young blacks and Hasidim.


Miss Roosevelt Weds Seth Kelly
Elizabeth Roosevelt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliott Roosevelt Jr. of Dallas and Sylvan Beach, Mich., was married yesterday to Seth Thomas Kelly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Kelly of Dallas and Greensboro, Vt.
The Rev.
Gilbert Bowen performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church at Sylvan Beach.
Mrs.
Kelly, 26 years old, is an environmental scientist with ERC Environmental and Energy Services in San Diego.
She also owns a furniture design company, the Isabell Collection, there.
She and her husband graduated from Denison University.
Her father operates an oil and gas business in Dallas.
She is a great-granddaughter of Franklin D. Roosevelt.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Baldwin 187,000
68 Park View Place
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Brookville 630,000
211 Brookville Road
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 33-year-old ranch; den, 3 fireplaces, inground pool, 2.2 acres; taxes $6,800.
Freeport 220,000
263 Maryland Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $6,400.
Islip 173,000
128 South Bay Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $4,900.
Oceanside 210,000  449 Waukena Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage; taxes $4,200.
Smithtown 148,000
23 Seaver Lane
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old high ranch; dining room, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
OTHER AREAS Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 260,000
171 Larch Road
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; fireplace, new eat-in kitchen, family room, porch, beamed ceilings; taxes $5,350.
Oakland, N.J. 199,000
105 Grove Street
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old split level; screened porch, work area, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,666.
Old Saybrook, Conn. 110,000
66 Church Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 32-year-old ranch; walk-up attic, aluminum siding, needs work, 0.20 acre; taxes $1,239.


Jeffrey Orridge Wed to Avian Trammell
Avian Marie Trammell, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Wilbur P. Trammell of Buffalo, was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Lyndon Orridge, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Egbert Orridge of East Elmhurst, Queens.
The Rev.
Leslie Braxton, a Baptist minister, and Judge Trammel performed the ceremony at Calvary Baptist Church, which was founded by her paternal grandfather, Peter Trammell.
Mrs.
Orridge, 26 years old, is the liability control coordinator at the Hospital for Joint Diseases in New York.
A graduate of St.
John's University in Queens, she received a master's degree in public administration from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was the chief administrative judge of the city courts in Buffalo.
Her mother, Evian T. Trammel, is a retired high school teacher.


Making a Difference; Promoting Basics at Nissan
There was a time when Japanese auto makers only imported vehicles to the United States.
Now they build them, adapt them and, increasingly, design them here.
Since joining the Nissan Motor Company in 1988, Duane F. Miller has risen to senior vice president of Nissan Research and Development, which is moving into a new research center in Farmington Hills, Mich.


Sunday Dining; For Couscous, Zesty and Healthful
The term couscous refers both to a yellow semolina grain and to the wonderful variety of dishes made with it, the aromatic stews of meat, chick peas, onions, spicy sausage and more.
In North Africa, where the dish originated, lamb is probably the most traditional ingredient, but chicken and beef are also common in the United States.
Below are some fine options if you want to become aquainted with this wholesome, inexpensive dish.
La Kasbah
70 West 71st Street, Manhattan, (212) 769-1690 -- Vegetable couscous is one of the highlights of the menu at this bustling, engaging glatt kosher restaurant, which has two simply appointed peach-and-white dining rooms that are often full but not intolerably loud.
Another good option is the combination platter, which includes the smoky roasted eggplant puree called baba gannouj, falafel, tabbouleh, Tunisian-style eggplant salad and mixed Moroccan salad.


The Crucible; Can the Soviets Avoid Chaos On the Way to A New Society?
The events that have shaken the Soviet Union and the world over the last two weeks have been above all a trial by fire of the people and processes shaped by six years of perestroika.
It has been a test in which the men at the forefront of the struggle for change have confirmed their determination and emerged dominant as the arbiters of Soviet destiny -- men such as Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian Republic and other republican leaders, Mayors Anatoly A. Sobchak of Leningrad and Gavriil K. Popov of Moscow, as well as Leonid M. Kravchuk, the Communist-turned-nationalist who leads the Ukraine.
Even President Mikhail S. Gorbachev -- though the plotters had been his closest comrades and his wavering had fed their ambitions -- regained a measure of legitimacy through his courageous refusal to cooperate in any way with the coup.


Roughriders Drop Harris and Sign Austin
The career of MAJOR HARRIS, the West Virginia quarterback who finished third in the 1989 Heisman Trophy ballot, has been reduced to an addendum: When the Saskatchewan Roughriders announced that they had signed quarterback KENT AUSTIN to a multiyear contract, Harris's release sounded almost like an afterthought.
Austin's pact was the big news.
The former Mississippi quarterback led the Roughriders to the 1989 Grey Cup title and led the Canadian Football League in passing last season. (AP)


Sunday Outing; Where 'Sesame Street' Comes to Life in Earnest
Summer is winding down, but between now and October, there are bound to be plenty of hot days left.
So how do you cool off and cure the back-to-school blues at the same time?
One remedy is a jaunt to Sesame Place, which bills itself as a "kid-powered" amusement park.
"The park strives to offer a holistic play experience, one that brings together the physical, social and emotional interaction of play," said Robert J. Caruso, its executive vice president and general manager.


Yes, Tomatoes Can Fire the Imagination
THE high season for tomatoes fires the imagination of some cooks.
At a recent dinner, I tasted a soup made from green tomatoes, decorated with a spoonful of sherbet made from yellow tomatoes.
It looked like a painting -- and was about as easy to digest as one.
But when they are prepared in more conventional ways, it is hard to tire of tomatoes, whether they show up in sandwiches, soups, sauces, as a salad or a breakfast dish.
Green tomatoes (not to be confused with Mexican green tomatoes called tomatillos, which are a cousin of the cape gooseberry) are no exception.
My favorite way to eat them is fried.


Cancer Program Loses Oncologists To Local Hospital
At least four oncologists and 50 staff members of the University of California at Los Angeles cancer program defected to a nearby hospital in July, capping a year that saw a total of 10 academics leave the prestigious cancer research center.
"This is an unprecented move in that there are so many people who have moved together to another institution," said Joyce Green, an administrative assistant who left U.C.L.A. for St.
John's Hospital and Health Center in Santa Monica along with her boss, researcher Donald L. Morton, and many of his colleagues.


Jean Heisel and Charles Ippolito, Architects, Wed
Jean Marie Heisel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph A. Heisel of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Charles Peter Ippolito, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ugo F. Ippolito of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Richard Martin performed the ceremony at the Larchmont Avenue Presbyterian Church.
The bride and groom are architects in the firm of Heisel Associates in New York.
Mrs.
Ippolito, who is 26 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University and received a master's degree in architecture from the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Her father heads Heisel Associates.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Aug. 17  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 174,000
2 Grove Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; remodeled kitchen, high-ceilings; maintenance $418, 30% tax-deductible (Broker: Coleman Neary Realty)  Greenwich Village 812,500
264 West 12th Street  3-bedroom, 4-bath, single-family, 4-story town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, curving, pine staircase, 3 fireplaces with marble mantels, rear garden, 17- by 83-ft. lot; taxes $5,340 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper East Side 470,000
108 East 86th Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,570-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room; maintenance $1,720, 30% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 980,000
30 West 86th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,860-sq.-ft. condo in a town house; elevator, atrium, 2 terraces, 14-ft. ceilings; common charge $813, taxes $8,129 (Broker: Eychner Associates)  BRONX  Parkchester 195,000
1143 Leland Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, detached, 5-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale 285,000
3630 Oxford Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, center-hall colonial; dining room, den, sun room, fireplace, remodeled kitchen, 1-car garage; 45- by 90-ft, lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  BROOKLYN  Fort Greene 450,000
173 Washington Park  4-family, 4-story, brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, den, remodeled kitchen in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; rear garden, Washington Park view; 100% tax-abated (Broker: Markgraf Group)  Marine Park 179,700
192 Gerritsen Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, remodeled, eat-in kitchen, rear deck, finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope 130,000
25 Plaza Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, den, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $905, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Frederick Palmer Realty)  QUEENS  Forest Hills Gardens 395,000
44 Slocum Crescent  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, English Pebble house; dining room, powder room, fireplace, c/a, private garden; 17- by 102-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  Woodside 370,000
3261 60th Street  3-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in two units; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; taxes $3,786 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale 289,000
410 Edgegrove Avenue  2-family, detached, brick and asbestos frame house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; eat-in kitchen in each; 1-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,114 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Huguenot 415,000
289 McBaine Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, fireplace, jacuzzi in master bath, 2-car garage, 104- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $300 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)


Carving Out a Greater Serbia
THE FORMER COMMUNISTS WHO RUN THE YUGOSLAV republic of Serbia were panicking.
Summoned to the capital for a secret strategy session, they had waited for hours for some word from their leader, President Slobodan Milosevic.
The officials, numbering about 150, were insulted, angry and increasingly rebellious.
With the economy reeling and student demonstrators in the streets seemingly poised to topple the government, Milosevic was among the missing.
Either he takes the podium, several local leaders said in utter exasperation, or we go home.
Finally, Milosevic arrived in the hall and strode purposely to the podium.
Speaking with what participants remember as almost preternatural calm in that crisis atmosphere, he held forth for more than an hour.
He betrayed no emotion, never raised his voice and took questions until none were left.


Political Talk
Helping 4 Hopefuls
With his Federal trial on fraud charges fast approaching, Assembly Speaker Mel Miller has given several Democratic assemblymen a green light to begin campaigning for his job.


In Retreat
At a time when Lebanon had private armies the way Michigan has bowling teams, Gen.
Michel Aoun rose to prominence through his willingness to pit his Christian militiamen against just about anybody.
He lost the presidency under a 1989 peace plan, but refused to leave the presidential palace.
After the new president, Elias Hwari, had the Syrian Army run him out of the palace last year -- 750 people died in the battle -- he took up residence in the French Embassy in Beirut.
The French, who supported the General's anti-Syrian policies, felt obliged to help him out.
Last week they helped him out of the country, fooling reporters and perhaps would-be assassins with a decoy motorcade and plane while the General slipped away by sea, winding up in the South of France.
In return for dropping criminal charges against the General, President Hwari got his agreement to stay away at least five years.


Labor Rally in Capital
Hundreds of thousands of union members and civil rights advocates gathered in Washington to urge the nation's political leaders to improve health care and education and to support labor's positions on a range of domestic issues.
Article, page 18.


Sunday Menu; A Light and Quick Feast From the Garden and Sea
Before you run out of local potatoes, zucchini, tomatoes, corn and herbs, combine them with some fish and seasonings in this satisfying but light, quick-cooking stew.
Preparation will go even faster if you use a food processor for chopping and slicing.
Choose a good, hearty bread for dunking.
Summer Fish Stew
1.
In a nonstick pan large enough to hold all the ingredients, saute the onion and garlic in hot oil until the onions begin to soften and brown.
2. Add the potatoes and continue to saute for about 5 minutes longer.
3.
Add the zucchini, tomatoes, tomato paste, tomato-vegetable juice, wine and thyme.
Reduce heat to medium and cook until zucchini begins to soften, about 4 or 5 minutes.
4.
Add the corn and shrimp, and cook 2 minutes.
Add the fish and scallops.
Season with salt, if desired, and the pepper, and continue cooking about 3 more minutes, until fish is cooked through.
Serve with bread.
Yield: 4 servings.


Kelly Ann Barnes Marries Richard Warren Stewart
Kelly Ann Barnes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter J. Barnes Jr. of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Warren Stewart, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Stewart of Lancaster, Pa.
The Rev.
Robert W. Barnes, an uncle of the bride, officiated at the St.
Francis Roman Catholic Cathedral in Metuchen, N.J.
The bride, 30 years old, is an assistant vice president of Citibank in New York.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
The bridegroom, a vice president of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company in New York, graduated from Washington and Lee University and received an M.B.A. degree form Columbia University.


Nothing Wrong With the Kids. Parents Are the Problem.
The kids are all right.
Seventeen-year-old Monica Seles was able to qualify for a No Excuses jeans commercial without first having had to publicly date a married man.
And we won't have to worry about 19-year-old Brien Taylor passing Intermediate Tennis.
It's the kind of good news about adolescents of which we just don't get enough.


A Menu That's All Things to All Tastes
THE small restaurant called 19 March Street may well have taken a poll before opening on a main thoroughfare in Stamford last year, so totally does it seem to have gauged the pulse of the public.
Southwestern decor is in vogue?
Paint the storefront wall space and table tops soft rose-beige, turquoise and sand tones that evoke desert hues.
Cafes are in?
O.K., subtitle the restaurant "an American cafe" and give the dining space an informal appearance, crisp and clean, with no fancy adornments.
People like light foods, snacks and "grazing" items?
Fine, provide a menu that is all things to all contemporary tastes.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Our finished basement, which is used as a guest, computer and sewing room, shows no signs of leaks; however, it gets very humid in the summer, so much so that mold grows on the furniture, records and books.
This area adjoins an unfinished part of the basement that contains the laundry.
We have thought of running a dehumidifier all the time to control the mold, but I think this would be quite expensive.
Is there anything else we can do to solve the humidity problem?
A.
If the walls are finished or covered with paneling of some type, there may be seepage through the foundation walls that you cannot see.
Also, check the outside to make sure that all surface water drains away from the foundation, especially water pouring out of the downspouts during a heavy rain.
Finally, if the laundry area has a clothes dryer, make sure it is vented directly to the outside.
Otherwise, this could be the source of the humidity.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
In Re Shared Soup
A judge has ruled in the case of Jeff Duhl of Massapequa, whose crusade on behalf of all those who taste from another's plate was chronicled in this space last month.


RISS BEACH CLOSED BECAUSE OF WASTE
The National Park Service closed a 1 1/2-mile section of beach in Jacob Riis Park in Queens yesterday after more than 500 pieces of medical waste washed ashore on Friday.
The waste, which included hypodermic needles and empty medicine vials, was the first major dumping discovered in the New York metropolitan region since 1988, when the Federal authorities cracked down on illegal dumping after needles and other waste washed onto New York and New Jersey beaches.


No. 3 Miami Hones Offense on the Backs of Arkansas
Gino Torretta, the latest in a long line of celebrated Miami quarterbacks, threw touchdown passes of 99 and 42 yards today and made the big plays in an 80-yard scoring drive as the Hurricanes beat Arkansas, 31-3.
Torretta's 99-yarder to Horace Copeland was the first score of the game and his 42-yarder to Martin Patton made the score 21-3 after Arkansas stayed close for most of three quarters.


Can Football League Blossom in Spring?
Amid speculation that the World League of American Football might not be around next spring, the creator of another professional football league is ready to go ahead with a plan for an 18-game schedule that will start in February.
Vincent Sette, president and founder of the Professional Spring Football League, with offices at the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J., said he spent the last two years researching the old American Football League, the United States Football League and the W.L.A.F., before developing his concept for spring football.


Proud of His Obscurity
THE BOOK OF DISQUIET
By Fernando Pessoa. Translated by Alfred Mac Adam. 278 pp. New York: Pantheon Books.


The Trend-Setters Redefining Corporate Life
To the Editor:
We agree with Paul Leinberger and Bruce Tucker that employees today see the traditional corporate world as irrelevant.
However, one only needs to look to companies like Johnson &amp; Johnson, Merck, Stride Rite, Hewitt Associates and Time Warner to see new definitions of corporate life.
Job-sharing, flex-time, telecommuting, child-care centers, flexible benefit plans, elder-care assistance and parent support groups are just some of the ways corporate America is responding to the work and family revolution.
BARBARA S. VANDERKOLK  ARDIS A. YOUNG  Princeton, N.J., Aug. 5
The writers are co-authors of "The Work and Family Revolution," to be published by Facts on File in September.


U.S. Gets Inspirational Boost For Its Canada Cup Victory
Team USA didn't need a pep talk or motivational speech, nor did it want one.
All it needed for inspiration in its Canada Cup opener today against Sweden was the knowledge that a coach battling for his life had drawn up the game plan.
The Americans, relying on strategy designed hours before by their seriously ill coach, Bob Johnson, got their first two goals from Jeremy Roenick within a span of 2 minutes 8 seconds in the first period and defeated world champion Sweden, 6-3.


IN SHORT: FICTION
MEMOIRS OF A CADDY  By David Noonan. Simon &amp; Schuster, $18.95.


Look to the Women
To the Editor:
Someone has got to tell Michael Pollan that he simply has not lived if he doesn't know about the magnolias, the honeysuckle, the figs, the pears, the surprise lilies and the chinaberries in Eudora Welty's fiction.
Mr.
Pollan's essay was delightful, but if he is going to enter the territory of gardens and American fiction, he mustn't forget Eudora Welty's funny, cultivated and complicated response to the flora in her work.
JOAN FLIPPIN San Francisco


Mothers and Daughters
To the Editor:
In reading "When Grandmother Is the Mother, Until Birth" (front page, Aug. 5), about Arlette Schweitzer, a 42-year-old librarian who is pregnant with twins for her daughter through artificial insemination, I thought civilization had gone too far.


Keith Brown Wed to Jennifer L. Green
Jennifer Lyle Green and Keith MacNeil Brown were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of Christ the Redeemer l in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
Lucinda R. Laird and the Rev.
David S. Hoag officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Alan C. Green of Pelham Manor and the late Mr.
Green.
The bridegroom, 28, is the son of Anne Brown of Coxsackie, N.Y., and Ralph N. Brown of Slingerlands, N.Y.


Money Still Heads List of Concerns as Schools Open
THE opening of the 1991-92 New Jersey public school year this week was supposed to have been different because the issue of state aid to education, a subject that has dominated discussion about New Jersey public schools for more than 10 years, was to have been at least temporarily resolved.
But despite a record $4.2 billion in state aid for schools this fall, money is once again the prevailing concern as school districts across the state nervously await yet another legal challenge to New Jersey's system of financing public education.


Business Diary/September 25-30
ECONOMY  Salomon Gets a Little Help From Its Friends


Topics of The Times; Essentials of Government
As they move from the traditions of totalitarianism to open government, politicians in Russia and the other republics might take note of two essential elements of late 20th-century American bureaucracy: the doctrine of plausible deniability and its indispensable accessory, the shredder.
Both were conspicuously absent in the failed Soviet coup.
Soviet officials who might have come to Mr.
Gorbachev's aid but didn't fell back on the ridiculous "coup flu" excuse.
They produced no backdated memos, claimed no memory loss and found not a single subordinate to blame.


In Scallop Beds, It's Wait and Hope
TWO research divers treaded water and gazed through their masks the other day as a bayman, Steve Latson, searched through the material that divers had dredged from the bottom of Peconic Bay in search of scallops.
"There isn't a single one in there," Mr. Latson told them.


No Belabor Day for Mets: They're Hot
The season, as has been conceded by the Mets for weeks, is scarcely anything more than a salvage operation.
Their sweep of three games from the Reds, then, constituted a minor treasure.
A devalued treasure, for sure, but a memorable one all the same.
The Mets, playing terrifically entertaining, if not entirely textbook, baseball, blasted the Reds, 9-4, today for their third straight triumph.
The spasm of success, while it didn't permit the Mets to forget the travesty of the last month, at least spared them another weekend's worth of apologies.


The Old Sure Shoe: Leahy Puts Jets on Top
The Jets, who lost three games in the closing minutes last year, opened the new season on a new note today.
They beat the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, 16-13, on Pat Leahy's 40-yard field goal with 1 minute 22 seconds to play at Giants Stadium.
After playing two meaningless games against each other last season, one to close out the exhibition schedule and another to close out 6-10 regular seasons for both teams, the teams played one more time with meaning.


Abroad at Home; Out of The Chaos
It is Moscow, 1991. But at times it could almost be Philadelphia, 1787.
In the anxious voices of those trying to reshape what was the Soviet Union one hears some of the same conflicting concerns that preoccupied the Framers of the American Constitution: fear of authority and fear of chaos, the demand for local political independence and the recognition of economic interdependence.


A Defining Holiday
Labor Day celebrates working men and women by giving them the day off. Well,
most
of them.
While America goofs off for one last day of summer, millions -- yes, millions -- work.
This day defines the essential employee, the nonessential workaholic and the eager beaver.
Sam Ehrenhalt, the statistical wizard who heads the New York office of the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, estimates that today will not be a holiday for something like 10 million or 20 million jobholders.


Lithuanian President Speaks of a New Period in Baltic History


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The nation's housing markets have lapsed into a sluggish, uneven recovery after five months of robust sales gains during the spring and early summer.
Still, prices are increasing gradually in most areas, while new construction is rising steadily.
Real estate experts said the erratic nature of the upturn was underscored last week by reports that new-home sales had fallen 8.5 percent in July and that sales of existing homes were down 6.7 percent.
Despite the July drop, analysts said the housing markets were stronger than a year ago and far more robust than during the second half of 1990.  [ Page 25. ]


Quotation of the Day
"There are more serious problems in life than financial ones, and I've had a lot of those. I've been broke before and will be again. Heartbroke? That's serious. Lose a few bucks? That's not." -- Willie Nelson.  [ 26:2. ]


Sympathy Misplaced In Waterbury Killing
To the Editor:
I am appalled by the misplaced emphasis and flawed judgment of your Aug. 12 news article on the killing in Waterbury, Conn., of a young Chinese restaurant delivery man.


Review/Opera; Tackling Thomson's Sprawling 'Lord Byron'
Like his acquaintance Ernest Hemingway, Virgil Thomson will inevitably be more famous for his life than for his work.
We knew of Thomson's Midwest origins, his Paris years, the music criticism, the long ensconcement in the Chelsea Hotel.
But how many even among cognoscenti have heard of "Lord Byron," the third of Virgil Thomson's operas, and how many among them know a note of it?
A few of us heard them all at the Pine Hill Hall in nearby Wilton last night, including the ones Thomson himself removed from the original productions at the Juilliard School.
In a brave and uphill struggle, Monadnock Music under James Bolle put on "Lord Byron" in concert form.


Labor Day
NEW YORK Government offices: Closed.


CHRONICLE
The JIM HENSON Memorial and Muppet Museum opened last week in Leland, Miss., on the banks of Deer Creek, where Mr.
Henson played as a boy among the friends and fauna that were to give him the background for his world of Muppet characters, among them Kermit the Frog, Miss Piggy and the Swedish Chef.
Mr.
Henson, who died last year at the age of 54, spent his childhood in the small town just north of Greenville near the state's western border, playing with friends like KERMIT SCOTT, now a philosophy professor at Purdue University, who was the inspiration for Miss Piggy's suitor.


Deborah Kantar Weds Philip Gardner
Deborah Kantar, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William Kantar of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Philip Gardner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harrison Gardner of Morristown, N.J.
Cantor Alex Zimmer performed the ceremony at the Kantars' home.
Mrs.
Gardner, 27 years old, is an associate in the Washington office of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, a New York law firm.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the clinical director of psychiatry at the Bournewood Psychiatric Hospital in Brookline, Mass.
Her mother, Constance Glaser Kantar, is the general manager of the Newton Symphony Orchestra.


Jonathan Bondy Weds Miss Blank
Esther Susann Blank, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Zvi Blank of Morris Plains, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan Spencer Bondy, the son of Mrs.
Thomas Barrea of Upper Brookville, L.I., and the late Edward J. Bondy.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Boston University.
She is to join the law firm of Riker, Danzig, Scherer, Hyland &amp; Perretti in Morristown, N.J., this month.
Her father is an environmental consultant.


Jordan Tries, So Don't Be 'Stoopid'
Michael Jordan, probably deep in a summer bunker somewhere on this globe, has been attacked recently, not by bogeys, but by a couple of former athletes.
In a recent Sports Illustrated article, Hank Aaron, who was to baseball what Michael Jordan is to basketball, said that Jordan hasn't done enough for the black community.


J. R. Harwood Wed to Amy Zweiman
Amy Beth Zweiman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton Zweiman of Wynnewood, Pa., was married last evening to Jonathan Robert Harwood, a son of Justice and Mrs.
Stanley Harwood of Westbury, L.I.
Rabbis Myron M. Fenster and Henry Cohen performed the ceremony at the Rittenhouse hotel in Philadelphia.
The bride, 26 years old, is a social worker at the Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in social work from Boston University.
Her father is chief of allergy and clinical immunology at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
Her mother, Claire Zweiman, is an administrative assistant at the University of Pennsylvania Medical School.


Ms. Bradley Wed To Dean Villarini
Elizabeth Ann Bradley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Bradley of Rhinebeck, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dean Anthony Villarini, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Carlos Villarini of Buffalo.
The Rev.
Ramon Madrid performed the ceremony at Good Shepherd Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant marketing manager for Sports Illustrated in New York.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of Hamilton College and a candidate for a master's degree in Spanish literature at Hunter College.
Her father is the supervising principal at the Salisbury Central School in Lakeville, Conn.


Policeman Charged in Robbery
The crime was ordinary; the suspect was anything but.
A 70-year-old woman was mugged on Friday night by a man who grabbed her pocketbook as she returned to her home in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn.
The man, the police said yesterday, was a police officer.


Giants-49ers: Old Rivals Meet Early in a New Season
Between them, the Giants (1991) and the San Francisco 49ers (1989 and 1990) have won the last three Super Bowls.
When they collide at Giants Stadium on Monday night in a dream matchup of a season opener, each side will present something old and something new.
Essentially, these are the same teams that dominated the National Football League last season.
Their defenses are still strong, the Giants' offense still likes to control the ball and the 49ers' offense still likes to move it around.


Lisa B. Friedman Weds Adam J. Savitz
Lisa Beth Friedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Friedman of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Adam Jonathan Savitz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
S.
Alan Savitz of Los Angeles.
Rabbi Robert A. Rothman officiated.
Mrs.
Savitz, 23 years old, is a production associate at Walt Disney Pictures and Television in Burbank, Calif.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
Her mother, Barbara Friedman, is a librarian at the Greenwich (Conn.) Library.


In Feast of Louisiana Governor's Race, Revenge Is Main Course
The stage was set for hoopla.
Edwin W. Edwards, who once let the good times roll as a matter of policy, was campaigning for the job he lost in 1987, asking a friendly crowd to make him Governor of Louisiana again.
A dozen shrimp and crab dishes filled the buffet tables.
The rum drinks flowed in several bright colors, and a trio of blond girls in little sequined outfits sang a medley of patriotic hymns to a rock beat.


Dr. Susan Rider Is Married to Brian Keith Siegel
Dr.
Susan Rider, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Rider of Basking Ridge, N.J., was married yesterday in Warren, N.J., to Brian Keith Siegel, a son of Robert E. Siegel of East Elmhurst, Queens, and the late Marlene Siegel.
Rabbi David Nesson performed the ceremony at the Chanticler Chateau restaurant.
The bride, 27 years old, is a dentist and is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from New York University where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and received a D.D.S. from the University of Michigan.
She is studying for a master's degree in orthodontics at St.
Louis University.


Cynthia Harder, Student, Is Wed
Cynthia Briggs Harder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Harder of Glen Arbor, Mich., was married yesterday in Purchase, N.Y., to Benet Steven Polikoff, the son of Mrs.
Raymond Troubh and Benet Polikoff Jr., both of New York.
Judge Edward M. Davidowitz of the State Court of Claims in the Bronx performed the ceremony at the Century Country Club.
Mrs.
Polikoff, 24 years old, graduated from Bowdoin College, as did her husband, and is a graduate student in educational administration at Columbia University.
Her father is the assistant headmaster at the Leelanau Center for Education in Glen Arbor.
Her mother, Mimsy Harder, is an assistant director of the alumni office at Leelanau.


Body of Bronx Boy Retrieved From a 500-Foot Shaft
Firefighters yesterday morning retrieved the body of a 12-year-old Bronx boy who had fallen down a 500-foot shaft while playing with friends on Saturday in a dark maze of empty pipes on an unguarded construction site near his home.
City workers yesterday placed caps over the 3-foot-wide pipes, rebuilt the flimsy contruction fences that had encircled them and placed guards around the Morris Heights site where the boy, Don-re Carroll, died and two of his friends were rescued on Saturday night.
By the afternoon, however, the guards had left and some children were playing on a crane while others were jumping off a large pipe on the street and piles of construction wood.


Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections. SportsMonday begins on page 31, Business Day on page 25.


Unions at a Loss to Reverse Falling Fortunes of Workers
For all their exuberance, participants in Monday's Labor Day parades have rarely had so little to celebrate.
No problem illustrates labor's waning influence better than its failure to join with its historic ally, the Democratic Party, to exploit an issue that both acknowledge could be a runaway vote getter: a declining standard of living for most workers.


Aliens Law Shouldn't Lead to Fear of Hiring
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 7 article on recent increased enforcement of sanctions against employers of illegal aliens points out contradictions and challenges of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, which aimed to welcome illegal immigrants with histories of residence and employment in the United States through "amnesty" and to discourage employment of new arrivals through fines for employers of illegal aliens.


Philetus H. Holt 2d, Executive, 83
Philetus H. Holt 2d, an executive at Exxon for 34 years, died on Friday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 83 years old.
He died of heart failure, said his daughter, Frances H. Covert of MIddletown, N.J.


Joyfully, Improbably, a School Opens in Leningrad
For an instant, the cheers drowned out the deafening clatter of trolley buses, as Viktor Kribulin, a Leningrad poet, told a knot of grinning students that their faded Russian schoolhouse would "forever be a monument to the new life, the new future that awaits your generation."
With that, Leningrad School 610 opened the doors to the building it wrested from the local Communist Party committee just before the coup.


The Emergency Room Emergency
Not so many years ago, a middle-aged man felt pain in his abdomen and hustled over to the emergency room at a big New York hospital.
After sitting in the jammed waiting room for a while, he was asked by a triage nurse how he felt.
A bit better, he replied, so the nurse told him to wait his turn to see a doctor.
Some five or six hours later, his name was finally called, and the young doctor who examined him turned taut with concern.
The patient had suffered a burst appendix.
Lethal poisons had been flooding his insides for hours, requiring prompt surgery.
Today the man has a jagged scar and troublesome internal scar tissue as reminders of the messy episode.


Dara Greenwald Weds
Dara Greenwald, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Greenwald of New York, was married yesterday to Joseph Vernon Mechanic, a son of Mrs.
Murray Darvick of Roslyn, L.I., and the late Dr.
Richard Mechanic.
Rabbi Richard Sobel performed the ceremony at the summer home of the bride's parents at Brant Lake, N.Y.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated from Hampshire College and is a candidate for a master's degree at the Bank Street College of Education.
The bridegroom, 28, is an options trader in New York.
He graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.


Singapore Chief, Shaken by Vote, Sees Changes
The Prime Minister of Singapore, who campaigned as the politician to lead this prosperous Asian city-state away from authoritarian government, spoke today of broad changes in the way the nation is governed after his governing party failed to achieve the resounding victory it sought in this weekend's general election.
His People's Action Party won the election by what would be considered an overwhelming majority almost anywhere else in the world, taking 77 of the 81 seats in Parliament.


Soviet Upheaval Adds Urgency to the Debate Over U.S. Intelligence
The dissolution of the Soviet Union and the humiliating purge of the K.G.B. have injected new urgency into the painful debate over the role of the American intelligence services in a world where the Communist competition has left the playing field.
Even before the tumult that began in Moscow last month, Congress was forcing the Central Intelligence Agency and the military intelligence agencies to rethink some of their priorities -- and even their budgets -- to adjust to a declining Soviet military threat.


Reader's Digest Aims at an Affluent Target
Seeking to remind advertising agencies that The Reader's Digest does indeed reach beyond Middle America, the magazine is starting an edition for its most affluent readers.
The Reader's Digest Power Plus edition will be sent to the monthly's readers in those neighborhoods, identified by Federal census data, offering high concentrations of households with incomes of $50,000 and up.
The new edition, being presented to agencies this week, will make its debut in March and then appear again in June, September and December.


Barbara Stier Is Married
Barbara Greenman Stier was married yesterday to Sidney Joshua Pollack by Cantor Theodore L. Aronson at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
The bride, 68 years old, retired as a teacher.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in education from New York University.
She was a widow.


Recovery In Housing Is Erratic
After five months of robust sales gains during the spring and early summer, the nation's housing markets have lapsed into a sluggish, uneven recovery.
Still, prices are increasing gradually in most areas, while new construction is rising steadily.
"This is a very weak and spotty recovery," said David Shulman, a real estate analyst for Salomon Brothers Inc.
He said he did not expect home sales and housing construction to rebound swiftly, in contrast to what happened after previous recessions and housing slumps.


Ms. Weisz, Manager, Wed To Robert Pincus, Lawyer
Linda Weisz, a daughter of Harriette Weisz of Lakewood, N.J., and the late Jack Weisz, was married yesterday to Robert Pincus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Pincus of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Jon R. Haddon performed the ceremony at Auberge Maxime in North Salem, N.Y.
The bride, 42 years old, is the manager of compensation and benefits for Malcolm Pirnie Inc., an environmental engineering consulting company in White Plains.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut and received an M.B.A. degree from Pace University.
The bridegroom, 49, is a lawyer in New York.
He graduated magna cum laude from the University of Rochester, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received law degrees from Columbia University.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.


Suzanne Bethune Has a Wedding
Suzanne Mirella Bethune, a daughter of Mrs.
William J. Bethune 3d of Stuart, Fla., was married yesterday in Vineyard Haven, Mass., to Hans Otto Frederick von Steiger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans von Steiger of Oak Bluffs, Mass.
The Rev.
Terry Lee Henry and the Rev.
John Taylor Arms 4th performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church.
The bride, 25 years old, is also a daughter of the late Mr.
Bethune, who was a banker in New York.
She is a graduate of the Pingry School and Lehigh University.


AIDS Protesters Descend On Kennebunkport


Ms. Abell Is Wed To Andrew Rosen
Marcelle Line Abell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Abell of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday in Washington to Andrew Stephen Rosen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William Rosen of Summit, N.J.
Rabbi Jeffrey A. Wohlberg performed the ceremony at the Kennedy Warren Ballroom.
Mrs.
Rosen, 28 years old, is a research associate for Magi Educational Services, a health and education consulting concern in Larchmont, N.Y.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in public health from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father is a senior engineer in Gaithersburg, Md., for the Bechtel engineering and construction company.
Her mother, Nellie Abel, is a hair stylist.


J J. Vuillequez Dies; Ex-Metals Executive Was 80 Years Old
Jean J. Vuillequez, a longtime executive with Amax Inc., the metal and energy company, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Jacksonville Beach, Fla.
He was 80 years old and lived in Sawgrass, Fla.
Mr. Vuillequez died of a heart attack, said the family's lawyer, Nelson Buhler.


Edberg and Lendl Turn Back Teen-agers
Ivan Lendl and Stefan Edberg kept the element of surprise out of the United States Open last night by fending off the two teen-agers intent on stealing their spots in the quarterfinals.
Neither challenger submitted without a squabble.
In a match that so resembled a mutual interrogation that it could have been played out beneath a naked light bulb, Edberg ran Michael Chang ragged, and Chang returned the favor, but the Swede had the last word in straight sets, 7-6 (7-1), 7-5, 6-3.


Bridge
Two Englishmen who had lived in New York City for a quarter of a century met for the first time last month, formed a bridge partnership, and scored an impressive victory.
They are Alex McCallum, whose wife, Karen, is a reigning world champion, and David Tempest.


Kathleen Dodson Weds Eric Greenberg
Kathleen Dodson, a daughter of Naomi Dodson of Evanston, Ill., and the late Richard J. Dodson, was married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Eric Greenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Greenberg of Cortlandt Manor, N.Y.
Rabbi Stanley Urbas officiated at Tarrytown House.
The bride is the director of development of the Washington (D.C.) Chamber Symphony.
She was until recently the director of special projects for the Big Apple Circus in New York.
She is a graduate of Oberlin College and the Oberlin Conservatory of Music.
Her mother is a registered nurse at Bethany Methodist Hospital in Chicago.
Her father was an engineer.


David Leonard Vogler Wed to Erica G. Eisner
Erica Gail Eisner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harris Eisner of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Leonard Vogler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chester Vogler of Centerville, Mass.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at Stouffer's Westchester Hotel in White Plains.
The bride, 28 years old, is a grants manager in New York with the Atlantic Philanthropic Service Company, a consulting concern.
She graduated from Clark University.


Street Fair Marks Brazil's Independence Day


U.S. Unsure About Yeltsin
Bush Administration officials have grown ambivalent about the Russian president, questioning some of his actions and intentions.
Page 7.


Sports of The Times; No Reason To Doubt Thomas Now
IN any profession, it's known as the comfort level.
Doing the job without having to think about how to do your job.
In the Jets' 16-13 victory over the Tampa Bay Bucs yesterday, which opened his second season, Blair Thomas displayed what the Jets had in mind when they used the second choice in the 1990 grab-bag of college talent to select this chunky 5-foot-10-inch, 195-pound running back from Penn State.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 2


Letter: On Defense; Not All Missiles Are Offensive Weapons
To the Editor:
It remains one of the oddest and most dangerous illusions of the modern era that our defensive military posture should consist only of offensive weapons.
This view resounds throughout "More Danger Than Defense" (editorial, Aug. 12).
We spend nearly $300 billion a year on "defense," yet the effort to allocate even 2 percent of this spending to missile defense has generally been thwarted by a Congress wedded to the notion of mutual assured destruction.


Short Songs From the 60's and 70's
"Who'll Buy My Memories? (The I.R.S. Tapes)" is bare-bones Willie Nelson -- just his voice and a lone acoustic guitar -- in 25 short songs adding up to 63 minutes of music (Sony Music Special Projects, cassette, CD or two L.P.'s).
Most of the songs are solo versions of material first recorded by Mr.
Nelson in the 1960's and 1970's, when he was a more prolific songwriter; the collection includes the title songs from the albums "Country Willie" (1965), "Yesterday's Wine" (1971) and "The Sound in Your Mind" (1976).


Yanks Catch a Break On a Misplayed Ball
Devon White thought the ball might sail over the center-field wall.
Kevin Maas thought White might catch it.
They both were wrong.
The drive by Maas didn't reach the wall, but White uncharacteristically failed to catch the ball, and the resulting two-run double gave the Yankees an unexpected 4-2 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays yesterday at Yankee Stadium.


Essay; Pour It On
Some of us remember the imperious way Mikhail Gorbachev cut off the microphone of Andrei Sakharov when that saintly dissenter tried to protest against impending dictatorship just days before he died; for that reason, we find it hard to join editorialists who tut-tut at the "bullying" way Boris Yeltsin told the chastened Mr.
Gorbachev to read out the truth from a similar rostrum.
The crowd that used to say the peoples of the Soviet empire really were born to authoritarianism, and that we should not encourage the pushy Landsbergis of Lithuania because disunion would surely lead to anarchy followed by dictatorship, now pushes this line: Let's not be beastly to the former despots in the Communist Party, the Red Army or the K.G.B.


Never-Say-Die Pennant Contenders
It's called the stretch run, the September assault on the baseball leaders.
To those trailing the first-place clubs, the top looks far away, with the season dwindling.Take heart, Boston and Oakland and Chicago (White Sox) and, St.
Louis and Cincinnati -- teams in apparent danger of falling too far back to catch up.
Imposing mountains have been climbed before.


Health on a Budget/A special report.; In a Stronghold for H.M.O.'s, One Possible Future Emerges
When Michael Boucher was hired this year as one of 300 new teachers in the public schools here, he was offered a choice of two health plans.
Both were administered by health maintenance organizations, popularly known as H.M.O.'s.
The limited choice did not seem to bother Mr.
Boucher, a social studies teacher at the Folwell Middle School, who said that over the years he had enrolled in three H.M.O.'s, the members of which agree to accept limits on their medical choices in return for low-cost care that emphasizes preventive medicine.
Mr.
Boucher said he would rejoin the H.M.O. he "belonged to as a kid."  Widely Used in Minneapolis
Minneapolis is a stronghold of the prepaid medical plans, which many experts across the country say are likely to have an essential role in the struggle to slow medical spending.
With one of the country's highest rates of H.M.O. membership, 44 percent, this city may provide a glimpse of the future in health care.


Beth Horowitz Weds
Beth Horowitz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Horowitz of Plainview, L.I., was married last evening at the Conservative Synagogue in Jamaica Estates, Queens, to Fred Smithson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Smithson of Chicago.
Rabbi Esidoro Aisenberg officiated.
The bride and bridegroom, both 25 years old, are graduates of the University of Michigan.
She is an associate buyer for Abraham &amp; Straus in Brooklyn.
The bridegroom is an associate at Chase Securities in New York.
He is a certified public accountant and chartered financial analyst.
He received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; An Ailing, Murky Industry Looks for Signs of Change
AT the National Book Award ceremony last year, Catharine Stimpson, the chairman of the fiction jury, declared that American writing was marked by an astonishing vitality and vigor.
She was swiftly followed on the podium by the author Saul Bellow, who said he had never known the country's literature to be in such a lamentably lifeless state.
It is the third rule of publishing that no two people will agree on anything, even where to have lunch. (The first rule is that there is only one thing worse than losing an auction for a book -- and that is winning it. The second is that it is nearly always more profitable to leave your money in the bank than to venture into trade-book publishing, where a profit margin of even 5 percent is elusive.)


Tacy Witter Marries Jeffrey S. Mayer
Elizabeth Tacy Witter, a daughter of Susan R. Witter and William D. Witter, both of New York, was married yesterday in Mountain View, Calif., to Jeffrey Scott Mayer, a son of Bruce W. Mayer of Lewisville, Tex., and Lucille H. Mayer of St.
Helena, Calif.
The Rev.
Martin V. Skewes-Cox, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at Rengstorff House.
The bride, 33 years old, is known as Tacy.
A graduate of San Francisco State University, she is a graduate student in psychology at Santa Clara University.
Her father is the founder of William D. Witter Inc., an investment counseling concern in New York.
Her mother is a home-care nurse at Lenox Hill Hospital.


Hong Kong Journal; Monkey Hill's Swinging Crowd Jars the Neighbors
In a hilly patch of woods on the very edge of a crowded urban neighborhood here, 700 wild monkeys have created their own unlikely little kingdom, where the young learn not only to swing through the treetops and pick tender bamboo shoots, but also how to cross a concrete bridge and open a pop-top can of Tsingtao beer.
These animals, which zoologists believe are largely descended from abandoned pet monkeys, live a startlingly urban life in the small wood that Hong Kong residents now call Monkey Hill.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Prices rose on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today.
At midday, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 24.91 points, or a tenth of 1 percent, to 22,360.78.
It gained 333.70 points Friday.


SOVIET TURMOIL: In a Splintered Union, Ethnic Russians Fear Future; In Moldavia, Claim Of Independence Incites Protests
Olga Borchenko was on her way this morning from Odessa to Kishinev, the capital of the Moldavian republic, when the train suddenly ground to a halt.
"I saw flags flying and people on the tracks," she said, sitting with her luggage on the grass by the side of the stalled train and nodding toward a demonstration up the line.
"Those people from the Dniester republic are blocking the tracks."


City Libraries, Still at Risk
The destruction of New York City's public libraries has been forestalled.
The City Council, the library workers' union and library directors deserve praise for their efforts to resolve the crisis.
But they have won only a stay of execution.
A generous mix of public and private funding will be required to insure survival.
The city's library system is actually three independent bodies.
The best known is the New York Public Library, which covers Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten Island.
The Queens Borough Public Library is the nation's busiest.
The Brooklyn Public serves the most populous borough but is the most seriously underfunded.


Fumbling Rams Lose To Cards
One day into the new season, and one week away from a meeting with the Giants, the Los Angeles Rams are faced with the kinds of problems that most teams resolve in training camp.
Their inability to avoid fumbles caused the Rams to lose their opener to the Phoenix Cardinals today, 24-14, at Anaheim Stadium.


Long Islanders Enjoy a Last Fling With Summer


Traffic Alert
West Indian carnival and parade: Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn will be closed on Monday from Utica Avenue to Washington Street from 10 A.M. to late evening.
Holiday Closings A listing of Labor Day closings appears on page 22.


NEWS SUMMARY
Soviet Turmoil 4-7
Insurgent Soviet politicians warned that an emergency Congress aimed at reviving the political system could give reactionaries an opportunity to seek a constitutional coup to depose President Gorbachev.
Page 1


Jill Mindlin Weds Jonathan Konoff
Jill Ruth Mindlin, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert Mindlin of New Hyde Park, L.I., and the late Mr.
Mindlin, was married yesterday to Jonathan Jacob Konoff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Konoff of Rochester.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck in Kings Point, L.I.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband, and from Brooklyn Law School.
She is to join the New York law firm of Otterbourg, Steindler, Houston &amp; Rosen as an associate next month.
Her mother, Elaine Mindlin, is a community aide in the Queens Borough President's office.
Her father was an editor for The Long Island Press and the New York correspondent for the Newhouse News Service.


Corrections
The deadline on a in obituary Saturday about a publishing executive in Newton, Mass., misstated his name.
He was Ronald G. Segel, not Robert.


Ms. Kaplan Weds Christopher Lue
Susan Beth Kaplan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Kaplan of Cazenovia, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Bradley Lue, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Winston R. Lue of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
Elizabeth Strong, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Lerman in Cazenovia.
The bride and bridegroom, both 25 years old, are graduates of Colgate University.
The bride is a senior money transfer assistant at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and is studying for an M.B.A. at Fordham University.


Lorri Staal Wed To Adam Rosen
Lorri Elizabeth Staal, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Staal of Eastchester, N.Y., was married last evening to Adam L. Rosen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Rosen of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier performed the ceremony at the Park East Synagogue in Manhattan.
The bride, 29 years old, was until recently a clerk for Judge I. Leo Glasser of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
She is to join the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher as an associate in October.
She graduated cum laude from Cornell University and received a law degree from Northwestern University.
Her father is a senior account executive at Prudential Securities in White Plains.


North Carolina Program Helps Keep More Babies Alive
For nearly four years, the BabyLove Medical Assistance Program has formed the core of North Carolina's effort to reduce its infant mortality rate, which in 1988 was the nation's highest.
As a result of BabyLove and related state initiatives and the expansion of the Federal Medicaid program, North Carolina's infant mortality rate fell to 10.6 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1990, from 12.6 in 1988.


Books of The Times; Life and Death of the Small Town
Far From Home Life and Loss in Two American Towns  By Ron Powers 317 pages.
Random House. $22.


Dr. Deborah I. Dawson Weds Daniel E. Goldman
Dr.
Deborah Irene Dawson, a daughter of Kathryn H. Dawson of Morristown, N.J., and David M. Dawson of Woodridge, Ill., was married yesterday to Daniel Evan Goldman, a son of Ruth K. Goldman of Morris Plains, N.J., and the late Lawrence J. Goldman.
Rabbi Mordecai Genn and the Rev.
Barbara Miller, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Martinsville (N.J.) Inn.
The bride, 28 years old, is a psychologist with Springfield Associates, a group practice in Springfield, N.J.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a doctorate from Rutgers University.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


For TV, Summer Stays Long and Not So Hot
The summer television season officially ends today.
And for the most part, the networks view Labor Day like Lawrence of Arabia glimpsing the sea after a parched trek through the desert: It holds out the promise of blessed resuscitation.
But as network television continues to suffer financially, a difference in strategies on dealing with the summer doldrums has begun to emerge.


Warsaw Seeks Decree Powers
The Polish Government said today that it will ask the Parliament for the power to rule by decree to help push through an economic austerity plan.
Andrzej Zarebski, a Government spokesman, said the Government had decided the decrees were needed to effectively regulate the economy.


Hayley Feldstein Weds
Hayley Jill Feldstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Buddy Feldstein of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Glenn Foster Littman, the son of Elaine Littman Pachter of Eastchester, N.Y., and Richard Littman of Upper Montclair, N.J.
Rabbi Deborah Joselow performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hil.
The bride, 23 years old, is an assistant manager at Bloomingdale's in New York.
She is a graduate of American University.
Mr.
Littman, 33, is an account executive at Katz Communications in New York.
He graduated from Emerson College.


Europeans Arrive in Yugoslavia to Promote Peace Plan
Officials of the European Community arrived in Belgrade today to advance a peace plan accepted by Croatia and Serbia that calls for teams of foreign observers to monitor a cease-fire.
But even as Foreign Minister Hans van den Broek of the Netherlands prepared to preside over the formal signing of the community's plan, there were reports of renewed clashes between Croats and ethnic Serbs in at least two rural Croatian towns.


Navigating the System
EAST SIDE: Most service is suspended on the Lexington Avenue line , Nos. 4, 5 and 6, in both directions between Grand Central and Fulton Street on the East Side of Manhattan.
Passengers traveling south from the Bronx can take the No. 4 train from Woodlawn to 59th Street where they can transfer to the Broadway N and R trains to Lower Manhattan
Service on the No. 6 train will be available to Grand Central in Manhattan for passengers traveling from Pelham Bay in the Bronx.
At 59th Street, those riders should transfer to the Broadway line's N or R trains to go further south.
A free shuttle bus will run east along 23d Street and north along Third Avenue between the 23d Street station on the Broadway line R and N station and the 86th Street station on the Lexington Avenue.
The shuttle will run south along Lexington Avenue to 27th Street.
WEST SIDE: To accommodate additional riders on West Side lines, No. 5 trains in both directions will be rerouted to the No. 2 line between Nevins Street in Brooklyn and 149th Street in the Bronx.
MORE INFORMATION: Additional information is available through the Travel Information Center between 6 A.M. and 9 P.M. at 718-330-1234.


Lebanon and Syria Sign Wide Security Pact
The Lebanese Government signed an agreement with Syria today insuring day-to-day coordination on all military and security matters, the exchange of intelligence information and the extradition of fugitives.
Interior Minister Mohammed Harba of Syria said the most important provision of the treaty involved fighting drug trafficking in both countries.


U.S.-Japan Chip Deal
Texas Instruments Inc. and three Japanese electronics giants announced on Friday that they would jointly develop semiconductors for high-definition television sets sold in Japan.
Texas Instruments Japan Ltd., Fujitsu Ltd., Hitachi Ltd. and the Sony Corporation will develop chips for the video decoders used in Japan's HDTV system.
The companies say the project will help bring down the price of the sets, which now retail for about $30,000 in Japan.


Hartford Scrambles To Handle Wage Tax
The onset of the income tax, along with dozens of other tax changes signed into law by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. last month, has sent Connecticut's residents scrambling to cope with the massive revision in the tax code.
It has also brought about a burst of work for accountants, who have been rushing to study the state's long-delayed budget to determine how the tax would affect their clients.


Ripe Time for Soviet Students in U.S.
Far from the Moscow barricades, Soviet students in the United States can only watch in suspense as their country transforms itself.
But some say that, paradoxically, they may be in the right place at the right time.
"Even though I wasn't there, I feel that what has happened is part of my life too, because the majority of the people around the Parliament building were of my generation," said Pavel Gelman, a 24-year-old drama student at Pepperdine University in Malibu, Calif.
"I think it is appropriate for me to be here because now it is clear that whatever happens, the Soviet Union and the West will need and cooperate with each other more than ever."


Ms. Grundman, Student, Is Wed
Nancy Grundman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Grundman of Harrison, N.Y., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Jay Marc Grossman.
He is the son of Linda Grossman of Plantation, Fla., and Dr.
Martin Grossman of Coral Springs, Fla., and the stepson of Arlene Grossman.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk officiated.
The bride, 25 years old, and the bridegroom, 26, are 1987 graduates of Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.
She is a law student at Fordham University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Olshan Grundman Frome &amp; Rosenzweig.
Her mother, Sondra Grundman, is a sales associate at Prudential Suburban Properties in Rye, N.Y., and a founding director of the Harrison Children's Center, a day-care organization.


A Major Injury Mars Pro Football's Opening Day


Folks Back Home Do Give a Hoot How '80 Election Was Won
To the Editor:
Responding to the coming Congressional investigation of whether or not the 1980 Reagan campaign improperly interfered with the attempt to secure the return of American hostages in Iran, House Minority Leader Bob Michel said that he didn't think the people back home gave two hoots about what happened 10 years ago (news article, Aug. 6).


TRANSIT POLICIES FACING OVERHAUL
Last week's fatal subway crash has prompted New York City transit officials to review a wide range of policies, including drug and alcohol testing, standards for hiring train operators and supervisors and its labor relations in general, the president of the Transit Authority said.
The president, Alan F. Kiepper, said in an interview this weekend that the accident, which the police have attributed to a drunken motorman, shows the need for improving the relations between transit employees and management.
The relationship is so antagonistic, many employees said, that it may have contributed to the failure of the motorman's co-workers to report that they had sometimes seen him drink before work, a failure Mr.
Kiepper called disappointing.


World Economies


Gorbachev Interview: 'People Expect an Answer From Us About the Future'
Following is a transcript of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's interview today in St.
George's Hall in the Kremlin with Steve Hurst, CNN's Moscow bureau chief, and Yegor Yakovlev, the director of Soviet television, as translated by CNN:


Edward R. Sammis, Editor, 89
Edward R. Sammis, an editor and writer, died on Saturday in Norwalk Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 89 and lived in Westport, Conn.
He died of heart failure, his brother, Fred Sammis, said.


U.S. Closes With a World Mark, Medals and a Vision
The world track and field championships ended today with another entertaining performance by United States athletes, but probably more important, with a vison of the future for the sport, as dictated by political events around the world.
For the third time during the eight-day meet, Americans figured in a world record.
The men's 400-meter team of Andre Cason, Leroy Burrell, Dennis Mitchell and Carl Lewis ran seamlessly to finish in 37.50 seconds, a sizable improvement over the 37.67 the last three and Mike Marsh ran three weeks ago in Zurich.


R. B. Myrus Wed To Alison Caplan
Alison Jane Caplan, a daughter of Robert Caplan and Carol Randolph Caplan of La Jolla, Calif., was married yesterday in Coronado, Calif., to Lieut.
Richard Benjamin Myrus of the Navy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Don Myrus of Sea Cliff, L.I.
Rabbi Laurie Cosky performed the ceremony at the Del Coronado Hotel.
The bride, 27 years old, is studying for a doctorate in Hispanic languages at the University of California at Santa Barbara.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in Spanish from Middlebury College.
Her father is a senior partner in the San Diego law firm of Seltzer Caplan Wilkins &amp; McMahon.
Her mother was the late Sherrill R. Caplan.


Lower Mortality Rate Masks Lag on Infant Health
In April, the Bush Administration announced with fanfare that in 1990 infant mortality in this country had fallen to a record low, nearly meeting the goal set by the Public Health Service 10 years before.
But it did not mention that the United States was lagging so badly in three other areas of infant health that its goals for 1990 were pushed back to 2000.
On the surface, the three areas appear to be more mundane than infant mortality.
They have to do with visits to doctors early in pregnancy and with the birth weight of infants for the population as a whole and for minorities.


Only 'Law and Order' Is Filming For TV on New York's Streets
The remains of a 9-year-old boy murdered 30 years ago had been found in a brownstone being renovated on West 13th Street.
Now the detectives of NBC's "Law and Order" were to take a former resident to the site, hoping she would remember something about her former playmate's demise.
The detectives, played by Paul Sorvino and Christopher Noth, emerged from their vans for the scene.
Mr.
Noth butted a soccer ball.
Someone hairsprayed Carolyn McCormick, who plays a police psychiatrist.
"Stand by," a man called, and then, "Ready . . . action."


Mary L. Williamson, a Law Student, Is Wed to Kurt H. Kiefer, Art Student
Mary Leyden Williamson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas F. Williamson Jr. of Pawling, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Kurt Hamilton Kiefer, the son of Virginia Kiefer of Colorado Springs and James Kiefer of Aurora, Colo.
The Rev.
Robert M. Taylor, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Christ Church on Quaker Hill.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Stanford University, where she is a law student.
She received a master's degree in international studies from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.
Her mother, Barbara Williamson, is an editor for the Taconic Foundation in New York.


In Feast of Louisiana Governor's Race, Revenge Is Main Course
The stage was set for hoopla.
Edwin W. Edwards, who once let the good times roll as a matter of policy, was campaigning for the job he lost in 1987, asking a friendly crowd to make him Governor of Louisiana again.
A dozen shrimp and crab dishes filled the buffet tables.
The rum drinks flowed in several bright colors, and a trio of blond girls in little sequined outfits sang a medley of patriotic hymns to a rock beat.


Judge Dismisses Claim Against Basquiat Estate
A $40 million claim by the Vrej Baghoomian Gallery against the estate of the artist Jean Michel Basquiat has been dismissed in Manhattan Surrogate's Court.
The gallery had represented Mr.
Basquiat, a self-taught painter whose intense, graffiti-like imagery, a mix of jazz, African and Abstract Expressionist motifs, brought him fame in the early 1980's.
Since his death in August 1988 at the age of 27, his paintings have sold for as much as $600,000.


Ideology Aside, a Socialist Holiday Thrives
With Communism and Socialism increasingly out of favor around the world, Americans today are celebrating a holiday that was first promoted by socialists more than a 100 years ago.
Labor Day began on Sept. 5, 1882, when 30,000 people marched down Manhattan's Fifth Avenue to Union Square to honor working men and woman.
The day was proclaimed a national holiday by Congress in 1894 after lobbying by unions like the Central Labor Union of New York.


Karras Is Now Chasing Book Buyers
From MICKEY MANTLE (who seems to re-publish his autobiography every 18 months), to BO JACKSON, to WAYNE GRETZKY, athletes have been collaborating with authors in record numbers.
But ALEX KARRAS, who chased quarterbacks while listening to a different drummer, has collaborated on a novel.
"We literally wrote it together," contends DOUGLAS GRAHAM, a poet, songwriter, and screenwriter who, in his native Detroit, watched Karras star for the Lions.


T. K. Brodheim Wed To Deborah A. Bower
Deborah Ann Bower, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. Bower of Lincoln, Mass., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Theodore Krevoy Brodheim, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Brodheim of New York.
Rabbi Bernard Mehlman officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, is a vice president of J. P. Morgan Securities in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of Harvard University, where her father is the Donald Kirk David Professor of Business Administration.


A Horse Is a Horse of Course of Course
For 108 years, through various Madison Square Garden incarnations, a stint at the Squadron A Armory, and its move last year to New Jersey, the National Horse Show has retained an aura of leather and velvet.
Now the new president, SALLIE WHEELER, is introducing bubble gum and lollipops.
To attract youngsters to this year's event, which starts Oct. 29 at the Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, Wheeler is creating pony rides and a petting zoo.
In addition, the show will offer special classes for schoolchildren and youth groups. . . .
Look, up in the sky: It's DARRELL GREEN.
Or at least his namesake, a Boeing 727.
Green, the Redskins' Pro Bowl cornerback, recently won the DHL-N.F.L.'s Fastest Man competition for the fourth time in six years.
So DHL, the express-delivery company, with a fleet of 74 unnamed planes, has named its first one for him.
At Texas A.&amp;I., Green was the last runner to beat CARL LEWIS in the 60-yard dash before the 1984 Olympics. . . .
There is no official definition of what makes something a sport, but rollerblading probably has joined the ranks.
ABC's "Wide World of Sports" recently devoted a segment to it.
Next Saturday, the 50-kilometer national championship will be held in Central Park at the West Side Drive and 72d Street, starting at 6:30 A.M.


Martha Newmark Steinman, Lawyer, Marries Gilbert Herzberg, Physician
Martha Newmark Steinman, the daughter of Ralph Steinman of New York and the late Pauline Newmark Steinman, was married last evening at the Jewish Community Center in Harrison, N.Y., to Dr.
Gilbert Zachary Herzberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman J. Herzberg of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbis Dennis Math, Charles Bahn and Phillip Weinberger officiated with Cantor Elliot Levine.
The bride and bridegroom are 27 years old and magna cum laude graduates of the University of Pennsylvania.
Mrs.
Herzberg received a law degree from New York University and is an associate in the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin.
Her father is a partner in the New York accounting firm of Anchin, Block &amp; Anchin.


Willie Nelson Hopes for a Hit; So Does the I.R.S.
Since Willie Nelson's "Who'll Buy My Memories? (The I.R.S. Tapes)" went on sale in June, it has sold only 160,000 copies.
Under Mr.
Nelson's unusual arrangement with the Government, the collection of 25 songs must sell at least four million copies if it is to erase the singer-songwriter's tax obligations.
"You got to be positive," Mr.
Nelson said in an telephone interview last week.
"It's not unheard of. I could sell three million albums. I've done it before." He hopes sales will improve when the collection is available in stores; it is sold now only through phone orders advertised mostly on late-night television.


Between Heat and Hurricane, Summer Weather Is Weird
Summertime has its own rhythms, so time-honored that you can plan your life by them.
You buy your swimsuit in June, you take it easy in July, you eat peaches in August.
Just before Labor Day you buy a fall outfit or take care of those back-to-school purchases.
And September is for cool days and apples.
Not this year.
Freakish weather, including the violent storms that accompanied Hurricane Bob -- has thrown everything off.
Vegetables and fruit are appearing at all the wrong times, animals are doing strange things, and some people's livelihoods have been seriously disrupted.


Benay E. Cook, Student, Is Wed
Benay Elizabeth Cook, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Cook of Alpine, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Steven C. Taub, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Taub of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Stephen Listfield and Cantor Kurt Silbermann performed the ceremony at the Plaza hotel.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and is a student at Brooklyn Law School.
Her father is the president of Cook Consultants and Sales, a shoe importer in Alpine.
Her mother, Judith Cook, is an elementary-school teacher in Alpine.


What About Hitler?
To the Editor:
Janet Malcolm maintains that the universal acceptance of vegetarianism will bring about world peace ("The Vegetarian Road to World Peace," letter, Aug. 18).
Presumably this was why Adolf Hitler was a vegetarian all his life and wrote extensively on the subject.
If vegetarians choose not to eat meat, they ought to acknowledge that it is a personal quirk and not preach at the rest of us so self-righteously.
ROBERT MILCH  Stony Brook, L.I., Aug. 19, 1991


Congresswoman Calls For U.N. Role in Azerbaijan
Armenian officials today supported an American Congresswoman's call for a United Nations peacekeeping force in the disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, where ethnic combatants have seized 25 hostages.
The proposal came from visiting Representative Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California.
"I'm afraid if we do nothing, we could have the makings of something with very serious consequences," she said.
Prime Minister Vazgen Manukyan of the Armenian republic called the idea "brilliant."


Fidelity Is Bullish on Weekly Papers
Fidelity Investments, the huge Boston-based financial conglomerate known for its mutual funds, has entered the unlikely field of weekly journalism in the Boston suburbs.
In the last year, it has become the region's most aggressive buyer of weekly newspapers.
Fidelity Capital has been joined in its acquisitions by members of the Harte family, which has owned newspapers for three generations.
They began acquiring weeklies in 1986, and together they control 34 weekly papers and free shoppers in the Boston area, with a combined distribution of nearly 400,000 homes.


Animals Afford a Test of Humility and Charity
To the Editor:
Explaining Isaac Bashevis Singer's statement that "There will never be any peace in the world so long as we eat animals," Janet Malcolm quotes the writer Milan Kundera: "Mankind's true moral test . . . consists of its attitude toward those who are at its mercy: animals" ("The Vegetarian Road to World Peace," letter, Aug. 18).


Gorbachev Says His Wife Is Still Recovering
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that his wife, Raisa, was still recovering from a "very bad attack" prompted by fear for their lives during last month's attempted coup.
He used the Russian word "pristup," which sometimes refers to heart attacks.


Adjusting to New Role, McMillan Proves a Hit
Erik McMillan dressed slowly and quietly at his locker after the Jets' 16-13 season-opening victory today, perhaps composing himself to answer the inevitable questions about his demotion from starting free safety to special-teams player over the summer.
After 45 starts at free safety and two Pro Bowl appearances, standing on the sidelines waiting to rush onto the field to cover a kickoff or a punt isn't a great feeling.


Buffalo in September Is Still Too Cold to Suit the Dolphins
The Miami Dolphins and the Buffalo Bills have something special going on now, a top-this-if-you-can, in-your-gut brand of football that keeps producing some of the league's best action.
The latest edition -- the season opener for both teams -- was another example of why these divisional rivals who definitely meet again in the regular season will likely do so again in the playoffs, too.
Buffalo was scorched early by a balanced and well-executed Miami offensive attack, but in the end, it was the Bills who lit blazing fires.
Running back Thurman Thomas provided plenty of heat, becoming the first Bill to gain 100 yards passing and 100 receiving in a game, quarterback Jim Kelly added his regular-season career best with 381 passing yards, and the Bills doused each Miami threat to win, 35-31, before 80,252 in Rich Stadium.


In Bush's Councils, a Growing Distrust of Yeltsin
Bush Administration officials have grown increasingly ambivalent about Boris N. Yeltsin in the two weeks since the Kremlin coup, questioning some of his actions and intentions and starting to criticize him in private as a "demagogue."
President Bush and his aides have been careful not to make any real public criticism of Mr.
Yeltsin, the President of the Russian federated republic, both from a desire to maintain diplomatic protocol and because they view him as a powerful figure with whom they will almost certainly have to deal in the future.


Debra Eichel Is Married
Debra Eichel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Eichel of Kings Point, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Paul Brooks, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley A. Brooks of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Nathaniel Steinberg performed the ceremony at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Brooks, 23, is an assistant buyer for Saks Fifth Avenue in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of George Washington University.
The bridegroom, 26, is an associate in the New York law firm of Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman &amp; Dicker.
He graduated from George Washington and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.


Gorbachev Asks British Leader for Economic Aid
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev appealed to Prime Minister John Major of Britain today for economic help for the crumbling Soviet Union.
"Now is the time for the West to support us," the Soviet President told the visiting Mr.
Major, who is the current chairman of the Group of Seven leading industrial democracies.
The British leader is making a flying visit to try to chart a course for Western economic diplomacy as centralized Soviet power continues to flow out to the country's constituent republics, eager for independence from Moscow.


Repair Work Nears End
New York City Transit Authority repair crews, rushing to reopen the subway lines running through the 14th Street-Union Square subway station, began pouring the final blocks of concrete and laying the last ties yesterday in hopes of restoring full service by rush hour tomorrow morning.
The police reopened the streets surrounding the Union Square station at 1 P.M. yesterday.


A Brash Bash for Connors's Birthday
The fans were stacked five-deep again yesterday afternoon to watch Jimmy Connors knock flat forehands with John Lloyd out on a sidecourt near where National Tennis Center workers cart the garbage.
The smell around Court 11 was awful, but none of the fans would budge from the fence.
They wanted autographs or a glimpse of the great left-hander.
Connors was a phenomenon worth the wait, worth the aroma.


Ms. Cohen Is Wed To Jonathon Bass
Jacqueline Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Cohen of Westfield, N.J., was married last evening at Temple Emanuel-El in Westfield to Jonathon Bass, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Bass of Ocean, N.J.
Rabbis Charles Kroloff and Jacob Friedman officiated, assisted by Cantors Martha Novick and Andrew Edison.
The bride, 24 years old, is a research assistant at the Luginbuhl Research Institute for Endangered Species at Drexel University in Philadelphia.
A graduate of Simmons College, she expects to receive a master's degree in environmental science from Drexel in December.


The Day's Highlights
Shaping the New Order
A WARNING ABOUT THE CONGRESS: Pro-reform politicians warned that an emergency national congress that is supposed to seek a new formula for reviving the exhausted Soviet political system could provide an opportunity for Communist reactionaries to seek a constitutional coup to depose President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Page 1.


Shift in Feelings on the Homeless: Empathy Turns Into Frustration
Ten years after the wan face of homelessness first captured the nation's attention, empathy is turning to intolerance as cities impose harsher restrictions on homeless people to reduce their visibility or force them to go out on their own.
New York City, Santa Barbara, Calif., and a number of other cities are acting out of both frustration and desperation, pressed by hard times and by a public that has grown increasingly impatient with a problem that has worsened despite the programs aimed at relieving it and previous shows of good will.


Hasidim Say They'll Join Parade Line
In a good-will gesture to black residents in Crown Heights, several members of the Lubavitcher Hasidic Sect have accepted an invitation by the organizers of today's West-Indian American Day Parade to march near Mayor David N. Dinkins, a Lubavitcher spokesman said yesterday.
Rabbi Shmuel Butman, who said he would march, also said that leaders of the sect, whose world headquarters is on the parade route, met yesterday with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, State Attorney General Robert Abrams and other government officials to seek assurances that the police would maintain order and insure their safety.


Metro Matters
Labor still marches, but as jobs and money move south, the drummer is ever more distant.
Labor Day was a New York invention.
But, a decade ago, when the city's once-vaunted Central Labor Council decided to revive its annual Labor Day parade for the first time in 13 years, it took two months to get a permit from the Police Department.


DEVELOPERS LEERY OF WETLANDS PLAN
The Bush Administration's proposal to ease restrictions and hasten the development of marshes and wet forests and meadows could have the opposite effect, consultants and state officials say.
In a series of recent announcements, the White House proposed a broad new policy for regulating at least 100 million acres of wetlands in the contiguous 48 states.


Miss Baratoff Weds William W. Todd
Elizabeth Wyatt Baratoff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Baratoff Jr. of Sea Cliff, L.I., was married yesterday to William Walker Todd, a son of Sheila O'Keefe Todd of Denver and Webster Bray Todd of Winifred, Mont.
The Very Rev.
Leonid Kishkovsky performed the ceremony at the Russian Orthodox Church of Our Lady of Kazan in Sea Cliff.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from New Hampshire College.
She is an assistant buyer for Saks Fifth Avenue.
Her father is the president of the Nederland Capital Group, an investment banking concern in New York.


INSIDE
Envoys Arrive in Yugoslavia
Officials of the European Community arrived in Yugoslavia to set in motion a cease-fire monitoring plan, but reports of clashes continued.
Page 3.
Impact of Wetlands Plan
The Bush Administration's proposal to ease restrictions and hasten the development of wetlands could have the opposite effect.
Page 8.
Andrew Young and B.C.C.I.
The Bank of Credit and Commerce International forgave a loan of $150,000 to a consulting firm led by the former Atlanta Mayor.
Page 25.


Siemens Sells A U.S. Holding
Siemens A.G., the German electrical engineering and electronics company, has sold its 9.9 percent stake in Advanced Micro Devices Inc., as planned earlier this summer.
Siemens bought the 8.2 million shares in 1977 when the companies were working on a venture, which was dissolved two years later.


B.C.C.I. Forgave Consultant Loan
The Bank of Credit and Commerce International last year forgave a $150,000 loan to Andrew Young's dormant consulting firm, freeing him from a personal obligation to make $32,000 in annual payments on interest and principal, Mr.
Young, the former Mayor of Atlanta, Congressman and United Nations Ambassador, said in an interview.
The gesture was typical of the style of the bank, which spent millions around the world in efforts to influence public officials.
B.C.C.I. was seized last month by financial regulators in seven countries after the Bank of England uncovered evidence of widespread fraud, drug trafficking and money laundering.
Mr.
Young said he regarded the debt forgiveness as belated payment of $50,000 in annual retainer fees that the bank had promised his consulting firm while he was Atlanta's Mayor.
Mr.
Young was Mayor from 1982 to 1990 and remains one of Georgia's most influential public figures.
Currently, for example, he is head of the Olympic Organizing Committee for Atlanta, which will be the host city for the 1996 Summer Games.


SOVIET TURMOIL: In a Splintered Union, Ethnic Russians Fear Future; In Lithuania, Power Workers Cling to the Pleasant Life
It is thrilling to be a Lithuanian these days, but not so comfortable to be one of Lithuania's more than 300,000 Russians.
For years, Russians here enjoyed a feeling of absolute freedom, and at times even a sense that they were bosses.
Lithuania was under the Kremlin's thumb, the Russian language was required in all schools, and many people believed it would ever be so.


Jordan Tries, So Don't Be 'Stoopid'
Michael Jordan, probably deep in a summer bunker somewhere on this globe, has been attacked recently, not by bogeys, but by a couple of former athletes.
In a recent Sports Illustrated article, Hank Aaron, who was to baseball what Michael Jordan is to basketball, said that Jordan hasn't done enough for the black community.


Mexico's Ruling Party Defuses Vote Protest
Mexico's governing party appears to have re-established control over militant members who occupied a state legislature to protest a decision to hold a new gubernatorial election because of fraud accusations.
The official press agency Notimex reported today that about 100 militants of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, known as PRI, left the Guanajuato state legislature early today after occupying it for 36 hours in a dispute over the state's governorship.


SOVIET INSURGENTS FEAR HARD-LINERS PLAN NEW MOVES
Insurgent politicians warned today that an emergency national Congress that is to convene Monday to seek a new formula for reviving the exhausted Soviet political system could provide an opportunity for Communist reactionaries to seek a constitutional coup to depose President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Notably, such a warning was issued by Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, the Gorbachev adviser and party critic who predicted the coup by ranking Communist officials two weeks ago.


Bossa Nova Is Back in the Hearts of Brazilians Who Scorned It
Startling Bahian drum brigades and primitive echoes from the Amazon may be the most recent Brazilian sounds to have an international impact, but here in the cradle of bossa nova Brazilians themselves are rediscovering its gentle rhythms and romantic lyrics.
Bossa nova, or the new flair, fell out of favor with local audiences in the mid-1960's, but it survived for tourists, who demanded Rio's trademark sound.
"Bossa nova had more permanence in the world than in Brazil," said Nelson Motta, a music critic and producer.


Reviews/Television; In Dance, Enclosure Needn't Be a Limiting Factor
There is something to be said for the confining box of the proscenium stage and the sense of enclosure it can create.
Yeasty ideas inform two programs tonight in the "Alive From Off Center" dance and film series, which is devoted to the proposition that good dance, shot well, is good television.
The photography is frequently eloquent and imaginative.
But the strongest dances -- and the choreography is clearly not a factor -- take place within four walls.
Ruby Shang's ambitious "Dances in Exile," which will be seen with Brenda Way's "Loose the Thread" tonight at 11:05 on Channel 13 and next Monday night at 9:30 on Channel 31, is performed in Manhattan in Federal Hall and Times Square, in the setting of the Kamakura temples in Japan, and in Shinjuku Station in Tokyo.
A clash of cultures is explored in an episodic, meditative text written by David Henry Hwang and spoken by B. D. Wong, who plays the narrator and both the American man and the Japanese woman whose story is told here.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Brooks Beats Gamez by 1 Stroke for Title Despite some wayward shots on the closing holes, Mark Brooks shot a two-under-par 70 yesterday to beat Robert Gamez by one stroke in the Greater Milwaukee Open at Franklin, Wis.
Brooks, who was 18 under par for the 72 holes, was tied with Gamez at 19 under after 15 holes, but Gamez bogeyed two of his last three holes for a 70 and a total of 271.
Steve Jones was third at 273.
Brooks sent his drive on the par-5 16th hole into the gallery but recovered out of the trees to par the hole.
On the par-3 17th hole, his tee shot went into the sand trap.
But he recovered for a par, then ended with a bogey on No. 18 to win the $180,000 first prize. (AP)


CHRONICLE
After experiencing a dizzy spell while saying Mass in Rockland County, JOHN CARDINAL O'CONNOR was hospitalized on Saturday for observation.
He is expected to be discharged today, his spokesman said.
The 71-year-old Cardinal, who heads the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, had gone to Monroe in the Catskills on Saturday to visit the convent of the Sisters of Life, an order of nuns that he founded.


Black Tie Affair Crashes The Iselin Handicap Party
Black Tie Affair was supposed to be just another horse out of its league today, one that was supposed to have no right running with the cream of a Grade I field.
But in the $500,000 Iselin Handicap at Monmouth Park, the 5-year-old out of Chicago outdueled Farma Way in the stretch to take the ninth leg of the 10-race American Championship Racing Series.


The Baltics' Free Past: Lively Era, Brutal End
According to memories and memoirs, the three Baltic republics that emerged from the collapse of empires in World War I developed rather smoothly as small but cohesive economic and political entities during their brief life in independence.
Baltic-Americans who grew up in the region likened the standard of living to that of Scandinavia.
Asked about the quality of life then, Hans Kobin of Hackensack, N.J., an Estonian from Tartu who is 69 years old, said, "It was comparable to life in Denmark."


Pretoria Has Long Helped Zaire Military
To the Editor:
Zaire's military links with South Africa, far from representing "political realignment," have been essential to President Mobutu Sese Seko's political survival for a quarter-century ("Pretoria Said to Advise Zairian Army," news article, Aug. 17).


Adjusted Census Count Is the Best We Can Get
To the Editor:
We shall never know the population of the United States in 1990 and must settle for an approximation.
A biased first approximation was obtained by the Census Bureau by its initial head count, but everyone agrees any head count will miss a significant number of people.
The bureau then embarked on a sophisticated adjustment project to estimate the number missed.
It was quite well done with the result we have a second and much better approximation of the actual population.
We would be stupid not to use it.


Investing in New TV Field Brings Scrutiny
In what Federal and state regulators describe as a speculative frenzy that is likely to cost naive investors dearly, a small group of companies is persuading people to spend thousands of dollars each to apply for Government licenses for a new way to transmit television programming.
Known as wireless cable, because it employs microwave transmitters to carry multiple channels of programming, the new technology does hold promise as a potentially low-cost competitor to cable television.
But critics in government and industry say amateur investors are being misled by zealous telephone sales representatives who greatly exaggerate the claims and play down the many risks.


Amy R. Segal, a New York Lawyer, Is Married to Dr. Andrew Steven Blum
Amy Robin Segal, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon J. Segal of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Woods Hole, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
Andrew Steven Blum, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney Blum of Baltimore.
Rabbi Elias Lieberman officiated at the Falmouth Jewish Congregation Meeting House in East Falmouth, Mass.
The bride, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate in the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler.
A graduate of Dartmouth College, she received a law degree from the University of Chicago, where she was on the editorial staff of The Legal Forum.


In Some Council Contests, It's Still Us Against Them
As a result of the racial gerrymandering that produced New York City's new Council districts, only one-fifth of next week's primaries are between major candidates from different racial or ethnic groups.
But questions of race have not faded into the background, particularly in the districts where no one group predominates and in two contests where white incumbents are seeking re-election from revamped districts that are now predominantly black.


George F. Dinneen, Finance Executive, 48
George F. Dinneen, a former vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company who began his own financial planning company in New Jersey, died on Friday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 48 years old and lived in Chatham Township, N.J.
Mr. Dinneen died of pneumonia, a funeral home spokesman said.


Benjamin Coopersmith and Dr. Beth Roland Wed
Dr.
Beth Naomi Roland, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman M. Roland of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening at Tavern on the Green in New York to Benjamin Elsworth Coopersmith, the son of Judith Densky of Whitestone, Queens, and the late Joseph Coopersmith.
Rabbi Amy Ehrlich officiated.
Dr.
Roland, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis University and received her M.D. degree from New York Medical College.
Her father is a dentist in Huntington, L.I.
Her mother, Dr.
Marilyn Pearl, is the director of radiology at North Central Bronx Hospital.


Reviews/Television; An In-Depth, Depressing Look at the Inner Cities
NBC News, in collaboration with Newsweek magazine, is taking a weeklong look at America's inner cities, an assignment that is as urgent as it is depressing.
The reports on the "NBC Nightly News," the "Today" show and other network programs present a bleak picture of what a Los Angeles detective describes as places where "only bad guys can survive." Most of the bad guys on view here are black, as are most of the honest people who can't walk their streets safely.
Those who can escape do; the rest, as someone says, are out of luck.
The theme of "City Limits" was struck yesterday on "Sunday Today," in Garrick Utley's no-nonsense interview with Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, that veteran city-watcher.
Over what seems to be a breakfast table, Mr.
Moynihan made the point that poverty is nothing new in New York and other cities.
The problems today, he said, "are not of poverty but of behavior," which he calls anarchistic and nihilistic.


New Zealanders Making Their Run
JOHN CAMPBELL, the New Zealander who picked up a Mercedes after leading all the masters runners (40 years old and over) in last year's New York City Marathon, may not take to the streets this time.
Reportedly, he wants an appearance fee.
"We always took very good care of John," says FRED LEBOW, who created the event.
For a country of only 3.3 million people, New Zealand produces a lot of sheep (55 million) and an indeterminate, but dogged number of road runners.
Seven of them, including Campbell, begin an assault on American events next Sunday in the 10-kilometer Connecticut Classic at Danbury.


Meadow Star Fourth In Maskette Stakes
The deck was stacked in her favor in terms of weight, distance, geography, career resume and even public favor.
But Meadow Star, the dainty and enigmatic filly champion of last year, still confounded her partisans yesterday when she emerged from two months of seclusion and ran fourth while the mare Queena was winning the Maskette Stakes at Belmont Park.
Not only that, but Meadow Star made an exceptionally late break from the starting gate, ran sixth and ast most of the way and strained mightily to salvage fourth place in a forlorn run through the homestretch.
It was only the second time in 14 starts that she had run out of the money, matching a fourth-place finish in the Wood Memorial on April 20.


Aspen Journal; In Sight of Earth's Best, Plotting to Save the Rest
In a setting as splendid as the Roaring Fork Valley here, it seemed a bit incongruous to hear that the planet Earth could be headed the way of the Studebaker.
But the warnings of ecological doom, and ways to prevent it, drew nearly 1,000 environmentalists here this weekend to hear lectures, listen to music, sip espresso and plot strategies to save the planet.


N.H.L. Appoints Celebrity Captains
Wearing a jersey instead of his signature sweater, MISTER (FRED) ROGERS, a sometimes figure skater, will glide on the ice this season as an honorary National Hockey League team captain.
The children's television host, who never would be called for roughing or high sticking, is one of 22 celebrity captains making an appearance at their rinks as part of the league's 75th anniversary season.
They will wear number 75.


Ms. Wilen Weds Marcelo Halpern
Elizabeth Wilen, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Samuel Henry Wilen of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Marcelo Halpern, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Teodoro Halpern of Teaneck.
Rabbi Rolando Matalon performed the ceremony at the Henry Lindenbaum Center.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and is a law student at Northwestern University.
Her father is a professor of chemistry at the City College of the City University of New York.
Her mother, Rosamond Wilen, is a librarian at the Teaneck Public Library.


Harlem Journal; For Lovers Of Nature, A Garden In the City
Across from Jackie Robinson Park, in Harlem, is a turn-of-the-century mansion that is home to 21 people who once lived in shelters or on the street, and beside the building is the Jimmy Jarvis garden.
Here is a memorial not only to a man who was a poet, a musician, a scientist, a father, an urban cave dweller and, perhaps above all, a nature lover trapped in New York City, but also to the merging of two radically different visions of paradise.
On one side, asters, anemones, black-eyed susans, pink phlox and rose of sharon bloom in manicured rows along neat brick walkways.
Under the shade of a copper beech tree is a polished stone bench.
Here, behind a fence at the corner of 150th Street and Edgecombe Avenue, is an English garden, designed by Mark Greenwald, an architect, and his wife, Carrie, a horticulturist, from Greenwich, Conn. who were hired with private donations.


Music in Review
Hampton Summerfest Southampton High School
In recent years, the Israeli pianist Ilana Vered has presented her Summerfest series at Rutgers.
This summer she brought the series to East Hampton and Southampton, where she presented eight concerts devoted mostly to chamber music.


Business and Health; Combating Waste In Medical Care
FEDERAL health researchers and professional medical associations say they are making headway in establishing guidelines to help physicians reduce wasteful and costly procedures.
The guidelines for the appropriate treatment of common medical problems are being developed by groups at the state and national levels.
The need for them has been obvious since researchers have found wide variations in the way physicians around the country treat the same diseases.


Teen-Ager Sues Owens
BILLY OWENS , the former basketball star at Syracuse, is being sued for more than $1 million over an attack on a teen-ager who threw a snowball at his car.
KEVIN CASAVANT of Onondaga sued Owens and three other men, including the University of Connecticut basketball player, CHRIS SMITH, contending that group broke his nose and caused other injuries Jan. 17 when they punched and kicked him as he lay on the sidewalk.


Patterns
All Calm in the Canyons
In the musty canyons of Seventh Avenue, all work ceased around noon on Thursday.
One could have heard a pin drop.
But no pins were dropping.


What Draws Indians Toward Sonia Gandhi
To the Editor:
Your New Delhi Journal of Aug. 9 on the political future of Sonia Gandhi refers to darshan as a fundamentally religious concept and says it also has a feudal dimension deriving from the link between a commoner and a maharajah.
It would be more correct to see darshan as a fundamentally psychological concept that has many dimensions, the religious and the feudal being just two of them.


Bridge
It is always satisfying when the opponent's winners collide on the last trick.
An example is the diagramed deal, played in the Eastern Regional Championships in Manhattan in May.
South was Kitty Bethe of Manhattan, a member of the winning American Women's Team in the 1989 world championships in Perth, Australia.
She won the opening club lead with the ace, crossed to the diamond king and cashed the spade ace.
She returned to the diamond ace, threw dummy's club loser on the spade king and led the spade queen.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are this week's scheduled release dates for major economic indicators.
Monday None


Susan Price Carr, Lawyer, 45
Susan Price Carr, a lawyer with Time Warner Inc., died on Friday at Beth Israel Hospital North in Manhattan.
She was 45 years old.
She died of breast cancer, family members said.


Reporter's Notebook; A Wariness Permeates The Usual Celebration
Inside her intricate but cumbersome headdress -- a 10-foot-tall, eight-pointed star fashioned out of nylon and foil -- Angela George was already uncomfortably hot at noon yesterday, just as the mass of festive humanity known as the West Indian- American Day parade was starting to make its way along Eastern Parkway in Crown Heights.
"I have a lot of fun," protested Ms.
George, an immigrant from Trinidad who described her costume as that of an African king.
"But I look forward to taking it off at the end of the day."


Officer, Just 'Doing His Job,' Is Praised as Brooklyn Hero
Mayor David N. Dinkins says Officer Paul Perricone is a hero, but the 23-year-old rookie, assigned to the 86th Precinct in Brooklyn, says he was "just a cop doing his job" when he searched for survivors in a burning building destroyed by an explosion last night on 86th Street in Bay Ridge.
"We were around the corner when we heard the explosion," he recalled at Lutheran Medical Center, where he was treated for third-degree burns of his right forearm.
He also received a visit from Mayor Dinkins and Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown.


The Other Old-Timer Also Wins Her Match
The ball floated across the net and landed in the middle of the court, in front of Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere, pleading to be spanked for a winning passing shot.
Across the net, Martina Navratilova had stumbled in the ad court service box hitting her volley.
The deuce court was vacant.
All Maleeva-Fragniere needed to do was to drive the ball through, normally as simple a chore for her as sticking a key into a lock.
"Oh, yes, yes," she said.
"I mis-hit the ball. I was thinking too much if I should hit the forehand or a backhand."


Estonia's Foreign Minister Savors the Faxes, if Not the Champagne
For a man who hates champagne "so sour" -- these are trying times.
Almost every day for the last week, Lennart Meri has been clinking glasses of bubbly with a foreign minister or two or their representatives to celebrate the reopening of diplomatic relations with Estonia.
Mr.
Meri is this country's Foreign Minister, a job to which he was named after the first free elections, held last year.
It was a time when the appointment seemed to be no more than an act of defiance of the Soviet Union, which for a half century deprived this once independent country of the right to conduct foreign relations.


Scan Picks Doozy of Race To End His Losing Streak
On a weekend when Meadow Star and Lite Light both were outrun, racing fortune took another turn yesterday at Belmont Park when William Haggin Perry's 3-year-old colt Scan won for the first time in eight races this year, and won a big one: the 122d running of the Jerome Handicap.
Scan, a striking son of Mr.
Prospector trained by Scotty Schulhofer, is one of those well-bred horses who mingle in the best company and run in the best races.
But they don't always win.
In fact, he hadn't won since last November when he took the Cowdin and Remsen within two weeks' time.
But since then: three times second, twice third and twice fifth.


Batticaloa Journal; Atrocity by Atrocity, a Priest Chronicles a War
The other day, the Rev.
Harry Miller walked into the parched scrubland outside this war-weary town.
He walked until a couple of young men with automatic rifles materialized from the landscape to escort him to their camp.
It was the local headquarters of the guerrilla army of ethnic Tamils -- the so-called Tamil Tigers -- who are fighting to establish a separate state on this island.


Austin Kelley Is Signed For Disney 'New Town'
The Disney Development Company subsidiary of the Walt Disney Company has named Austin Kelley Advertising, Atlanta, to create and produce initial advertising and marketing materials to introduce a "new town" project adjacent to Walt Disney World in Osceola County, Fla.
A spokeswoman for the agency confirmed the assignment but declined to discuss billings or other details.
Telephone calls to executives at Disney Development were not returned.


Keyboard Kickoff For Football Season
WITH football season upon us, can tailgate parties and neighborly gatherings around a glowing television set be far behind?
Hi Tech Expressions, a New York company that specializes in low-priced software, is offering a solution to a few of the pesky social problems associated with the autumnal madness.
N.F.L.
Print Pro is a program designed to print signs, banners, posters, cards, invitations and so forth, emblazoned with the logo or helmet of your favorite N.F.L. team, any of the 28 of them.
In all, there are 100 graphic images on the two 5.25-inch disks (3.5-inch disks are also available), as well as 40 borders, 7 typefaces and 21 type styles.
These options can be combined in ways that can be inviting and inventive, or gaudy and tasteless if you wish to go that way.


SALVADORAN REBEL LISTS 5 PROPOSALS
A member of the Salvadoran guerrilla leadership says his organization could take steps toward "not existing as an armed force" if the Government of El Salvador would agree to five proposals for changes in the national army and police.
The guerrilla, Salvador Samayoa, saying he spoke for all five groups in the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, spelled out the proposals for the first time publicly in an interview Thursday night in Managua.


Student Killed, Friend Injured In Queens Fight
Robin Moonasar and Shiraz Baksh were the best of buddies, fellow computer hackers and high school classmates in Toronto who decided to come to New York for a week of excitement before classes started on Wednesday.
But a fight outside a wedding party in Richmond Hill, Queens, early yesterday ended Mr.
Moonasar's life and nearly finished Mr.
Baksh's.


Money in Panama Dispute Is Frozen
The Government of Panama began a legal effort here today to try to recover $23 million that it contends was stolen from the country by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the deposed ruler.
In all, Panama asserted that he had taken more than $500 million.
General Noriega has been charged in the United States with involvement in drug trafficking.
He is scheduled to go on trial in Miami this week.


Taylor and McIntyre: Close but No Call by Official
Lawrence Taylor was mugged in full view of 76,319 fans at Giants Stadium here tonight and a national television audience, and the culprits got away.
They were even rewarded because San Francisco quarterback Steve Young scampered into the end zone on a 5-yard touchdown run, right after the commission of the crime, giving the 49ers a 14-13 lead early in the fourth quarter.
On the play, Taylor was grabbed by the neck and pulled to the ground by San Francisco left guard Guy McIntyre.
An official, in full view of the offense, didn't call offensive holding.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in SportsMonday about Erik McMillan's role in the Jets' victory over Tampa Bay misstated the amount of time wide receiver Al Toon is expected to miss because of an injury.
He should be able to play Sunday.


Welcome Burst of Fall Chills Heat-Weary
At moments yesterday it seemed as if summer had somehow already slipped unnoticed into fall.
All across the New York metropolitian region on Labor Day, people headed for backyards, parks, beaches, anywhere outdoors -- not to escape the oppressive heat usually expected of late summer, but to marvel at a crystal-blue sky with whipped-cream clouds and a breeze with a little snap to it.


Newest Plan by Gorbachev and Republics Leaves Vexing Economic Riddles Unsolved
Whether President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the leaders of the major Soviet republics succeed or not in keeping the semblance of a union in place is unanswerable at this point.
But the surprise accord they issued today is a gamble to prevent the existing union from tumbling in on itself.
This latest plan has at least as many open questions as its predecessor arrangements over the last six years.
The critical unknowns include when the nation might again have new elections and a new constitution, whether the republics will find a better way to generate economic recovery, and the precise long-term role of Mr.
Gorbachev who, for the moment at least, remains as the needed agent of national resolve.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Gretzky and Lindros Lead Canada Over U.S.
Wayne Gretzky had a goal and three assists and Eric Lindros scored the first of five straight goals for Canada in its 6-3 victory over the United States team in Canada Cup competition last night in Hamilton, Ontario.
Lindros, taken first overall by Quebec in June's National Hockey League draft, scored the game's first goal when he finished off a cross-crease pass from Gretzky at 7:48 of the first period during a power play.
Craig Janney scored two goals for Team USA, and Brent Hull added the other.
GOLF Rain Stops L.P.G.A.
Stormy weather halted play yesterday in the final round of the L.P.G.A.
Rail Charity Classic in Springfield, Ill.
Pat Bradley, with a four-stroke lead, had six holes left on the Rail Golf Club course when play was suspended until this morning.


BRIEFS
Common Stock  *
Cabletron Systems Inc., Rochester, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of 2.5 million common shares through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.


Jets' Effort Is Praised By Coslet
After becoming the first Jet coach since Weeb Ewbank in 1963-64 to win his home opening games in his first two seasons, Bruce Coslet was happy at camp today but he wasn't quite prepared to rest on his laurel.
"It felt good, sure, and we played well enough to win, and we got it done," said Coslet of Sunday's 16-13 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
"It showed we're a better football team this year than we were last year, but really, after looking at the films, we played very average. We had a lot of missed opportunities and last year we probably would have lost that game."


Delegates Stunned
Declaring that the nation was "on the brink of catastrophe," President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the leaders of 10 republics stunned the opening session of the national Congress today by proposing to transfer all central authority to themselves and an appointed legislative council until a new union can be formed.
The proposal, prepared in arduous negotiations between Mr.
Gorbachev and the republics' leaders that ended shortly before the session opened, was a last-ditch attempt to halt the uncontrolled fragmentation of the union before it destroyed the interwoven economies and the armed forces.


Often History's Touchstone
FOR Judaism, the Temple Mount is the holiest site in Jerusalem, a place evocative of ancient splendor, worship and conflict.
Here it was that Solomon, following the wishes of his father, David, established the magnificent House of Israel, completed about 950 B.C.
To create a level site in the Judean hills, Phoenician masons had to erect thick walls to retain landfill and support the stone platform, the original Temple Mount, on which the temple and other buildings stood.
When Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon invaded Israel in 587 B.C., Solomon's temple was sacked and destroyed and the people were forced into their half-century of Babylonian captivity.
Upon their return, they built a new, more modest temple on the same mount, dedicated in 515.
Then in the second century B.C., a Syrian king pillaged the Second Temple.
It was recaptured three years later, in 164, by Israelites led by a priest and his five sons, known as the Maccabees.
This restoration is marked by Jews in the celebration of Hanukkah.


It's Official: Gooden Is Put on Disabled List
The Mets made the practical move, the cautious move and many might say the inevitable move yesterday when they placed Dwight Gooden and his ailing right shoulder on the disabled list.
What they did not make, Manager Bud Harrelson insists, is an alarming move.
Gooden (13-7, 3.60 earned run average) has been found to have muscular weaknesses in the front of his pitching shoulder that have caused stiffness and discomfort and prevented the right-hander from pitching since Aug. 22.


Return of Ice Age
By analyzing fossils of tiny two-winged flies called midges in sediments of a lake in New Brunswick, Canadian scientists have confirmed that a brief reversion to ice-age conditions affected North America as well as Europe from 11,000 to 10,000 years ago.
The last ice age reached its depths about 18,000 years ago.
By about 11,000 years ago, the ice sheets had contracted and the climate had warmed considerably.
But then Europe reverted to glacial conditions for about two centuries.
In this event, called the Younger Dryas by glaciologists, oak trees that had recolonized Germany disappeared once again.
Scientists are not sure what brought on the Younger Dryas.
One theory is that fresh water from melting glaciers changed the surface currents of the North Atlantic in such a way as to alter the climate.


Lessons in Protest and Tolerance
Colleges and universities have been having a turbulent time deciding what speech and action are permissible on campus.
Their difficulty mirrors that of the larger society in setting bounds for sometimes bitter disagreements.
In a country that prizes open, robust debate, and is willing to risk some breaches of the peace to give room to free speech, what are the limits?
Any college serious about its mission undertakes to teach -- and exemplify -- tolerance and free speech.
Those virtues often harmonize, as when students honor each other's right to vent even hateful opinions.
Sometimes they collide, as when students shout down or threaten opponents or harshly intimidate vulnerable students.


Raiders Lose Allen for 6 Weeks to Injury
The Los Angeles Raiders, who suffered an embarrassing 47-17 loss to the Houston Oilers on Sunday, learned yesterday that they would be regrouping without running back MARCUS ALLEN , who is lost for three to six weeks because of a sprained ligament in his right knee.
Allen blamed the artificial turf at the Astrodome in Houston for the injury.
Allen, 31 years old, was the Raiders' starting tailback against the Oilers, but was limited in effectiveness before he was hurt.
He gained just 17 yards on eight carries and caught three passes for 16 yards. (AP)


Famechon Emerging From a Coma
The former world featherweight champion, JOHNNY FAMECHON began to show signs of emerging from a coma yesterday and was taken off a life-support system, hospital officials said.
Famechon has been unconscious since being struck by a car while crossing a street in Sidney, Australia, nine days ago.
He won the world title from JOSE LEGRA in London in 1969.
He compiled a 46-5-6 record. (AP)


INSIDE
A Tangled Banking Tale
Clark M. Clifford, a Washington icon, and Robert A. Altman, a protege, are at the center of a Federal inquiry into a global banking scandal.
Page D1. 3 Die in Brooklyn Explosion
Three people were killed and more than 20 hurt when an explosion leveled two three-story apartment buildings in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
Page B1.
Art's Age of the Fake
As reproduction techniques grow increasingly sophisticated, it becomes harder and harder to tell the real from the copy.
Page C14.


Needle Exchange to Prevent AIDS Is Overdue
To the Editor:
We noted with interest that yet another study has shown that clean-needle distribution can have an effect on acquired immune deficiency syndrome (front page, Aug. 1).


Into an Age of Fake Art: A Very Real Quandary
In a society that accepts fake fur and costume jewelry, what's wrong with fake art?
So say a number of dealers who sell imitation Picassos for about $2,000, and fake French Impressionists for less.


Finally, No-Mess Painting for Kids
KIDPIX is a new paint program for the Apple Macintosh that has the potential to become the computer-era equivalent of fingerpaints.
Broderbund Software Inc., which makes the popular Carmen San Diego series of educational games, has crafted Kidpix to be easy to learn, simple to use and just plain fun.
Kidpix is not a replacement for "grown-up" Macintosh paint programs, like Pixelpaint, Superpaint or Canvas, which can be used to create sophisticated graphic arts images and business presentations.
It is, instead, a simple paint program that comes with dozens of wacky tools and special effects, including sounds.
The program is virtually guaranteed to keep the interest of any child, and even grown-ups are likely to be enchanted by it.


Retail Sales Look Weak For August
As children across the nation head back to school, they will be wearing fewer new clothes and shoes and carrying fewer new accessories than many retailers had hoped.
At many stores, back-to-school sales have been disappointing, executives say, and retailers have been forced to cut prices to generate sales.


Our Towns
"Good morning. Good morning. Good morning, everybody. This is Edna W. Newman broadcasting from your very own radio station, WMRF."
Let's get one thing straight right from the top of this column.
WMRF may legally belong to the Daughters of Israel Geriatric Center on Pleasant Valley Way here.
But Edna W. Newman ("Stress the W, will you!") really runs the show.
She is its voice and manager; if anyone rearranges the record shelves or the height of her chair, they had better not leave fingerprints.
She is its deejay and program planner; she selects every record.
Too bad if you don't like Barbra Streisand.


With Nothing to Lose, A Moment to Live For
He was not going to lose, not now, not this far into his birthday, having so appropriately fallen on the day America's workers had the chance to sit home and watch the all-time champion of blue collar tennis.
High above the Stadium Court, Arthur Ashe, who as much as anyone must have known this, began talking about 1978, a United States Open final between Jimmy Connors and Bjorn Borg.
"Were you here for that one?" Ashe asked, during a changeover late in the fifth set.
"He was unbelievable that day. He was flying. He just took Borg apart." Ashe knew the scores, 6-4, 6-2, 6-2.
"If you're talking about Connors's performances here, to me, that was first."


Israel Strives To Meld Jews Of 2 Worlds
At the Diplomat Hotel, far from rundown but working on it, the biggest excitement today was a religion class.
It was held for the benefit of several hundred recent arrivals from Ethiopia, who in a few days will celebrate their first Jewish New Year in a new land, and who Israeli officials decided might benefit from instruction in unfamiliar holiday customs.


Uneven Economic Recovery Shakes Faith in Fed's Power
The economy's uneven response to the Federal Reserve Board's deliberate reduction in short-term interest rates over the last year has led to a debate among credit market analysts about whether the Fed is capable of engineering a sustainable recovery.
"The Fed seems to have less ability to stimulate the economy today than it had in the past," said Steven A. Wood, director of financial markets research at the Bank of America.
"It will be hard to get the kind of recovery we have had in the past with just monetary policy."


Three Killed, Dozens Hurt In Explosion
Three people were killed and at least 34 others were injured when an explosion followed by a huge fireball virtually destroyed two three-story brick apartment buildings in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, last night.
Fire and police officials said the badly burned bodies of two victims, both believed to be women, were removed from the rubble.
Two other people, and possibly more, were buried in the pile of smoldering wooden beams and scorched bricks and were believed to be dead.


Richardson Fails Drug Test and Is Let Go
MICHEAL RAY RICHARDSON , a four-time National Basketball Association All-Star banned from the league in 1986 for cocaine use, has been released by Knorr Bologna of the Italian League after cocaine test results were positive.
VITTORIO MANCARUSO , general manager of the Italian team, said yesterday that Richardson failed two tests after he returned from the United States last week to rejoin Knorr Bologna for the season, which begins Sept. 22.


A Friendship, a Washington Bank and a Trail of Money Leading to B.C.C.I.; Clifford and Altman, Mentor and Protege, At Center of Inquiry
Somewhere near the center of the tangled financial story of First American Bankshares Inc., Washington's largest bank holding company, is the mentor and protege relationship of Clark M. Clifford and his junior law partner, Robert A. Altman.
At 85 years old, Mr.
Clifford, a former poker-playing partner of President Truman and Winston Churchill, was the Secretary of Defense who helped persuade President Johnson to wind down the Vietnam War, the man who counseled President Kennedy about his private life, and the diplomat sent on special missions by President Carter.


Hendrick Christian Ahlers, Executive, 73
Hendrick Christian Ahlers, a retired executive in the wholesale dairy and cooking-oil business, died on Thursday at Meridian-The Woodland Care Center in Plainfield, N.J.
He was 73 years old and lived in Chatham, N.J.
Mr.
Ahlers, who was president of the New York Mercantile Exchange at the age of 27, was vice president and chief executive of Carl Ahlers Inc. of New York City, a family business founded in 1898.
The company was a bulk distributor of food products.
Mr.
Ahlers retired when the company closed in 1975.


Julko Litewka, Jewish Leader, 79
Julko Litewka, the general secretary of the Jewish Labor Bund, a constituent member of Socialist International, died on Sunday at his home in the Bronx.
He was 79 years old.
He died of Hodgkin's disease, his son Albert said.


Chess
That it is difficult to come back from adversity was once again evident in the quarter-final matches for prospective challengers for the world championship, which is held by Gary Kasparov of the Soviet Union.
But it was not impossible.
In three of these contests, which took place in Brussels Aug. 11 to 24, the player who was the first to win a game went on to eventual triumph.
That was true even when the match was deadlocked after the regulation eight games, as in the case of the pairing of Artur Yusupov and Vasily Ivanchuk of the Soviet Union.
Yusupov had been the first one to win a game and, sure enough, he won the tiebreak.


Polish Airline Picks Boeing
LOT, Poland's national airline, said it would buy nine Boeing 737 airplanes to replace its aging fleet of Soviet-built aircraft.
LOT said Saturday that it had decided on the Boeing Company's aircraft after considering planes from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Airbus Industrie.


Almost Broke, Soviet Union's Space Efforts Go on Sale
SOVIET space officials, reeling from their country's turmoil and expecting more, have told the White House that the cash-hungry civilian space program may collapse unless it makes large sales to the West.
Almost everything, the officials said, is on the table, even the space station Mir, now circling 240 miles above the earth.
Last week, two Soviet astronauts aboard the space station helped to make money for the ailing program by sipping Coca-Cola in an experiment for the company.


Dividend Meetings


By Design; Lace Gets Loose
For generations of women, "It's snowing in the South!" meant their slips were showing.
Now, with lingerie style running rampant, there is no need to be embarrassed.
It's a look.
Some designers are even building errant slips into their dresses.
For a series of sexy cocktail numbers in his resort collection, Davis Church, a young designer, installed strips of satin behind and above the bodice and an extra pair of straps.
When the regular straps fall off the shoulder a bit (they're designed to do so), one gets a peek of satiny slip.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:


Rozier Rejoins Falcons to End Dispute
MIKE ROZIER , the Atlanta Falcons' leading rusher last season, joined the team yesterday, ending his contract dispute.
The Falcons said Rozier did some running yesterday at the team's facility in Suwanee, Ga., but he isn't expected to be activated in time for Sunday's home opener against the Vikings.


Professor's Racial Theories Fall Wide of Mark; Awareness Will Out
To the Editor:
As a student at City College, I would like to respond to A. M. Rosenthal's Aug. 13 column about Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr.


Subway Line Back After Being Closed By Fatal Derailing
After four days of round-the-clock work to clean up last week's subway derailment, service resumed early today for the 500,000 riders of the Lexington Avenue IRT line, when a No.  4 express train carrying a handful of passengers rumbled safely through the site of the deadly accident.
At 12:04 A.M. the express train rolled slowly over new tracks and past new signals and ceiling-support columns 200 feet north of the Union Square station, the scene of Wednesday's derailment.Five passengers were killed, another 200 were injured and service on the line was disrupted for six days.


A Field of Stars and Dreams
BOB FELLER struck out Shoeless Joe Jackson.
REGGIE JACKSON homered off Eddie Cicotte.
JOE PEPITONE and LOU BROCK became pitchers.
Beefy LARRY DRAKE stole third base.
A team of former major league baseball players faced a group of actors and other celebrities at Dyersville, Iowa, yesterday in the first competitive game on the diamond that was carved out of a cornfield for the 1988 movie "Field Of Dreams."
The game was loosely played and the scorekeeping was even looser.
The celebrities were declared 9-4 winners even though REGGIE JACKSON and Pepitone hit three-run homers for the ballplayers.


Slump Eases, but Hope Dims Among White-Collar Jobless
Economists are pointing cheerfully to a recovery they say has now moved firmly into gear.
But for those left behind, like Courtney Anderson, a former $60,000-a-year airline vice president whose unemployment benefits have run out, the recession gets darker with each passing day of no work.
"We're bleeding our savings," said Mr.
Anderson, 41 years old, who sat on the patio of his suburban Denver home dressed for work except for a tie, watching his 3-year-old son, Carter, play with a toy dinosaur.
"Your finances take a hell of a beating. And so does your ego.


For City Council From the Bronx
This year's City Council primary election is the first since the new City Charter gave the Council greater powers and more members in an effort to empower the city's diverse ethnic and racial communities.
In overwhelmingly Democratic New York City, most winners of the Democratic primary on Sept. 12 are all but assured election.
For the benefit of voters facing bewildering new choices among a host of candidates in reshaped districts, The Times offers its endorsements in several contested races.
The judgments are based on interviews with candidates, their response to questionnaires and a review of their records.


Gaines Is Back in a Honolulu Hospital
ROWDY GAINES , the Olympic gold-medal swimmer, has returned to a hospital in Honolulu for further treatment of Guillain-Barre syndrome, a nerve disorder.
Gaines, 32 years old, had been treated at The Queen's Medical Center last month after complaining of tingling in his hands and feet.
A spokeswoman for the hospital, ELAINE KAWAMOTO , said that Gaines was readmitted on Friday, but said she could not discuss his condition. (AP)


Music in Review
Beethoven Festival Planting Fields Arboretum
For music lovers who would rather have their psyches buffeted by currents of Sturm und Drang than have their bodies pummeled by the surf on Labor Day weekend, the annual Beethoven Festival presented here by Friends of the Arts is the place to be.
The festival is held in various rooms and gardens at the 400-acre Planting Fields Arboretum, a pleasant place to spend a summer day.


Accounts
*
Bozell Cheil, Seoul, South Korea, a joint venture of Bozell International and Cheil, has been awarded three accounts there: Tong Yang Magic appliances, $5.5 million; Hanbul Cosmetics, $2.7 million, and Federal Express, $500,000.


Memphis State Stuns Southern Cal
At the start of the day, the University of Southern California was considered no less than a top-20 team in most polls.
By the end of it, the Trojans had become a victim in the first big upset of the college football season.
Memphis State, which won just six games over the previous two seasons and hasn't had a winning season since 1983, held the Trojans scoreless in the second half today and scored a 24-10 victory in front of 55,637 at the Los Angeles Coliseum.


Excerpts From Soviet Congress: Time for Drastic Changes
Following are excerpts from a session of the Congress of People's Deputies in Moscow yesterday.
All speeches were translated by CNN, except for that of Aleksandr M. Obolensky, which was translated by The New York Times.
NURSULTAN A. NAZARBAYEV: President of Kazakhstan
As a result of a coup d'etat committed on Aug. 19-21, the process of forming new union relationships between the sovereign republics was disrupted.
These developments brought this country to the brink of catastrophe.
The situation that evolved in this country after the putsch, should it get out of control, could bring about unpredictable consequences both inside this country and in our relations with foreign countries.


Chemists' New Toy Emerges as Superconductor
LIKE young children playing with their first balloons, thousands of chemists have been caught up in the fascination of a new toy that just might turn out to be a commercial bonanza: the "buckyball."
In New York City last week, scientists participating in the Chemical Congress of North America packed two large conference halls during a meeting that lasted much of the night.
The subject was the latest research on buckyballs, also called "fullerenes" -- cage-like molecules resembling soccer balls.
Because these molecules are geodesic structures held together by the electronic bonds between carbon atoms, they are named for the late R. Buckminster Fuller, whose engineering and architectural designs often incorporated geodesic domes.


U.S. TIE TO BALTICS
President Bush, rather than continue to wait for Moscow to act, gave full diplomatic recognition today to Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, the Baltic nations taken over by Stalin and now on the verge of independence from a crumbling Soviet Union.
Although Mr.
Bush was following dozens of other world leaders in recognizing the Baltics, he said today that his hesitation in doing so would have no significance "in the sweep of history." He originally planned to recognize the states last Friday, an aide said, but delayed until today because of a personal request by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


A View From Vermont, Where the Governor Is Also the Doctor
AS political leaders try to redesign the nation's health care system, the only physician who is a sitting governor hopes to use his medical expertise to help shape the outcome.
The Governor, Howard B. Dean of Vermont, was thrust into his role last month when his predecessor, Richard Snelling, died of a heart attack.
The 42-year-old internist, a Democrat, had been elected Lieutenant Governor three times.


New York City Narrows Agency Finalists to 3
The New York City Public Development Corporation, which is seeking an advertising agency to help polish the city's image, is expected to select a winner in the next 10 days, industry executives say.
From 75 agencies involved initially, the executives say, the field has been narrowed to 3.
They identified two of them as Adler Boschetto Peebles &amp; Partners and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, both New York.


Palestinian Council Expected to Meet on Setbacks
The Palestine National Council, which regards itself as a parliament in exile of Palestinian representatives from around the world, is likely to meet in Algeria this month, senior officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization in Tunis said today.
The idea of a gathering of the 450-member body has been discussed for some time, prompted by the widespread appreciation among many Palestinians of fundamental changes that have taken place in the Middle East since the Persian Gulf crisis, deeply affecting the prospects of a resolution of their conflict with Israel.
The Palestinians would also discuss issues arising from a proposed Arab-Israeli peace conference in the fall.


Sports of The Times; Sefcik's Shotgun Shovel
IF Matt Bahr were to have an opportunity to kick the winning field goal in the final seconds, Coach Ray Handley knew the Giants' offense had to get inside the 30-yard line.
But now, trailing by 14-13 with less than 2 minutes remaining in their season opener last night, the Giants were confronted with a third-and-5 at the 49ers' 45-yard line.
On the sideline, Handley ordered a new play in the Giants' repertory: the shotgun-shovel pass from Jeff Hostetler to Dave Meggett, who spurted 8 yards for a first down.


Lithuania Disappointed by U.S. Timing
Lithuanian officials reacted ambivalently today to the announcement that the United States was granting diplmatic recognition to their Government.
They were pleased to have the political protection that it implies but irritated that it did not come sooner.


Cornell Games With Personal Twist
ESPN's decision not to renew Ivy League football this season meant there would be no Cornell University games on national television.
For most Cornell devotees, the absence of Big Red games would be cause for complaints, but they had no true recourse.
But Roger Weiss -- a 52-year-old money manager and Cornell alumnus -- went a giant step farther.
He proposed that he would bankroll the six-figure cost of producing seven Cornell games against Ivy League opponents for a television outlet.


Professor's Racial Theories Fall Wide of Mark
To the Editor:
Hugh Pearson (letter, Aug. 20) asserts that, since Jews were money lenders and money lenders financed the slave trade, Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr.'s statement "Everyone knows rich Jews helped finance the slave trade" is not "irrational." This argument misses an essential weakness of the statement.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 3


Peaceful Parade in a Troubled Neighborhood


Professor's Racial Theories Fall Wide of Mark; America's Cloak
To the Editor:
I am probably the oldest professor at City College, and perhaps have one of the longest terms of service.
I offer the following brief comments from Wendell Willkie:  The cloak that binds America together


Review/Ballet; U.S.-Soviet Troupe at the Pillow
Bring together 10 teen-age Soviet ballet students with their American counterparts for 3 weeks; then teach them rarely seen choreography by masters like Leonide Massine and Antony Tudor plus that of a young experimentalist, and you have anything but the usual hands-across-the-sea exchange.
The Ballet Repertory Project presented at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival here on Saturday night is pure joint venture.
After this splendidly polished workshop performance (repeated today), the combined group of dancers is to follow up its debut in the Berkshires with the same program this week in Moscow.
Voronezh and Perm, the two Russian cities whose ballet academies sent their students, are to be visited later.
The Kiev Ballet school in the Ukraine also sent two students to the Pillow.


Nina Schulman Has a Wedding
Nina Weinfeld Schulman and Harold Tyrrell Ruddick, union organizers in Louisiana, were married yesterday in New York.
Rabbi Miriam Shapero performed the ceremony at the Hudson River Club.
The bride and bridegroom, 27 years old, are graduates of Yale University, cum laude and summa cum laude, respectively.
They work for the Service Employees International Union in Baton Rouge.


New Orleans Journal; In the Birthplace of Jazz, It's Just a Little Too Loud
Echoing down the streets of the French Quarter, the sounds of a jazz band performing in Jackson Square acts like a magnet, drawing people into this fine public space hard by the Mississippi.
The music from battered horns played by boys in tattered shorts and T-shirts seems as native as the magnolia trees that provide a cool retreat from the sun, and it is a loud signal that there is life in the old buildings.


On My Mind; Pogrom in Brooklyn
The anti-Semitic outrages of Crown Heights are aimed at the Jews of only one neighborhood in one city -- for the moment.
But American Jews who do not understand that the same kind of political thugs will try now to lead the same kind of street thugs to burn Jewish property and break Jewish bones in other cities are blind to reality, deaf to history -- and suicidal.


The Third Thing First: Johnson Says He's Ready For Shift to the Outfield
No one, not even the pitcher himself, knows if Frank Viola will win another game this season, but one future Mets development became clear yesterday: Howard Johnson will move from the infield to the outfield.
The error-prone third baseman could make the extra walk any day now.
Johnson's defensive status was a topic of conversation because he committed two more errors for a major- league-leading total of 29 as the Mets fell to the Houston Astros, 3-0.


Market Place; Dreyfus Shifts Fee Strategy
THE Dreyfus Corporation is making money again in the mutual fund business.
The search for such profits represents a turn in strategy for the mutual fund giant, which sacrificed them last year in a bold, and successful, bid to gain market share.


People
*
Ronald H. Sugarman has been named senior vice president at the Interpublic Group of Companies, New York, and director of its Center for Advertising Services.
Mr.
Sugarman had previously been executive vice president and director of account services for McCann-Erickson Japan.


Markets Closed For Holiday
Because of the Labor Day holiday, financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday.
Government offices, banks and many businesses were also closed.
Articles about trading in overseas financial markets appears on page D9.


The Pitch: Safe, Secure And Solvent
ADVERTISING for banks and insurance companies once focused on customers' financial safety and security.
Opening an account or buying a policy, the ads promised, would be a guarantee of a sound financial future.
But a series of well-publicized failures of large banks and insurance companies has resulted in a flood of ads aimed at convincing customers that the financial institutions themselves remain safe, secure -- and solvent -- businesses with a future.
Some examples:


White Sox Are Bo Sox As Jackson Plays Again
The things Bo knows have been brilliantly packaged, carefully marketed and successfully sold to millions, but that list has been incomplete.
For on the most emotional night of his major league baseball career, Bo Jackson knew something new.
At a point Jackson described as the foundation of the rest of his career, he discovered an indescribable feeling produced by several standing ovations from the crowd of 37,187 at Comiskey Park, his new Chicago White Sox fans responding to hope rather than performance, and smiles after an 0-for-3 evening.


A Battle Is Over for Baltic-Americans
It was the moment that Americans from the Baltic republics have been awaiting for 50 years: formal recognition of their homelands' independence by their adopted country.
And when they heard the words from President Bush today, they could finally uncork the champagne, sing national anthems with resolution and unfurl the flags they had saved just for this day.


Holiday Reduces Offerings of Bond Issues
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings during this holiday-shortened week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late in the day Friday the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.34 percent and the six-month bill was bid at 5.37 percent.


Temple Mount in Jerusalem Beset By New Dispute Over Archeology
ARCHEOLOGY, religion and politics are on a collision course over a historic site in Jerusalem, known as Haram al-Sharif to Muslims and the Temple Mount to Jews, and revered by three of the world's major faiths: Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
In a politically charged lawsuit to be decided soon by Israel's Supreme Court, the Muslims who administer the site are accused of unauthorized excavations and construction that have destroyed, damaged or covered up important archeological remains.
The Israel Antiquities Authority is charged with failure to enforce the country's laws protecting archeological sites.
The suit was brought by a radical right-wing Jewish group in Israel called the Temple Mount Faithful.


Job for I.B.M.; Diebold in Deal
The International Business Machines Corporation said today that it had won a contract to provide computers and automated teller machines for Bank Slaski of Poland.
And Daimler-Benz A.G. said one of its units had acquired a majority stake in the European operations of Diebold Inc., based in Canton, Ohio, which makes automated teller machines and electronic security products.
I.B.M. said it would provide all 42 of the bank's branches with I.B.M.
AS/400 computers and automated teller machines.


TENNIS: Two Giant Comebacks: Bahr Stuns 49ers Again And Connors Pulls Off a Big Birthday Surprise; 39-Year-Old Wonder Overcomes Krickstein in 5th-Set Tie Breaker
The birthday boy, still playing the inspired level of tennis he has attributed to demons, adrenaline and a recharged passion for his profession, turned 39 years old yesterday and did it in style on the Stadium Court at the United States Open.
No gray hairs for Jimmy Connors.
Instead it was 24-year-old Aaron Krickstein who felt as if he'd aged a lifetime in the course of a 4-hour-41-minute fourth-round marathon, where Connors once again transformed himself into a dervish with no ties to time or gravity.


Tuning In to the Kremlin


Worry Over Retirement Funds
Nearly half the $200 billion that Americans poured into 401(k) retirement savings plans in recent years is entrusted to life insurance companies.
But corporate-benefit consultants and other financial experts say the troubles roiling that industry are making them increasingly anxious about the safety of some of these tax-deferred plans.
More than $60 billion in 401(k) money invested with insurance companies will mature in the next two years, and even though it is unlikely that all clients will demand their money at the same time, financial experts question the ability of some insurance companies to pay back the money invested with them.
As a result, many companies, including Du Pont and Shell, have started diversifying their employees' 401(k) funds into other investments.
Billions Under Management
The large majority of the funds appear to be in no imminent danger.
Still, the growing concern is based on more than speculation.
When they were seized by state regulators earlier this year, the Executive Life Insurance Company and the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company were managing billions of 401(k) dollars.


Q&amp;A
Sea Gulls
Q.
I thought sea gulls were coastal birds but now I see them far inland.
Is this a change of habitat?
A.
"First of all, they are gulls, not sea gulls," said Dr.
Richard Bonney Jr., an ornithologist and director of education at the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology in Ithaca, N.Y.
"Sea gull" is something of a misnomer, he said; while these birds were mostly coastal in the past, there have always been some inland.


SOVIETS' DISORDER IS FELT BY CUBANS
Last Thursday, when Cuba's Marxist-Leninist Government broke a 10-day silence over the political upheaval in the Soviet Union, it was to announce to the world that it would never veer from its "revolutionary and scientific" path, even after what it called the failure of Communist experiments elsewhere.
The same day, the Communist Party's official newspaper, Granmna, said in a front-page editorial: "Whatever happens in the Soviet Union, we will not move away from the path we have chosen. We will continue with our independent, Cuban, socialist line."


Bodies of 2 Men Are Found In Building Damaged by Fire
An early-morning fire on Sunday in a downtown apartment building killed one man and left seven homeless, officials said.
The bodies of two unidentified men were found after a fire damaged the top floor of the Barrett Towners apartment building about 5 A.M., officials said.


In Brooklyn, Steel Drums And a Truce
More than a million black Caribbean-Americans marched, danced, shimmied and sang through Crown Heights yesterday -- with a half-dozen Hasidic rabbis joining the head of the march -- in a chaotic, glorious cacophony of steel drums, reggae, rum and fantastical costumes that for the moment at least, seemed to blast away much of the racial tensions plaguing the Brooklyn neighborhood for the last two weeks.
The annual West Indian-American Day Parade stretched for at least three miles along Eastern Parkway.
A succession of flatbed trucks carried bands and enormous loudspeakers, each truck surrounded by dancers in distinctively colored costumes shaking to the island beat of calypso, soca, reggae, merengue or the emerging New York blend of dance-hall music.
Smoke from charcoal burners carried the scent of goat roti and jerk chicken.


Quotation of the Day
"This is a presidential putsch, a real presidential putsch. But thank God this one is without tanks. The politicians would have reached an agreement sooner or later and would have fooled the people into following them. But the dead cannot be resurrected. It's better to be fooled and alive than clear- minded and dead." -- Nikolai N. Engver, a Soviet legislator.  [ A6:2. ]


Review/Television; An Abortion Program for People on Both Sides
Scenes from the battleground over abortion, not rare these days, are on screen again in "Casting the First Stone," at 10 tonight on Channel 13.
But Julie Gustafson's probing documentary manages to get past the twisted faces, threatening voices and numbing slogans to the more personal beliefs and feelings of a few advocates on each side.
No viewer's opinion about abortion is likely to be changed by the hour, but you may come away with a better understanding and perhaps a higher regard for those on the other side, particularly for antiabortion activists, not television's favorite people.
Ms.
Gustafson, who keeps her opinions to herself, takes her camera into the Women's Suburban Clinic in Paoli, Pa., where Sharon Owens, a counselor, tries quietly and without pressure to reassure an unmarried pregnant woman who says, "It's like killing my child." Mrs.
Owens replies that most doctors believe the fetus feels no pain.
But on the other side of the deep division, Alberta Fay Horrocks, holding her new baby, speaks of abortion as "a very violent act" and tells of the help she received from members of Operation Rescue, known for its sometimes illegal efforts to shut down abortion clinics: "I wasn't alone." She has become a "sidewalk counselor" for the antiabortion group.


Co-op Board Interrupts Life of Luxury for 2 Cats
Damon and Pythias lived in an elegant Fifth Avenue co-op -- doted upon by a loving widow, two maids, a veterinarian and a therapist.
When the widow, Terry Krumholz, wrote her will last December, she made careful provisions to insure that the two sleek Burmese cats continued to live as they had -- where they had.
But now, more than a month after Mrs.
Krumholz died of cancer, her plans have run afoul, and the lives of Damon and Pythias have become a tumult.


The Day's Highlights
Shaping the New Order
Gorbachev Proposes Interim Government: Declaring that the Soviet Union was "on the brink of catastrophe," President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the leaders of 10 republics asked the Congress of People's Deputies to transfer all central authority to them and an appointed legislative council until a new union could be formed.
The move stunned and dismayed many deputies, who were effectively being asked to dissolve the only national assembly elected by the entire Soviet Union.
Page A1.


A Bit More Time, A Bit More Cash, A Lot Better Fit
At one end of the fashion spectrum is haute couture, realm of the privileged few who can afford time-consuming fittings and five-figure prices.
At the other end is the world of off-the-rack clothing, inhabited by millions of women with limited time and money to spend on their wardrobes.
In between is the small enclave of custom-made clothing.
There, for the price of fine ready-to-wear, an exacting woman can get distinctive clothes that are made to fit her body.
She can choose the color and fabric, have the neckline or sleeves changed, and end up with one of a kind.


CHRONICLE
Greta Garbo's vintage Duesenberg J Victoria apparently isn't worth as much as a car collector, JERRY MOORE, had expected.
It attracted a high bid of only $2.8 million, a tad shy of the $3.5 million demanded by Mr.
Moore, a Houston shopping center owner, at the Auburn '91 Collector Car Auction and Show at Kruse International Auction Park in Auburn, Ind., on Sunday.
Mr.
Moore said: "You've heard about big ice cream cones you couldn't have? Well, that's the biggest ice cream cone I've ever seen." He said he would keep the car in his fleet of 37 Duesenbergs, adding, "It's my favorite."


Slaying Divides A Neighborhood On Racial Lines
It is not readily apparent how much tension and trouble lurk in the working-class neighborhood where David Reilly lived and died in Southwest Philadelphia.
Children on Chester Street play touch football on the pavement and family men play softball in a "beer belly league" on a nearby asphalt schoolyard.
American flags wave here and there over front stoops of row houses.


ABC Postpones Soviet Program
ABC News yesterday postponed a special television broadcast set for early today in which President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic were to have answered questions from American viewers.
Mr.
Gorbachev and Mr.
Yeltsin requested the postponement of the live "ABC News Town Hall" broadcast until the Congress of People's Deputies finishes its current session, the president of ABC News, Roone Arledge, said from Moscow.


Ignoring Big Chances, Bumblebees Just Seek Small, Reliable Gains
TO anybody who has been attacked by an enraged bumblebee, the insect seems impulsive to the point of kamikaze madness, willing to risk life and stinger to protect its nest.
But in its everyday behavior while out rummaging for nectar and pollen, it seems, the bumblebee is a model of conservatism.


Maybe Next Summer, Corn on Park Avenue
To the Editor:
I saw the Broadway cornstalks at 153d Street (news article, Aug. 13) when I rode the bus to the Cloisters on a recent visit to New York.


NEWS SUMMARY
SOVIET TURMOIL A6-10
The national Congress was stunned when President Gorbachev and the leaders of 10 republics proposed to transfer all central authority to themselves and a legislative council until a new union can be formed.
A1
News analysis: The surprise accord is clearly a gamble to prevent the existing union from tumbling in on itself.
But whether President Gorbachev and the republics' chiefs succeed is unanswerable now.
A1
Reporter's notebook: Legislators say they deserved better A9 President Bush gave full recognition to Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, the nations annexed by Stalin and now on the verge of independence from a crumbling Soviet Union.
His decision was delayed by a personal plea from President Gorbachev.
A1
Baltic-Americans waited for 50 years for a moment that had finally come: formal recognition of their homeland's independence by their adopted country.
For thousands in Chicago, it was a day of joy and disbelief.
A9
The Foreign Minister of Estonia hates champagne but has been clinking glasses nearly every night with foreign representatives reopening diplomatic relations.
A10
Lithuania disappointed by U.S. timing A9
The Soviet changes may hurt Cuba and force the nation to make dramatic economic and political changes on its own, experts say.
Cuba is already bracing itself for survival if Soviet aid is cut off.
A10
Soviet troops in German say they're "in the same army" A10 INTERNATIONAL A3-5, 14-17
The latest cease-fire in Yugoslavia was shattered just hours after it was signed, leading Croatia's leader to warn that the accord could be undermined by what he said were "serious" Serbian violations.
A17
Four ex-East German guards tried for killing at wall A16
Tension among immigrants in Israel led to a brawl at a Jerusalem hotel between Ethiopian and Soviet newcomers.
Officials are now rethinking the wisdom of letting the two groups live under the same roof.
A14 Palestinian council expected to meet on setbacks A15
A guerrilla leader in El Salvador said his organization could take steps toward "not existing as an armed force" if the Government would agree to five proposals for changes in the national army and police.
A5
British visit breaks the ice with China A3
Mandela visits three imprisoned rightists A3
Batticaloa Journal: A priest chronicles atrocities of war A4 NATIONAL A18-21, D12
The Treasury is a reluctant regulator when it comes to policing the vast market for its securities.
That light touch led to the Salomon Brothers scandal, though overregulation might hurt the business, experts say.
A1
Assurances of recovery are no solace to the 300,000 out-of-work Americans who exhausted their unemployment benefits in July, the highest level in more than 40 years.
A1
Two prominent Washington lawyers, Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman, resigned from First American Bankshares with their pockets full and many questions unanswered, investigators say.
D1
The death of a freelance writer in West Virginia last month has added an air of intrigue to a complicated, long-running court case that has become known in Washington circles simply as "Inslaw." D12
A clash between whites and Asians in Philadelphia left a white teen-ager dead and residents asking how harmony can be achieved between racial groups in their city, which is undergoing rapid ethnic change.
A18
New Orleans Journal: A little loud in jazz's birthplace A18
An AIDS rally in Kennebunkport, Me., was brushed off by President Bush, who said he was concerned about disrupted business of shopkeepers and that "behavioral change" is the way to halt the disease's spread.
A20
Athiest troop leader ousted from Boy Scouts A20
An old tractor becomes a $350,000 mistake A21
A pigeon shoot in Pennsylvania was disrupted by animal-rights activists protesting the killing of 5,000 pigeons.
The police arrested at least 85 people.
D12
Los Angeles police reconsider using choke hold A18 REGIONAL B1-5
Subway service will be restored this morning for the 500,000 riders of the Lexington Avenue IRT.
Dozens of workers checked the repairs yesterday to the section devastated by last week's subway crash.
A1
Three people died in a huge explosion, followed by a fire ball, that leveled two three-story brick apartment buildings in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn.
At least 24 others were injured, the police said.
B1
The West Indian-American Parade, which attracted more than a million Caribbean blacks and a few Hasidic rabbis, seemed to blast away much of racial tension plaguing Crown Heights for the past two weeks.
B1
Reporter's notebook: Wariness permeates usual celebration B4 The breeze had a little snap to it this Labor Day, and at moments it seemed as if summer had already slipped into fall.
But around the region, people headed outside for the final rituals of summer.
B1
Nine candidates are battling it out for the District 31 City Council seat in southeast Queens.
There are at least three frontrunners, and many feel the candidates are running only for each other's throats.
B1
She wanted the best for her cats, so a widow's will specified that they be allowed to live in her Fifth Avenue co-op after she died.
But the co-op has a no-pet rule, and a month after her death, the board is infuriated.
B2
Student killed, friend injured in Queens fight B3 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Sports B7-13
Jimmy Connors won at the U.S.
Open after capturing a fifth-set tie breaker against Aaron Krickstein to advance to the quarterfinals.
His victory came on his 39th birthday.
B7
Tennis: Navratilova reaches quarterfinals B13
Baseball: Braves lose third in row B8
Gooden on disabled list B9
Johnson ready for the outfield B9
Yanks lose to Rangers B9
Bo Jackson returns to majors B9
Columns: Anderson on Montana B7
Football: Giants defeat 49ers in opener B7
TV Sports B11
On Tennis B13
Football: Coslet praises Jets B11
Memphis State stuns U.S.C.  B11
Horse Racing: Scan wins the Jerome B13
Sports People B13 Obituaries D13 Fashion Page B6 Science Times
Amid budget woes, Soviet officials put science on the market C1
Chemists' new toy emerges as hope for resistance-free wires C1 Arts/Entertainment
The great audio conspiracy C13
Music: Anderson Award C13
Dance: International troupe C13
Word and Image: "Biography," a novel C16
The two sides on abortion C22 Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A22
The ethnic archipelago
Protest and tolerance lessons
For Council from the Bronx


Careers; Some Advice For Entering Advertising
THE prospects are daunting for recent college graduates hoping to enter the advertising industry.
The recession, belt-tightening by advertisers and layoffs at several major agencies have narrowed the opportunities.
Through those clouds, however, advertising professors and agency executives say they see a glimmer of hope.
And they cite what has traditionally been an axiom of the industry: Sooner or later, every agency requires the vitality and enthusiasm of a young person.


Method of Matching Donor Kidneys Gains
A MORE accurate method for matching donor kidneys from cadavers to patients awaiting transplants may sharply improve the success rates of transplants between unrelated people, a new study suggests.
To prevent rejection, doctors test kidneys and recipients to see if they have certain important immune molecules in common.
Studies have shown that the operation is most successful if the organ and recipient "match" on all six of the major immune molecules.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
When a Congressional committee convenes tomorrow to examine the Salomon Brothers scandal, it will set the stage for a battle over regulation of the Treasury securities market.
The scandal is forcing a new examination of how the market operates, what rules govern it and how those rules are enforced.
The emerging picture is of a trading community governed under poorly defined rules by a reluctant regulator: the Treasury itself, an agency that has grown dependent on the firms it oversees.  [ Page A1. ]


A Friendship, a Washington Bank and a Trail of Money Leading to B.C.C.I.; They Bought Stock With Insider Loans And Made Millions
Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman resigned from their executive posts at First American Bankshares last month with their reputations tarnished, their pockets full, and some important questions unanswered, Government investigators say.
The role of the two prominent Washington lawyers is part of the investigations in New York and Washington of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which controlled First American.


Two Giant Comebacks: Bahr Stuns 49ers Again And Connors Pulls Off a Big Birthday Surprise
In January, the last time the Giants played the San Francisco 49ers, they beat them on a field goal as time ran out.
Tonight, with five seconds left, they beat the 49ers on another field goal.
Matt Bahr won last season's conference championship game, 15-13, with a 42-yard field goal.
Tonight, with five seconds left, he kicked a 35-yard field goal, and the Giants won, 16-14.


Renewed Clashes Shatter Yugoslavia's Cease-Fire
Yugoslavia's latest cease-fire was shattered today just hours after the agreement was signed, leading Croatia's leader to warn that the accord could be undermined by what he said were Serbian violations.
"They are very serious indeed," said Franjo Tudjman, the President of the Croatian republic, of the violent incidents that flared after the truce was to take effect.
He said that the clashes were the fault of Serbia, which, he declared, wanted to prevent "a peaceful solution," being reached through the agreement that was brokered by the European Community.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Purchased the contract of Barry Lyons, catcher, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Recalled Roberto Hernandez, pitcher, from Birmingham of the Southern League.
Optioned Brian Drahman, pitcher, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Jim Hunter, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Mike Ignasiak, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Optioned Allan Anderson and Tom Edens, pitchers, to Kenosha of the Midwest League.
Recalled Jarvis Brown and Pedro Martinez, outfielders; Paul Sorrento, first baseman; Gary Wayne, Denny Neagle, Willie Banks and Paul Abbott, pitchers; and Lenny Webster, catcher, from Portland of the Pacific Coast League.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Recalled Lance Blankenship and Scott Hemond, infielders; Kevin Campbell, Bruce Walton and Joe Slusarski, pitchers; Dann Howitt, outfielder; and Vance Law, infielder, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Brad Komminsk, outfielder, and Brad Witmeyer, first baseman, to Tacoma.
Activated Willie Wilson, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Activated Jeff Huson, infielder; Rich Gossage, pitcher; John Russell, catcher; and Jack Daugherty, outfielder; from the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Barry Manuel, pitcher, from Tulsa of the Texas League.
Purchased the contract of Donald Harris, outfielder, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Sent Travis Buckley, pitcher, to the Montreal Expos to complete the Dennis Boyd trade.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Recalled Derek Bell, Cory Snyder and Turner Ward, outfielders; Eddie Zosky, shortstop; and Pat Hentgen, pitcher, from Syracuse of International League.
Recalled David Weathers and Vince Horsman, pitchers, from Knoxville of the Southern League.
Named Bill Monbouquette coach.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Purchased the contract of Yorkis Perez, pitcher, from Richmond of the International League.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Activated Chris Hammond, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Called up Donnie Scott, catcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Recalled Dennis Cook and John Wetteland, pitchers; Carlos Hernandez, catcher; Eric Karros, first baseman; and Tom Goodwin, outfielder, from Albuquerque of the Pacific Coast League.
NEW YORK METS -- Placed Dwight Gooden, pitcher, on the 15-disabled list, retroactive to Aug. 24.
Recalled Jeff Gardner, infielder, and Todd Hundley, catcher, from Tidewater of the International League.
Recalled Terry Bross, pitcher, from Williamsport of the Eastern League.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Sent Dave Hollins, third baseman, and Von Hayes, outfielder, to the Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League on rehabilitation assignments.
Purchased the contract of Clifford Brantley, pitcher, from Scranton-Wilkes-Barre.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Recalled Bernard Gilkey, outfielder; Ray Stephens, catcher; and Rod Brewer, first baseman, from Louisville of the American Association.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Recalled Steve Decker, catcher; Mike Benjamin, infielder; and Gil Heredia, pitcher, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Football  National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Placed Aubrey Matthews, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Activated Brett Perriman, wide receiver.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Activated Johnny Rembert, linebacker.
Released Richard Harvey, linebacker.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Waived Buford Jordan, running back.
Signed Scott Ross, linebacker.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Activated William Roberts, offensive guard; Mark Ingram, wide receiver; and Dave Meggett, running back, from the roster exempt list.
Placed Johnie Cooks, linebacker, and James Milling, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Waived Al Jacevicius, tackle.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Waived Terry O'Shea, tight end.
Activated Ron Woodson, cornerback.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Robbie Keen, punter, to the practice squad.
Waived Greg Joelson, defensive end, from the practice squad.


2 True Signal-Callers Overthrow Misconceptions
Jim Kelly and John Elway made strong statements on Sunday and it was not only their production that led their teams to victories.
It was also the style and the confidence both quarterbacks displayed in calling their own game from start to finish.
Since National Football League coaches found their way up to the press box, the thinking has prevailed that an overhead view of the entire field plus thoughts from several heads is the best way to direct an offense.
On several teams, offensive coordinators in the press box decide which play to run and then relay their plan to the sideline, where another coach signals the play in to the quarterback.


The Ethnic Archipelago
Between Germany on the west and Siberia on the east lies a landlocked archipelago of tense ethnic islands: minority populations living uneasily under other peoples' flags.
Centuries of migration and colonization have produced an ethnic checkerboard, confounding nationalist visions of homogeneous and compact states.
Yet those visions persist, threatening to ignite savagery.
Yugoslavia is now ensnarled in a grim civil war.
The Soviet republics seem to be showing more sense, but the potential for conflict remains high.


Nancy Schiffman Weds S. L. Sklar
Dr.
Nancy Joy Schiffman and Dr.
Stuart Leslie Sklar were married yesterday at the Pearl River (N.Y.) Hilton by Rabbi Aryeh Gotlieb.
The couple, 30 years old, received degrees in optometry from the Pennsylvania College of Optometry.
The bride is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald I. Schiffman of Paramus, N.J.
The bridegroom is the son of Leona Sklar of Spring Valley, N.Y., and Morton Sklar of Philadelphia.


BUSH PLAYS DOWN PROTEST ON AIDS
President Bush today brushed off a weekend demonstration near his home by advocates for people with AIDS, saying that he was concerned about local shopkeepers whose business was disrupted and that "behavioral change" is the best way to halt the disease's spread.
At a news conference on independence for the Baltic republics, Mr.
Bush was asked about the protest, in which more than 1,000 people marched through the center of Kennebunkport on Sunday, scattered condoms and leaflets along the way and were stopped by police officers and Secret Service agents about a half-mile from the President's home on Walker's Point.


Professor's Racial Theories Fall Wide of Mark; Blame for Slavery
To the Editor:
Hugh Pearson defends Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr.'s racist views on the ground that singling out Jews for special treatment does not otherwise despoil "an opinion worth debating" (letter, Aug. 20).
But it is precisely those claims that distort and exaggerate the role of Jews and other minorities in history that lie at the heart of racism and anti-Semitism.


Wes Anderson Dies; Art Director Was 39
Wes Anderson, the design director of The Village Voice from 1989 until this year, died on Friday.
He was 39 years old.
He died of colon and lymphatic cancer, his doctors said.


Observer; Eagle Pass, Farewell
With aging, there are fewer and fewer people familiar with the culture that is yours.
If you age a lot, there is finally almost nobody left who shares your vast experience of an incredibly fascinating world.
Your exclusive experience of this broad culture, in fact, may make you slightly absurd and will almost certainly make you tiresome if you refuse to keep quiet about it.
Thus, people born in the age of the "It" girl found it hilarious that their elders wore high-button shoes.


Professor's Racial Theories Fall Wide of Mark; Round Up All Bigots?
To the Editor:
What is all the fuss about Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr.?
A year ago Prof.
Michael Levin, also of City College, made a speech saying that blacks are far less intelligent than whites.
The cries against Professor Levin were not as loud as the cries against Professor Jeffries.


For Connors, Much to Celebrate at the U.S. Open


An Old Tractor Becomes a $350,000 Mistake
Wayne Kuhlman, a lawyer here, occasionally likes to use his 1945 Farmall tractor to do odd jobs around his three-acre yard here, but he hardly thinks the rusty machine is worth the $9.6 million assessed by Clay County officials.
Mr.
Kuhlman had no problem correcting the error on his tax bill last fall, and he promptly forgot about the incident.
But the North Kansas City School District did not learn of the mistake until it had already adopted its budget this spring, and it was expecting $350,000 in taxes on the tractor.


Soviet Legislators, Pushed Aside, Say They Deserved Better
More than 2,000 delegates, drawn from around the Soviet Union, came to the Kremlin today thinking the country's future was in their hands.
They had barely settled in their seats at 10 A.M. when they were told that they were neither needed nor wanted and that they should take a four-hour break.
By the time they came back, the People's Deputies understood their new fate.
Under an agreement reached last night between President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and 10 republic leaders, the lawmakers' role as members of the highest legislative body of the now-vanishing Soviet Union had been virtually usurped.


Review/Music; At Anderson Award, a Chilly Time Is Had by All
Summer outdoor concert events usually give their performers more than just music to cope with.
The Marian Anderson Award Benefit Concert at the Charles Ives Center for the Arts here tonight provided an environmental surprise or two: no heat, no bugs, no rain or humidity, only one passing airplane; instead, an uncharacteristic chill that sent listeners lucky enough to have them beneath their blankets and left everyone else to bear the weather bravely.
Miss Anderson, 89 years old and appropriately bundled up, sat in the front row to hear some singing by the first winner of the new prize that bears her name, and to see Denyce Graves officially receive the second.
The award is a cash one: $25,000.
There are no competitions; instead, a panel of musicians and experts makes recommendations quietly and announces its findings.
Winners are chosen for talent and need.


Sauntering Is Such a French Thing to Do
To the Editor:
As a confirmed wanderer of New York City's streets, I was delighted by "Around Manhattan Step by Step" (Aug. 16), an account that echoed many of the pleasures and anxieties I have found in my own explorations of Manhattan's perimeter.
My only quibble with your report was your mention that the word "saunter" was "said to be created by Thoreau." My own understanding of the word's derivation -- for which I can cite no authority -- is that it precedes Thoreau by some four centuries.


Reluctant Regulator: A special report.; Free-Wheeling Treasuries Market Is at Turning Point With Congress
When a Congressional committee convenes tomorrow to examine the Salomon Brothers scandal and its implications, it will set the stage for a battle over the regulation of one of the world's largest and most important financial arenas: the market for United States Treasury securities.
That market -- where $117 billion in bills, notes and bonds changes hands daily -- is the mechanism on which the Government relies to finance the nation's $3.61 trillion public debt.
The unfolding scandal at Salomon Brothers is forcing a fresh examination of how the market operates, what rules govern it and how those rules are enforced.
The recent query by the Securities and Exchange Commission to all big Treasury dealers is an effort to find out more about what really goes on in this important corner of Wall Street.


Emperor's New Audio Components Raise Thoughts of a Conspiracy
The year's biggest news in the world of audio components, Sony's mini-disk, a recordable CD due in 1992, turns out on close inspection not to be all that interesting.
But it has proved to be valuable grist for the music world's conspiracy theorists -- well, myself and a few friends -- who have been idle of late.
The mini-disk, measuring about 2.5 inches in diameter, is roughly half the size of a compact disk and holds 74 minutes of music, nearly as much as a CD.
Unlike a CD, though, the mini-disk can be recorded and erased.
That's the good news.


CHRONICLE
The actor RALPH BELLAMY was in stable condition yesterday at St.
John's Hospital and Health Center in Santa Monica, Calif., recuperating from a respiratory illness, a hospital spokeswoman said.
The spokeswoman, Susan C. Solomon, said that while the actor had shown signs of improvement since he was admitted last Tuesday, doctors had not determined when he would be released.


Books of The Times; A Biographer Seeking Himself in Another's Identity
Biography By Celia Gittelson 260 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.
In recent years, biographers have become a favorite type of novelistic hero.
Bernard Malamud's "Dubin's Lives," Mary Gordon's "Men and Angels," Alison Lurie's "Truth About Lorin Jones," Isabel Colegate's "Deceits of Time" and A. S. Byatt's "Possession": all of these novels feature biographers who slowly discover that their subjects' lives echo or influence their own.
In the course of researching their books, they achieve not only an understanding of their subjects, but a measure of self-knowledge as well.


O'Connor Ends Stay in Rockland Hospital
John Cardinal O'Connor was released from Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y., yesterday morning after suffering from what a church spokesman said was heat prostration.
A statement released by the spokesman, the Rev.
Joseph G. Zwilling, said that the 71-year-old Cardinal, who heads the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, had been taken to the Rockland County hospital after feeling weak and light-headed while celebrating Mass on Saturday for the Sisters of Life, a religious community founded for women who are preparing to become nuns.


As U.S. Battles Computer Company, Writer Takes Vision of Evil to Grave
The death of a freelance writer in West Virginia on Aug. 10 has added an air of intrigue to a complicated, long-running court case that has become known in Washington circles simply as "Inslaw."
The case involves accusations that Justice Department officials were involved in fraud and theft.
It was moving quietly through the Federal courts, and a Congressional investigating panel was holding hearings even before the death of Danny Casolaro, a 44-year-old magazine writer and novelist from Fairfax, Va.


9, Yes, 9, Candidates Jostle for a Nomination
Every so often, a City Council candidate stops in at Curtis Jamison's Norge Laundromat on Merrick Boulevard in Laurelton, Queens, and puts up a campaign poster.
The business strip, crowded with West Indian restaurants and other small merchants, is an ideal handshaking stop.
So far there are five smiling photographs competing for space on the plate-glass window.


Mandela Visits 3 Imprisoned Rightists
Nelson Mandela intervened today in a hunger strike by three white right-wingers who have been charged by the South African authorities with killing blacks.
Mr.
Mandela, the leader of the African National Congress, met with the strikers at a Pretoria hospital for about an hour this afternoon in an effort to persuade them to abandon their protest.
He said he would personally ask President F. W. de Klerk on Tuesday to release the men, who are said to be in serious condition after nearly two months without food.


Man Killed and 4 Injured in Club Shooting
A 20-year-old man was killed and four other men, including two of his brothers, were wounded early yesterday when a dispute in a Manhattan nightclub spilled into the street and erupted in gunfire.
Investigators said that a fight broke out about 1 A.M. at The Ritz at 254 West 54th Street -- once the address of Studio 54, the discotheque that attracted such celebrities as Jacqueline Onassis in the 1970's.
Some patrons were ejected from the club by the management.


British Visit Breaks the Ice With China
With a 19-gun salute at the edge of Tiananmen Square, Prime Minister John Major of Britain today became the first leader of a Western European country to visit China and shake hands with Prime Minister Li Peng in more than two years.
Mr.
Major arrived this afternoon for three days of talks with Chinese leaders, during which he will sign an agreement for a new airport in Hong Kong.
The accord, which will allow China a greater role in Hong Kong's management, is expected to help shape not only the British Crown Colony's future but also the direction of broader Chinese-British relations.


Sexual Selection Seen In a Study of Plants
BIOLOGISTS have discovered evidence of what may be a version of sexual selection for plants.
When pollen is deposited on the stigma of a flower, it grows a pollen tube down to where the flower's eggs are stored.
Studying a type of wild hibiscus, biologists found that sperm-bearing pollen compete to fertilize the flowers' eggs.
The competition may favor the genetic success of plants that produce pollen that reach the egg quickly, the biologists said.


9 Greek Papers Put on Trial Over Publicity for Terrorists
The editors of nine Greek newspapers went on trial today on charges of violating new legislation banning the unwarranted publicizing of terrorist activity.


On a Very Rainy Night, Rangers Swamp Yankees And Their Porous Defense
The Yankees waited through more than two hours of rain delays tonight and then must have wondered why they bothered.
All they did by eventually playing the Rangers was embarrass themselves.
Not only were their faces wet while they patrolled the soggy field at Arlington Stadium, they were also red with shame because of some forgettable play.
The Yankees made three errors during a frightful fifth inning, added one more in the sixth and the miscues helped Texas score four unearned runs and waltz to a 7-2 victory.
Errors Get Worse
Each error was sillier than the next.
In the fifth, Bernie Williams let a grounder dribble between his legs in center field, Rich Monteleone bounced a throw home from 40 feet away and Matt Nokes threw an incomplete pass to shortstop Alvaro Espinoza on a steal attempt at second.
Hensley Meulens made an errant throw to Monteleone covering first as the Yankees lowered their total to one botched play in the sixth.


Delta Shuttle's First Week


Economic Scene; When Children Have Children
EVERYONE knows that teen-age pregnancy is the curse of the underclass -- that children who have children doom themselves to a life of poverty and dependence.
But everyone, it seems, could be wrong.
A National Bureau of Economic Research working paper published this summer by Arline Geronimus, a researcher at the University of Michigan, and Sanders Korenman, a Princeton economist, offers striking evidence that early motherhood does not much affect women's future earnings or increase the probability they will end up on welfare.


Ex-California Governor To Seek the Presidency
With a blast at "monstrous" political campaigns and a "corrupt" political system, Edmund G. Brown Jr. said today that he was dropping his bid for the Senate to open an exploratory candidacy for President.
The former California Governor said he wanted to serve as the voice for the disaffected and would accept no contribution larger than $100.


Store Owner Finds Everybody Likes Him but the I.R.S.
Stew Leonard's is a giant dairy store here, with a petting zoo and dancing milk cartons, that each year sells 10 million quarts of milk, more than 1,000 tons of hamburger and 7.8 million ears of corn. (That's enough corn to stretch from Norwalk to Houston, give or take an ear.)
It is beloved in a way that few stores are -- as a major employer in this city, as a tourist attraction in Fairfield County and as a national monument to family enterprise.
The Reagan Administration even bestowed the Presidential Award for Entrepreneurial Achievement on the store's founder, 61-year-old Stew Leonard Sr.


Breaching the Brain's Wall to Deliver Drugs
Researchers seeking treatments for diseases of the central nervous system have long been stymied by the blood-brain barrier, which blocks or limits the flow of substances from capillaries into the tissues of the brain.
While some substances, like caffeine and alcohol, easily cross the barrier, many therapeutic drugs do not.
Last week, Alkermes Inc., a neuro-pharmaceuticals company based in Cambridge, Mass., filed an application with the Food and Drug Administration to begin human clinical trials of RMP-7, a compound that enables many drugs to cross the barrier.
The company hopes to begin safety studies of RMP-7 later this year, and soon after that to begin testing the compound's effectiveness in delivering various drugs.
An Unusual Approach
Many companies have attacked the blood-brain barrier problem in the course of their research on drugs to treat brain diseases, but Alkermes is unusual in that it is working only on delivery mechanisms for crossing the barrier, not therapeutic compounds.
Alkermes's management believes that many existing drugs, like antibiotics and chemotherapy compounds, could be more effective if they could enter the brain in significant quantities.


Dollar Off in Quiet Trading Despite Economic Reports
The dollar weakened yesterday in quiet post-holiday trading.
Dealers seemed to shrug off the latest data indicating continued economic growth during the summer.
Gold prices were mixed after rising overseas.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $348.30 an ounce, up 20 cents from late Friday.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted a late bid for gold at $347.90 an ounce, off 10 cents from Friday.


Thomas Backers' Ad Faults Senators
Two conservative groups that support the selection of Judge Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court have begun running a television commercial questioning the ethics of three Democratic Senators whom they expect to oppose the nomination.
The criticisms of the three Senators are so harsh that Judge Thomas and the Bush Administration quickly moved to denounce the ad.


SOVIET TURMOIL: Soviet Notebook; When Meat Disappears, It's Waffles and Seaweed Mrs. Gorbachev Recalls
In the first account of her ordeal during the coup attempt last month, President Gorbachev's wife, Raisa, said today that she feared death, tasted the bitterness of betrayal and was now tormented by the memory of incarceration.
In an interview in the Soviet trade union newspaper Trud, Mrs.
Gorbachev described how her family had deliberately walked in view of naval vessels off the shore of their Crimean villa so people could see they were alive and well.
The hard-line coup leaders asserted that Mr.
Gorbachev was in ill health when they announced that they had taken over from Mr.
Gorbachev on Aug. 18.


Accounts
*
Sunbeam/Oster Household Products Group, Milwaukee, to Cramer-Krasselt, Milwaukee, for its Sunbeam and Oster brands of kitchen appliances.
The agency said that the $6 million account had previously been handled by Tatham/RSCG, Chicago, for Sunbeam, and Hoffman York &amp; Compton, Milwaukee, for Oster. *
Jantzen Inc., Portland, Ore., the bathing suit and casual wear subsidiary of the VF Corporation, to Bozell Inc., New York.
The agency said that the company, which has a $4 million advertising budget, previously created its own advertising.
Bozell handles the accounts for other VF brands.


Lumber Tax To Be Ended By Canada
Canada told the United States today that it would cancel a tax on lumber exports, a move that could reignite a longstanding political battle over lumber trade and complicate negotiations for a continental free-trade area that would also include Mexico.
The tax had been imposed in 1986 in response to American complaints that Canada was subsidizing its lumber industry.
The decision to remove it brought an immediate protest from the United States.


Editorial Notebook; Courage and Confusion at the Open
To tennis players and fans alike, there is no Grand Slam tournament quite like the raucous Septemberfest known as the U.S.
Open.
It is feast, festival and fashion show rolled into one; and after a day or a night in Flushing Meadows, spectators stumble from the premises drained and exhausted -- as if they, not 39-year-old Jimmy Connors, had been out there battling Aaron Krickstein for 4 hours and 41 minutes.
But the tennis, while frazzling and dazzling, is not what reduces the fan to emotional pulp.
It is the sheer psychic and physical energy involved in getting in and out of the National Tennis Center and finding something to eat and drink once you're there.


Bush Stresses Schools As Critics Turn Up Heat
Facing renewed charges from Democrats that he is inattentive to domestic problems, President Bush today kicked off a weeklong effort to promote his Administration's education programs with a visit to a Maine high school and a kindergarten, where he read a children's story aloud.
"Education and expectation go hand in hand and your world -- the whole world -- trembles with new possibilities," Mr.
Bush said in a speech to students, teachers and parents at the Lewiston Comprehensive High School before he headed back to Washington after his August vacation in Kennebunkport.


Personal Health
WHILE parents may look forward to the first day of school, for millions of children, from preschool to college age, the thought of going to school brings apprehension and anxiety that can blossom into refusal to attend school or a crippling school phobia if misunderstood and mistreated.
At least 5 percent of elementary school children and about 2 percent of high school students suffer from school phobia.
While some young children may cry and say that they do not want to go, more often anxiety about school takes the form of physical symptoms like stomachaches that are real enough but have no organic cause.


Thousands Protest Cuts In Dallas School Budget
Thousands of high school students, some throwing bottles and stones, marched on the headquarters of the Dallas Independent School District today to protest the layoffs of 245 teachers and the elimination of 384 teaching positions.
About 70 police officers in riot gear surrounded the administration building just north of the downtown area, protecting school administrators inside.
The students, many of them carrying placards, were joined by some parents and teachers.


In New Position, Johnson Does Right Thing
Howard Johnson became the Mets' right fielder of the present and most likely the future last night.
He was an instant hit, especially the instant he doubled home the first run of a three-run outburst in the first inning and the instant he singled across the first run of a three-run flurry in the fifth.
The Mets' 6-1 victory over the Houston Astros was significant not for the result -- victories and losses are meaningless in Mets World these days.
But some of the ingredients of the game were notable.


CHRONICLE
The spotlight that never seems to waver from Britain's royal family has moved for the moment to PRINCESS ANNE and her estranged husband, Capt.
MARK PHILLIPS.
Because they have now been separated for more than two years, they are now free to file for divorce.
Will they?
Spokesmen for Buckingham Palace say the couple have no plans to do so.
The princess is seventh in line for the throne.
Her husband is a former British Army captain.
Reports of separate romances have swirled about them for years.


Review/Theater; 2 Jersey Girls Leave Home
At the end of the tedious first act of "The Jersey Girls," a dreadful play by Larry Manogue at the Actors' Playhouse, Glen and Lisa begin teasing their old chum Mim about the time she lost her bra on a date in high school.
Angered by the indelicacy of such revelations, the prudish Mim huffily declares, "Some things just aren't funny." Unfortunately, "The Jersey Girls" is one of them.
Billed as a new comedy, "The Jersey Girls" is neither.
It takes the most banal of television sitcoms as a starting point and then trivializes it even further.
Glen, Lisa and Mim are living together as a sort of New Jersey version of "Three's Company." Returning from a week's vacation in San Francisco, Lisa and Mim decide to move to California, in hopes of meeting some eligible men.
They do.
Move to California, that is.
They find jobs and an apartment in San Jose with a new roommate.
They write letters home to Glen.
He writes back.
He comes to visit on his vacation, also hoping to meet some eligible men.
Another exchange of letters.
Glen returns at Thanksgiving.
More correspondence.
The girls go back to Jersey for Christmas.
The end.
Not exactly a laugh riot.


Fax Machines Are Getting a Voice
Companies trying to keep in closer contact with far-flung employees may soon have a new tool: the talking fax machine.
Although computers have long been able to synthesize speech, this is the first attempt to create a machine that can read a faxed document and translate that information into spoken works.


A Defender of the Faith With Fond Memories Of Her Discipleship
MARION CUNNINGHAM, whose lively revision of the prim and outmoded "Fannie Farmer Cookbook" has made it once again a kitchen standard, is talking on her kitchen phone.
"What time can I pick it up?" she asks.
Calm as can be.
No one would ever suspect that the car of her dreams goes in for repairs nearly as regularly as some people buy gasoline.


1 Killed and 2 Wounded in S.I. Dispute Over Dog
A feud between two families on Staten Island over a dog urinating on a bush led to a shootout in which one man was killed and two others, including a bystander, were wounded, the police said.
Children playing in front of their homes saw the shootings and ran screaming for cover as bullets ricocheted down Dunbar Street in Great Kills.


Tougher Ban Avoided
Track's world governing body has doubled the penalty for illicit drug use, from a two-year suspension to a four-year suspension, but XINMEI SUI, the Chinese shot-putter who became the first World University Games competitor to test positive for steroids, will get off with a two-year ban.


Families Seek Out Shelters As Route to Better Homes
New York City's shelter system for homeless families has become so livable that hundreds, if not thousands, of families who could stay elsewhere are flocking to shelters so they can move to the top of the list for permanent subsidized housing, city officials say.
Dorian and Renita Steeley and their three children, for example, were crowded into a two-bedroom apartment with relatives.
But they wanted their own place.
So they went to the city and said they were homeless.
They now have a functional two-bedroom apartment in a Bronx shelter, at a cost to the city of $2,730 a month.


Continental Confirms Talks With Perot Son
H.
Ross Perot Jr. has held talks with Continental Airlines about a possible venture that could be put together with several foreign carriers to inject new money into the bankrupt airline to make it more viable.
Art Kent, Continental's vice president of corporate communications, confirmed a report in The Wall Street Journal yesterday that Mr.
Perot had held preliminary discussions with the airline.
Mr.
Perot is a developer whose father is H. Ross Perot, the Dallas financier.


Provincial Communist Is Born (Again) Free
For the people of Azerbaijan, these days since the eruption of the Soviet state have been a time of marvels.


Microwave Cooking
THINK of the microwave oven as one pot, albeit a very efficient one.
That means that if you are making dinner in a hurry for four, you will need more than your microwave oven, although a few of the dishes can be made in it.
By using the stove or conventional oven as well as the microwave oven, you can put together a meal of several courses in under an hour.
If you do a little work the night before, life gets even simpler.


How About Area Code Lists by Number?
To the Editor:
"As Telephones Multiply, Dialing Will Take Longer" (front page, Aug. 18) addresses one telephone problem.
Another concerns the listing of area codes in telephone directories.
They are shown in five time zones and in no apparent order across the country.


INSIDE
Murder Charge in IRT Crash
The motorman in the fatal subway crash, first charged with manslaughter, was indicted on more serious charges of second-degree murder.
After six days, service resumed on the Lexington Avenue line.
Page B1.


City to Widen Investigation Of Contractor in Fatal Fall
New York City will step up its investigation of the contractor that is working on the Bronx construction site where a 12-year-old boy last week fell 500 feet to his death through an uncapped water shaft, officials said yesterday.
Sanford Evans, the Assistant Commissioner of Public Affairs for the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, said the city would inspect seven other construction sites being worked on by John Picone Inc., the contractor at the accident site at Grand Avenue and West 181st Street in University Heights.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Recalled Brian Drahman, Jeff Carter, Tom Drees, and Ramon Garcia, pitchers; Esteban Beltre, shortstop; Rodney McCray, outfielder, and Don Wakamatsu, catcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.


Corrections
An entry on Aug. 28 in the Addenda listing of the Media Business page about a dispute between Volvo Cars of North America and its former advertising agency, Scali, McCabe, Sloves in New York, referred incorrectly to a report in Adweek.
The magazine said Volvo was "not ruling out suing" the agency; it did not say the company was preparing a suit.


A.T.&amp; T. Laptop Gets 12% Price Cut
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it had reduced the price of its Safari laptop computer by 12 percent.
The new suggested list price of the base model is $4,749, down from $5,399.
The model with an 80-megabyte hard disk drive, to be available next month, will list at $5,749, also down 12 percent, A.T.&amp; T. said.
The action follows a series of price cuts by other makers of personal and portable computers in recent months in response to a sluggish market.


The Pop Life
A Music Sampler
One of the more memorable moments on MTV recently was an episode of "MTV Unplugged," featuring the rapper L.L.
Cool J. Backed by a rocking acoustic band, he unfurled strings of words while the group brought a live intensity to the proceedings.
The leader of the band, Pop DeSilva, has just released his first album, "A Man" (Elektra), and it is about as progressive as current pop music gets.
For one, it sounds as though it was constructed almost entirely of samples.
And for another, like current best selling rap albums like Third Bass's "Derelicts of Dialect" and De La Soul's "De La Soul Is Dead," it only occasionally takes notice of traditional radio-friendly pop music rules.
Words, sometimes sung and sometimes rapped, flow stream-of-consciousness style, which befits the album's general 1960's psychedelic esthetic, and bits of pop surrealism, where moods and meaning juxtapose regularly, show up as well.


Public &amp; Private; Noun, Vulgar, Defined
When I was a child I would sometimes go to the dictionary to look for mysterious words.
These were never words like "deduce" or "obstinate," "sauerbraten" or "wadding." These were almost always the kinds of words you hear bigger kids saying behind the garage, bigger kids who threaten you with injury if you mention in front of an adult that you heard those words from them.
As a result I would frequently find myself in the bathroom with the old red-covered dictionary looking for a word like -- well, you know.
And I could never find it.
Turns out I was born 20 years too early.


Pressmen Suing New York Times On Arbitration
A second lawsuit has been filed over efforts by The New York Times to take its unions to arbitration over a new $450 million printing plant in Edison, N.J.
Last week, a Federal judge ordered the New York Mailers Union Local 6 to participate in arbitration to settle a dispute over staffing at the new plant, which was completed this year but has yet to open.
That union had been sued by The Times to draw it into arbitration, which is specified in an agreement between the union and the company as the means of resolving disputes.
The Times is seeking concessions from several unions to reduce staffing at the plant.


Ted and Joe, 1941: September 4


Prayers for Independence


Winning on Last Play Not New to Giants
Don't make Super Bowl reservations yet because the Giants still have 15 regular-season games to play.
But their performance Monday night in a last-play, 16-14 victory over the San Francisco 49ers certainly spoke well for their chances to repeat.
Today, after watching tapes of the game, Ray Handley seemed happy with the outcome of his first game as the head coach of the Giants.


Jimmy Connors Show: The Rage of the Open
Late in Jimmy Connors's marathon match with Aaron Krickstein on Monday, Connors broke through the invisible wall between athlete-actor and television audience.
He looked directly into a courtside camera and proclaimed: "This is what they come for. This is what they want."
The man knows his audience.
The 39-year-old Nasty Boy-turned-Master Thespian is a consummate stage and TV star who has transfixed viewers with two five-set victories in the last week.


Market Place; Chemical Waste's Regulatory Woes
LIVE by regulations, die by regulations.
That may be the underlying story at Chemical Waste Management Inc., which has been trading at about a point higher than its 52-week low of $16.75 in the last few weeks, although some analysts see a recovery in the long term.
Like much of the environmental industry, the company is a creature of laws and regulations enacted to protect the environment.
It takes industrial byproducts and materials classified as hazardous and either incinerates them or treats them and buries them in landfills.


Gerald Jacobs Is Dead; Tea Executive Was 71
Gerald Jacobs, a New York businessman and investor, died of a massive heart attack on Saturday a few blocks from his Manhattan office in a taxi en route to Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.
In 1949, Mr.
Jacobs, known as Jerry, founded the Boston Tea Company, which he still owned, to manufacture flavored and specialty teas.


A Software Leader To Buy Pansophic
Computer Associates International Inc., the world's largest publisher of mainframe software, said yesterday that it had reached a tentative agreement to purchase Pansophic Systems Inc., a publisher of systems software for large computers, in a deal valued at $283 million, or $16.15 a share.


Alfonso Garcia Robles Dies at 80; Shared Nobel for Atom Arms Ban
Alfonso Garcia Robles, a former Mexican Foreign Minister who shared the 1982 Nobel Peace Prize for promoting disarmament, died late Monday in Mexico City.
He was 80 years old.
The Mexican Foreign Ministry said his death was the result of kidney failure.


Japanese Cars Stronger In Weak U.S. Economy
Japan's auto companies are emerging from the recession in the United States with a far bigger slice of that market than they had two years ago, but the political problems from their success in the United States have persisted.
In the first six months of this year, Japanese companies supplied just less than 30 percent of all the passenger cars sold in the United States -- an increase of more than four percentage points in market share since 1989.


Rome Journal; A Poisoned Season: Dead Dolphins, Abused Pups
For most of the last month, when people fled the cities and mass vacations stilled the fizz of urban life, Italy's silly season turned as usual to tales of animal woe -- pet puppies abandoned by beach-bound owners, rats proliferating below the streets.
This year, though, there was a far more somber note.


Though Jobless, a High-Level Apparatchik Sheds No Tears for His Party
Nikolai S. Portugalov was a member of the Soviet Communist Party for 40 of his 63 years, holding the rank of senior counselor in its once all-powerful Central Committee when the whole structure crashed in ruins last month after the failed coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
"I never thought I'd be out on the street and accused of being a member of a criminal organization," Mr.
Portugalov said in an interview today.
"But I'm not shedding any tears for the party."


Europe Plans Yugoslav Peace Talks
The European Community decided today to convene a Yugoslav peace conference here beginning on Saturday to try to find a solution to the many conflicts dividing that country.
The conference, with Lord Carrington of Britain as chairman, would try to begin a two-month arbitration process to give binding decisions on the ethnic and nationality divisions inflaming Yugoslavia.
Hans van den Broek, the Dutch Foreign Minister, who now holds the community's presidency, said after today's meeting of the 12 Foreign Ministers, that the leaders of Yugoslavia's six republics, as well as the federal government, had been invited to Saturday's gathering.


French Team Criticized
The way the French sports daily L'Equipe saw it, the French 400-meter relay team not only placed second to the American team in the world-record race in Tokyo last week, it also managed to disgrace itself by its cavalier conduct after the race.


When Meat Disappears, It's Waffles and Seaweed Graves Vandalized
Vandals have dug up the freshly buried corpse of Marshal Sergei F. Akhromeyev and stripped the officer of his uniform, Russian television reported today.
Marshal Akhromeyev, former Soviet armed forces Chief of Staff and personal military adviser to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, committed suicide after last month's failed coup, and was buried in Troyekurovskoye Cemetery here last week.


Massachusetts Says New Art Museum Must Help Pay Costs
Unless substantial private money is found to replace state funds, the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art, the dream museum that would showcase large-scale collections of 20th-century art in North Adams, Mass., will not get off the drawing board.
That's the word from the office of Gov.
William F. Weld, a Republican whose administration inherited the state-backed project from the Democratic regime of former Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis.


Group W Pledges $1 Million For Radio Creative Award
HOPING to encourage further use of radio as an advertising medium, one of the country's largest owners of radio stations is pledging $1 million to start an annual national award for the most creative radio advertising.
Group W Radio, a division of the Westinghouse Broadcasting Company, has established what is being called the Radio Creative Fund.
Beginning next spring, the fund will award $50,000 to the creators of radio ads selected as the year's best by an advisory committee of radio and advertising agency executives.


Yankees Can't Awaken Their Offense As Texas Nightmare Goes On and On
The Yankees stay in a hotel that enables them to walk to Arlington Stadium in about 30 seconds to play the Rangers.
The walk in the muggy air seemed much longer after tonight's game.
Fifteen-game losing streaks can make each step tougher.
The Yankees have not won here for more than two years and the dismal streak continued tonight as the Rangers defeated them, 5-1.
Arlington Stadium has been the Yankees' haunted house, always filled with just enough scary plays to turn them into losers night after night until the horror show has played for 15 nights.


Leigh Wade, Air Force General And Aviation Pioneer, Dies at 93
Leigh Wade, a pioneer aviator who became an Air Force major general, died Saturday in the Belvoir Woods Health Care Center at Fort Belvoir, Va.
He was 93 years old and lived in Washington.
General Wade entered the health care center last December.
His wife said he had recently been suffering from pneumonia.


Studios Courting Woody Allen
His movies do not make much money by Hollywood standards, and his demands for creative freedom, coming from anyone else, would be laughed out of town.
But Woody Allen is a film maker with cachet, and in an industry that fancies itself equal parts art and commerce, recent word that he might end his long relationship with Orion Pictures has set off maneuvering by other studios eager to sign him to a deal.
Mr.
Allen has made his films for Orion for a decade, and before that worked primarily with a team of industry executives, headed by Arthur Krim, who went on to found Orion.
Orion will release Mr.
Allen's newest picture, the recently completed "Shadows and Fog," sometime next year, and the film maker's latest contract calls for him to write and direct three more movies for Orion.


Safety of Queens Residents Finishes a Poor Second to Tennis
To the Editor:
Two Aug. 18 articles concerned Flushing, Queens: one reported that New York City is dropping plans to build a large apartment house and commercial complex called Flushing Center, the other that a preservationist group opposes plans to expand the site of the United States Open tennis tournament in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park (sports pages).


Nemiroff Memorial
A memorial service for Robert Nemiroff, the Broadway producer, is to be held on Friday at 1 P.M. at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, on 47th Street west of Broadway.
Among those scheduled to participate are Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, Ernestine Jackson, Delroy Lindo and the composer Judd Woldin.
Mr.
Nemiroff, a longtime champion of the works of Lorraine Hansberry, to whom he was married, died on July 18 at the age of 61.


BRIEFS
*
Anchor Bank, Myrtle Beach, S.C., has acquired the deposits and certain liabilities and assets of Hilton Head Bank and Trust Co., Myrtle Beach, from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. *
Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A., Italy's largest insurer, said it had reached an agreement in principle with the Continental Corporation, New York, to jointly underwrite non-life-insurance risks of Generali's multinational clients in North America.


Doctors Warned on Conflicts of Interest
The American Medical Association today warned doctors to be more alert to possible conflicts of interest when they refer patients to laboratories, clinics and other health-care businesses in which the doctors have invested.
But the association did not go so far as to say that doctors should altogether avoid sending patients to such businesses.
Nor did it recommend specific disciplinary measures for medical societies to take against doctors who violate the warning.


Verdict Is Guilty in Cheerleading Trial
After being portrayed by prosecutors as a venomous stage mother, a 37-year-old woman was convicted tonight of trying to hire someone to kill the mother of her daughter's chief rival in a cheerleading competition,
The woman, Wanda Webb Holloway, a suburban homemaker who played the organ at her neighborhood church, was found guilty on charges of solicitation of murder by a jury that spent nearly six hours deliberating her fate.


OTHER SCENES FROM A REVOLUTION
APPARATCHIK: "I never thought I'd be out on the street and accused of being a member of a criminal organization," Mr.
Portugalov said.
"But I'm not shedding any tears for the party."
He said he could not even remember his party card number, or think why he should ven try.
Mr.
Gorbachev had already seen to it two years ago that the party card had stopped being a coveted badge of privilege, entitling its owner to supplies of food, clothing and housing not available to ordinary mortals.
Page A13.


BRITON, IN CHINA, CALLS TIES NORMAL
Prime Minister John Major of Britain said today that relations between Britain and China were generally back to normal, but he also emphasized that in two days of talks with Chinese leaders he had pressed for improvements on human rights.
While the focus of his trip was to discuss Hong Kong matters, Mr.
Major also sought the release of a number of political prisoners.
When he raised the topic of human rights, however, he seemed to receive a mild rebuke from Prime Minister Li Peng.


SOVIET TURMOIL: Moscow Memo; The Old Order, Like Its Idols, Is Toppled, but the Victors Find Words of Bereavement
Revolutions are all about fallen symbols and collapsed order.
And however great the relief, there is an inherent grief in any death.
On a lawn across from Gorky Park, a cluster of massive statues lie broken and scattered under a sign identifying these as "sculptures of the servants of the totalitarian regime."


Forstmann Little in Deal For a Share of Whittle
Forstmann Little &amp; Company has signed an initial agreement to invest $350 million for a one-third interest in Whittle Communications, the media company that was founded by Christopher Whittle.
The investment would reduce the stakes in Whittle now held by Time Warner Inc., Associated Newspapers of London, Mr.
Whittle and 60 Whittle executives.


People
*
Jed Bernstein, 36, and Monty Kiernan, 41, senior vice presidents and management directors at Ally &amp; Gargano, New York, have been appointed to the newly created positions of co-directors of new-business development. *
Joie Davidow, founder, executive publisher and editor in chief of L.A.
Style magazine, which was acquired by the American Express Publishing Company in 1988, announced yesterday that she would resign after producing the magazine's December issue.


Amid Crisis, Soviet Leaders Devote Prime Time to Television
The two leading figures in the political upheaval in the Soviet Union, Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin, have both decided to take a considerable amount of time in recent days away from the events transforming their country to give interviews to American television journalists.
Both appeared in interviews on the Cable News Network, and both are now scheduled to take part in an ambitious two-way interview program with a large group of Americans in a special broadcast tentatively scheduled for 11:30 Eastern time tonight on ABC.


Syntex in Pact With Theratech
Syntex U.S.A.
Inc., a subsidiary of the Syntex Corporation, said it had entered into a collaborative agreement with Theratech Inc. for the development and manufacture of new pharmaceutical products.
As part of the pact, Syntex will acquire an equity position in Theratech, a company based in Salt Lake City that specializes in skin patches and other controlled-release systems for administering drugs.


Lutherans Vote Abortion Stance, Seeking New Language in Debate
In a statement intended to "get beyond" the current polarization of the abortion debate, the 5.2 million-member Evangelical Lutheran Church in America said yesterday that abortion could be a morally responsible choice in a limited number of cases.
Approved 905 to 70 by the denomination's Churchwide Assembly, the church's first statement on abortion acknowledged that the church was deeply divided over the issue.


Gorbachev and Yeltsin, Tense Allies, Push Union Plan
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian federated republic acknowledged differences today but joined together in urging the adoption of a new governing structure for the Soviet Union, based on the resurgent power of its constituent republics.
Speaking before the national Congress, the two leaders demonstrated once again that their old bitter rivalry has given way to a tense alliance that could be the key to the new shape and composition of the Soviet Union.


Exiled General Urges the Lebanese to Resist
Starting a new era of opposition in exile, Michel Aoun, the renegade Christian general who was spirited to asylum in France last week, called on the Lebanese today to reject the Government of President Elias Hrawi and vowed to liberate the country and regain its lost sovereignty.
The general's statement was made in a letter published by Beirut's leading newspaper, An Nahar.
"From today until liberation, my hand is stretched out to every one," he said.
"What is important now is regaining sovereignty and guaranteeing freedom of expression."


Industry Survey Shows Solid Growth in August
Helped by a surge in new orders, the nation's manufacturing economy expanded solidly in August, according to a monthly survey by the nation's purchasing managers.
It was the third consecutive monthly expansion and economists saw it as another sign that the nation's economic recovery was under way at a steady, albeit gradual pace.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said yesterday that its monthly index of business activity edged up to 54.8 percent, from 51.8 percent in July.
The index, compiled from interviews with purchasing officers at more than 300 industrial companies across the country, was at 50.9 percent in June.
Before that, the survey had indicated a decline in the manufacturing economy for more than a year.


Dow Plummets 25.93 to Finish at 3,017.67
Stock prices fell yesterday amid persistent concerns about the pace of the nation's economic recovery and the impact of computerized trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 25.93 points, to 3,017.67, the lowest reading since news of the failure of the coup in the Soviet Union sent stocks soaring two weeks ago.


60-Minute Gourmet
MENTION the word paprika and most people will think of Hungarian cooking.
While the Hungarians are indeed extraordinarily fond of paprika -- it shows up in their goulashes, soups, white sauces and countless other dishes -- this potent spice does not come from that country.
Paprika, both the hot and milder versions, is derived from a type of chili pepper that is native to South America.
It is a distant cousin to the cayenne and red chili peppers.
When I think of this pungent, mildly hot spice, pork comes to mind.
The dish here could be considered Hungarian in inspiration, although the sauce is considerably lighter than most Hungarian sauces I have tasted.


Visa U.S.A. Seeks Plus System
Visa U.S.A. is seeking to buy Plus System Inc., one of the largest networks of automated teller machines, a Visa spokesman confirmed yesterday.
The San Francisco-based credit-card giant bought a third of Plus System, based in Denver, in 1987.
The $3.5 million purchase gave Visa the option to buy the teller-machine network outright.


Wheat Makes Small Gains As Corn and Soybeans Fall
Stirrings in the export market sent wheat futures prices a little higher on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday, but corn and soybeans edged lower.
Wheat traders said the market got a lift from rumors that a deal with China was imminent, involving two million tons of grain under the Federal export-bonus program.


Philippines And Banks Revise Debt
The Philippines and a committee of bankers led by Manufacturers Hanover have agreed on a plan to reorganize nearly $5 billion of loans.
The agreement, reached Friday, pushed prices of Philippine debt to about 58 cents on the dollar yesterday, from 52 cents on Friday.


Motorman's Case Reflects City's Horror, Experts Say
The grand jury indictment of Robert E. Ray on second-degree murder charges was a predictable reflection of the horror across New York City at the conduct of the subway motorman and the deaths and injuries underground, legal experts said yesterday.
Though the police originally charged Mr.
Ray with the less-serious crimes of manslaughter, his own descriptions to the authorities of his drinking, nodding off at the controls of the speeding train and quietly drinking beer as the rescue went on around him magnified the case against him, the experts said.


In New Position, Johnson Does Right Thing
Howard Johnson became the Mets' right fielder of the present and most likely the future last night.
He was an instant hit, especially the instant he doubled home the first run of a three-run outburst in the first inning and the instant he singled across the first run of a three-run flurry in the fifth.
The Mets' 6-1 victory over the Houston Astros was significant not for the result -- victories and losses are meaningless in Mets World these days.
But some of the ingredients of the game were notable.


Eating Well
RETURN with me to the fateful summer of 1989 and Wednesday, Sept. 13.
Whatever big news was on the front page of The New York Times was dimmed for some devoted cooks by news inside.


Operation Rescue Condemns Death Threats
To the Editor:
In response to Anna Quindlen's Aug. 10 column ("Hidden Agendas"), it must be emphasized that Operation Rescue has publicly condemned the alleged death threats directed toward Federal Judge Patrick F. Kelly.
Such action is totally inconsistent with Operation Rescue's commitment to peaceful nonviolent intervention on behalf of preborn children.


R. R. Donnelley Picks New Division Officers
R.
R.
Donnelley &amp; Sons Company, the Chicago-based printing concern, announced top management changes yesterday for its magazine and telecommunications divisions.
John S. Oberhill, 49 years old, president of the magazine group, will become president of the telecommunications group on Oct. 1.
He will succeed Ronald K. Vickrey, 55, who is retiring.


Schedule, Once Connors's Friend, May Be What Finally Stops Him
Jimmy Connors showed up late for his practice session yesterday afternoon at the National Tennis Center.
It was a wonder he bothered at all.
The undisputed star of the United States Open would not be playing his quarterfinal match against Paul Haarhuis until tomorrow, three days after his previous, five-set miracle against Aaron Krickstein.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Aug. 24 about the job outlook in the service sector misstated actions by the Cigna Corporation.
Cigna did not cut thousands of jobs when it began to phase out its auto insurance business; employees were transferred to other parts of the company.


In Queens District, Visions of Future Races
While five candidates in District 21 in Queens try to woo voters in the City Council race, another political campaign is under way in the district.
In Jackson Heights, Corona, Elmhurst and East Elmhurst, Hispanic leaders have begun courting people like Luis Santos, who cannot vote in this election because they are not American citizens.
"I want to be from here and from there," Mr.
Santos, a 61-year-old janitor who came to the United States from the Dominican Republic 30 years ago, said recently.
For those who tried to assure that District 21's boundaries encompassed a substantial Hispanic majority, the prize is not this election but future ones.
Hispanics make up 55 percent of the 137,931 residents in District 21, which is often the first stop for many immigrants.
Because many of the district's Hispanic residents are recent immigrants from South American and Caribbean countries, they make up only a quarter of the registered voters.


Dolphins' Hill Is Traded For Cards' No. 1 Pick
The Miami Dolphins traded wide receiver RANDAL HILL, their first-round draft pick, to Phoenix yesterday for the Cardinals' top selection in next year's college draft.


Corrections
A brief article by Reuters in Business Day yesterday about an acquisition by a unit of Daimler-Benz misidentified the owner of the operations being acquired.
It is the Diebold Group Inc., international management consultants in Bedford Hills, N.Y., not Diebold Inc., in Canton, Ohio.
The two companies are not related.


Donald J. Chipman, Businessman, 58
Donald J. Chipman, a New York businessman and investor, died on Monday at New York Hospital.
He was 58 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, family members said.


Sun to Enter Race to Offer Software
Sun Microsystems Inc. is beginning an attempt to become a major supplier of operating system software for computers, putting it into direct competition with Microsoft and a new joint venture of Apple and I.B.M.
Sun will announce on Wednesday that it is developing a version of its operating system, which is the basic set of commands for controlling computers, that will run on personal computers using microprocessors made by the Intel Corporation.
Sun's operating system now runs only on machines that use Sun's Sparc microprocessor.
Such machines are mainly Sun's own work stations.


Political Memo; Undaunted by Doubters, Wilder Ponders '92
A call for budget cuts and fiscal responsibility is probably not the most compelling message for the more liberal voters of the Democratic Presidential primaries.
And a first-term Governor only 20 months into his term is probably not the strongest contender for his party's Presidential nomination, some analysts would argue.


Goodyear Tire To Raise Prices
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said today that it would raise prices on its tires from 4 percent to 8 percent.
The increase, effective Oct. 1, was forced by increased costs for salaries, wages, benefits and operations, Gene Culler, an executive vice president, said in a statement.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Pima County, Ariz., is offering $30 million in tax anticipation notes due on July 29, 1992, through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The tax-exempt issue has a 5 percent coupon that is priced to yield 4.5 percent and is rated MIG-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and SP-1+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
COMMON STOCK


NEWS SUMMARY
Soviet Turmoil A12-17
Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin acknowledged differences but joined together in urging the adoption of a new governing structure for the Soviet Union, based on the resurgent power of its republics.Page A1
Soviet leaders devote prime time to television A17
Apparatchiks face unemployment.
But one former member of the powerful Central Committee who is out of work says that it was inevitable, and that the Communist Party was fading rapidly.
A13
Victors find words of bereavement for old order and its idols A13
Leningrad has been doing business independent of Moscow to a degree unforeseen even a year ago.
It has officials roaming the Soviet Union to make barter deals for food and a steady supply of raw materials.
A1
Azerbaijanis are enjoying the drama of all the political tumult, even if they know not to take everything at face value.
Particularly entertaining has been the showmanship of a leader performing for his political life.
A16
Lithuania's defense minister has nonviolent strategy A12  International A3-10
Israel will request $10 billion in housing loan guarantees from the U.S., it said.
The move could force the Administration to choose between its hope to get the Israelis to a peace conference and its desire to tie any extra aid to a freeze on housing in the occupied territories.
A3
Saudi Arabia has been storing oil at an increased rate and signaling its determination to keep worldwide supplies plentiful and prices down, as Soviet production falls.
D1
Iraq law allows opposition groups A6
Exiled general urges Lebanese to resist A7 Relations between Britain and China are generally back to normal, Prime Minister Major said, but he also emphasized that in talks with Chinese leaders he had pressed for improvements on human rights.
A5
A Yugoslav peace conference will be convened by the European Community to try to find a solution to the many conflicts dividing that country, the community announced.
A3
Communists in Spain roiled over calls to disband A10
Rome Journal: A poisoned season with dead dolphins A4  National A18-21, B7
A fire killed 25 people and injured 40 at a chicken processing plant in Hamlet, N.C., officials said.
The plant turned into an inferno in which panicked workers were trapped by blocked or locked doors, witnesses said.
A1
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia, the first black American to be elected Governor, is considering a run for the Presidency.
He would bring to the race a compelling life story, clear star appeal and sharp political elbows.
A1
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California said he was dropping his bid for the Senate to open an exploratory candidacy for President.
He said he wanted to serve as the voice for the disaffected, and would accept no contribution larger than $100.
A20
Study calls for more TV time for '92 candidates A20 Thomas backers air ad critical of three Senators A18
Washington journal: Neighborhood builds on its rubble A18
The S.E.C. is investigating whether the improper bids for Treasury securities submitted by Salomon Brothers were part of a broader effort by a group of investment houses to corner the bond market, its chairman said.
D1
A 37-year-old woman was convicted of plotting to kill the mother of her daughter's chief rival in a cheerleading competition in Texas.
A18
A Lutheran position on abortion was adopted by the Lutheran Church, which said that abortion could be a morally responsible choice in a limited number of cases.
A20
Doctors are warned on conflicts of interest B7  Regional B1-6
New York City's shelter system for homeless families has become so livable that hundreds of families who could stay elsewhere are flocking to shelters so they can move to the top of the list for permanent subsidized housing, city officials say.
A1
The chief homeless policy adviser of New York City resigned.
She said that the city's programs needed to be rethought to include a range of social services to prevent people from becoming homeless.
B2 The motorman whose train derailed, killing five people, was indicted for murder, a more serious charge than the manslaughter counts he was arrested for after the crash.
B1
Motorman's case reflects city's horror, experts say B4
Driver injures four girls in Rockaways and flees B6
Natural gas buildup blamed for Brooklyn blast B3 Voter registration was the priority of some Hispanic political leaders in Queens's District 21 this campaign season.
They hope that their efforts will pay off in future elections, if not the present one.
B1
Welfare reform is championed in New Jersey by an unlikely source.
He is Wayne Bryant, the Democratic majority leader of the State Assembly and the state's highest-ranking black legislator.
B1
A popular Connecticut dairy store, Stew Leonard's in Norwalk, is beloved in a way that few stores are.
An announcement of an I.R.S. investigation of the store was greeted by pure scorn by many residents.
B1
Bridgeport starts appeal in bankruptcy case B5
Pressmen union sues Times on arbitration B6
Business Digest D1  The Living Section
Food
The "new" Fannie Farmer C1
Bensonhursts's zucchini glut C1
A Rosh ha-Shanah table C6
Wine Talk C8
Living
Anniversaries, anniversaries C1  Health Page C11
High blood pressure may pose less of a danger for women Arts/Entertainment
Studios court Woody Allen C13
Massachusetts Museum of Art is in financial straits C13
Theater: New from Steppenwolf C13
Film: "Swan Lake: The Zone," from the Ukraine C13  Obituaries
Frank Capra died at 94.
The director made movies suffused with affectionate portrayals of the common man and the strengths and foibles of democracy.
B10
Susumu Ishii, Japanese gang boss B9
Alfonso Garcia Robles shared Nobel for atom arms ban B9  Education Page B8
District finds a way to end segregaton
Bush stresses schools as critics turn up the heat  Sports B11-18
Baseball: Mets set back Astros, 6-1 B13
Basketball: Ordeal over for young star B11
Columns: Anderson on the Giants B11
Claire Smith on Baseball B13
TV Sports: Rage of the OpenB15
Football: Handley pleased with first-game result B11
Tennis: Capriati beats Sabatini in straight sets B11
U.S. Open builds to frenetic pace B15  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A22
Three tests of Soviet survival
For City Council from Queens
Robert B. Semple Jr.: Tennis


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Abington Bancorp, Abington, Mass., announced that Donald R. Eldridge had resigned as its president and chief executive and as chief executive and chairman of its Abington Savings Bank unit.
It also announced that James P. McDonough, president and chief operating officer of the savings bank, had been named to the additional positions of chief executive at the bank and president and chief executive of Abington Bancorp. *
Eyring Corp., Provo, Utah, a maker of flight and weapons systems simulators, named Gregory M. Patchen president and chief executive.


3 Baltic Nations Seek U.N. Seats
The three Baltic nations, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, applied for full membership in the United Nations today.
Diplomats said it was possible that they could be admitted in time to take part in the 46th General Assembly, which begins here on Sept. 17.


Jets' Rookie Linebacker Fills the Bill
After his performance in Sunday's 16-13 victory over Tampa Bay, Mo Lewis appears to be the strong player the Jets need to fill the strong-side linebacking spot.
The 6-foot-3-inch 240-pound Lewis, a third-round draft pick out of the University of Georgia, beat Joe Mott out of his starting job even before Mott was lost for the season with an injured knee.


Maverick Democrat Confronts Trenton's Welfare Rules
At the age of 43, Wayne R. Bryant is a senior partner in a thriving law firm with a Fortune 500 client roster, and he owns a major piece of a glistening new office tower in the town of Lawnside, where his family settled in the 1780's.
He is wealthy, patrician and influential: Just the sort of man who would have no use for the welfare system.
And Mr.
Bryant clearly does not.
"It's cradle-to-grave protection from responsibility," he says as he noses a big Lincoln through the mean streets of Camden, the state's poorest city, where 70 percent of the 87,000 residents, mostly black and Hispanic, receive some form of public assistance.


Haarhuis Says He's Surprised
Paul Haarhuis watched on television as Jimmy Connors played his epic match Monday night against Aaron Krickstein.
After two sets, Haarhuis left his hotel room to eat dinner.
When he returned, the Connors-Krickstein extravaganza was in a deciding fifth-set tie breaker.


Arbitrator Sends Stevens To Devils for Shanahan
Not a single puck has been dropped yet, but the Devils are already big winners in the National Hockey League as a result of an arbitrator's decision.
Judge Edward Houston sent shock waves through the hockey world yesterday by awarding Scott Stevens to the Devils as compensation from St.
Louis for the loss of Brendan Shanahan, who had signed with the Blues as a free agent.


Bridgeport Starts Appeal in Bankruptcy Case
Bridgeport renewed efforts today to resolve its troubled finances in bankruptcy court, appealing a Federal judge's decision that it did not qualify for bankruptcy protection.
The judge, Alan H. W. Shiff of Federal Bankruptcy Court here, ruled on Aug. 1 that Bridgeport was not insolvent, a requirement under Chapter 9 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, because a $27 million cash reserve more than covered a projected $16 million budget deficit.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:  I was recently at the City University's Graduate Center in midtown Manhattan.
Heading for the elevator I paused to hold a door open for a family: a mother carrying a toddler on her shoulders and her young son, who was pushing a stroller that contained his little sister.
They all seemed in very high spirits.
When I heard mother say to toddler, "I bet you never rode on a doctor's shoulders before!" it occurred to me that she had probably just received her Ph.D.
They went on, I followed and together we waited for the elevator.
After a while, the big brother turned to his mother and asked where they were going.


Wide Bartering Keeps Leningrad Going
For Leningrad's city council, where feeding the city and getting raw materials for its sputtering industries are top priorities, barter has been developed to a degree unforeseen even a year ago.
With the agreement of Leningrad's high-tech military-industrial concerns, Leningrad's city officials have been roaming the Soviet Union making barter deals for food and a steady supply of raw materials with various republics and locales.
For instance, the officials can provide a far-off Central Asian republic with a few thousand television sets made in Leningrad for the equivalent value in cotton or food.
Losing the Old Suppliers
Because of its role as a center for military-related industry, Leningrad for years took more from the rest of the country in raw materials and agricultural produce than it gave back in consumer electronics, refrigerators or other manufactured goods.
The exchange was mediated in Moscow, through Gosnab, one of the ministries at the heart of the old command-and-control economy.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the history of the Baltic republics referred incorrectly to the Estonian who led his country intermittently from 1918 to 1940.
He was Konstantin Pats.


Thomas Denies Feud
ISIAH THOMAS said that if he is not invited to the 1992 Olympics, he will not blame MICHAEL JORDAN.


Books of The Times; Shaping Foreign Policy During the Civil War
William Henry Seward Lincoln's Right Hand By John M. Taylor Illustrated. 340 pages.
HarperCollins. $25.


Suspension Not Feared By Notre Dame's Mirer
As Rick Mirer continued to satisfy an unspecified punishment for breaking Notre Dame football team rules, the quarterback said he had not feared that his arrest last weekend for public intoxication and disorderly conduct would lead to a suspension.
"In my mind, I was not guilty," Mirer said this afternoon.
"I'll go to my grave telling you that. I wasn't worried about missing a game. I didn't think I had that to fear."


SOVIET TURMOIL: Soviet Notebook; When Meat Disappears, It's Waffles and Seaweed
The fabled long lines for food were not to be found early tonight at the Gastronom Shop No. 1 on Tverskaya Street.
The reason was that the meat counter was selling waffles instead, and for a price that few Muscovites could afford.
"I've never seen waffles here before," said Nadia Papkova, a 39-year-old office worker.
"I came here for meat for my dog."


District Finds Way to End Segregation and Restore Neighborhood Schools
Arguing that housing segregation was the cause of segregated schools, the Palm Beach County public school system has devised a plan to integrate housing in the county, a move that school officials hope will mean that children can again attend neighborhood schools.
The district has been under pressure from the Federal Government to improve the integration of its schools, and its plan to encourage each housing development and community within its borders to attract black and white families is the first of its kind and may become a model for other districts struggling to find an alternative to busing, education experts say.


25 Die, Many Reported Trapped, As Blaze Engulfs Carolina Plant
Twenty- five people were killed and 40 were injured early today as a fire believed to have started near huge grease-filled vats swept through a chicken-processing plant here.
Many of the dead were found at exits from the plant, stuck in poses of escape.
The town's fire chief also said some bodies were found in a freezer, where workers had apparently fled to avoid the fire.


Jurors Indict Motorman For Murder
The subway motorman whose Manhattan train derailed last week, killing five people, was indicted yesterday on murder charges, a more serious charge than the manslaughter counts on which he was arrested after the crash.
A Manhattan grand jury approved charges that the motorman, Robert E. Ray, had not been simply reckless, the standard for manslaughter, but had exhibited "depraved indifference" to human life.
The authorities said he was drunk when he drove the Lexington Avenue express train.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday headed "Investments by 401(k) Plans," with an article about the safety of retirement plans, misstated the amounts invested in guaranteed investment contracts.
Figures were in billions of dollars, not millions.


About New York
The year was 1888, a time when Brooklyn was its own city crowing over a shimmering new bridge to Manhattan.
It was a time when young men with few resources, with scarcely a morsel of English, could make an honest living with a shoeshine brush and a box of polishes.
One of these was an orphan from Italy, Frank Caramanica.
Buffing his way through the law and government offices that honeycomb Court Street downtown, he was able within a few years to establish a stand -- three chairs shaded by an awning -- right outside Borough Hall.


Beef Council Nearing End of Agency Search
This week, the Beef Industry Council, Chicago, will finish interviewing eight agencies vying for its $25 million-plus advertising account, advertising executives familiar with the review said yesterday.
They said finalists are expected to be chosen by the end of next week.
The executives listed the eight agencies as: the incumbent, Ketchum Advertising, San Francisco; BBDO, Chicago and New York; Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago; the Leo Burnett Company, Chicago; DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago; GSD &amp; M Advertising, Austin, Tex., and McCann-Erickson, San Francisco.


High Blood Pressure May Pose Less of a Danger for Women
RESEARCHERS are adding high blood pressure to alcoholism, heart disease and other conditions that may affect women and men differently.
They say there is evidence to suggest that high blood pressure is less dangerous for women than for men.
Furthermore, treatments that work for men may be ineffective or even harmful for women if not used judiciously.


Driver Injures Four Girls in Rockaways and Flees
A car hit four girls on Monday in Edgemere, Queens, leaving an 11-year-old in critical condition and the others, ranging in age from 3 to 15, in serious condition, the authorities said yesterday.
The police said that witnesses had told them that the driver, a white woman, had moved out of her car after the accident, but that seeing a crowd made up mostly of black people gathering around her, she re-entered her car and drove off.
A motorist saw a commotion and chased the woman's car about 20 blocks, forced her to stop and took her keys until the police arrived and arrested her, the police said.


Frank Capra, Whose Films Helped America Keep Faith in Itself, Is Dead at 94
Frank Capra, the Academy Award- winning director whose movies were suffused with affectionate portrayals of the common man and the strengths and foibles of American democracy, died yesterday at his home.
He was 94 years old and lived in La Quinta, Calif., a suburb of Palm Springs.
He died in his sleep, said his son Tom, executive producer of NBC's "Today" show in New York.


Natural Gas Buildup Blamed for Brooklyn Blast
A buildup of natural gas probably caused the explosion and fire that killed three people and injured 31 in two Brooklyn apartment buildings on Monday, fire officials said yesterday.
For much of the day, rescue workers searched the rubble for a man they believed to be missing, but by evening they had halted the search, and officials said that everyone was accounted for.


Operation Rescue Condemns Death Threats; Unborn Troops
To the Editor:
The protesters at the Wichita, Kan., anti-abortion rally whose signs proclaimed "Support Our Unborn Troops" (news article, Aug. 26) were presumably unaware that their message contained a near-brilliant distillation of something many of us have been saying for years about the anti-choice movement: Make sure those fetuses are carried to term so that we can send them off to become cannon fodder.
EILEEN B. HERSHENOV New York, Aug. 26, 1991


Capriati Stuns Sabatini and Goes to Semifinals
The defending United States Open champion, Gabriela Sabatini, pushed and pinned to the baseline like a prize butterfly in Jennifer Capriati's ever-expanding tennis scrapbook, was stripped of her only Grand Slam title last night in a 6-3, 7-6 (7-1) upset dealt out by a 15-year-old who played with a wisdom beyond her years.
"As you go on, you get wiser,' said seventh-seeded Capriati, who has now deposed a defending Wimbledon champion, Martina Navratilova, and the reigning Open champion, Sabatini, in dizzy succession. "To win against the top players, you've got to think a little more out there,'


Operation Rescue Condemns Death Threats; Oppressed by Zealots
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen makes a valid point in "Hidden Agendas" (column, Aug. 10), in which she states that the real intention of the anti-abortion demonstrators is to maintain what they consider the proper subservient role of women in society.
Although the anti-choice groups do want to curtail the changing roles open to women, their major motivation is really ancient.


Review/Theater; Adapting an Anne Tyler Novel
If the sheer emotional weight of family, with all its burdens of love and pain and responsibility and memory, could somehow be represented by a single stage set, it could certainly look like Kevin Rigdon's design for "Earthly Possessions," the new play Frank Galati has adapted from Anne Tyler's novel for the Steppenwolf Theater Company.
Mr.
Rigdon has taken the possessions of the title -- the household furnishings of Ms.
Tyler's heroine, Charlotte Emory of Clarion, Md. -- and piled them high on either side of the stage.
The furnishings are clunky lamps, overstuffed chairs, tables, console radios and cabinets of the most comforting sort, the ubiquitous garage-sale totems of every American neighborhood, but Mr.
Rigdon has subverted their familiarity by painting them a disconcerting coal-black.
And rising above the stage, towering clear to heaven, is a wall of equally homey front doors and back doors and screens and shutters, all just as black, all just as ambivalent in effect.
Is the American family a warm place to come home to, Mr.
Rigdon's monumental collage seems to ask, or is it a dark tomb that must at all costs be escaped?


Food Notes
R &amp; R for Red Snapper
American red snapper from the Gulf of Mexico is off the menu until Jan. 1.
The National Marine Fisheries Service, an agency of the Department of Commerce, announced that the 1991 quota of 2.04 million pounds of fish, set as a conservation measure, was reached on Aug. 23.
This year's quota was only about two-thirds of last year's.


A Young Basketball Star Puts Ordeal Behind Him
It is a familiar scene played out in New York neighborhoods near summer's end.
The city's finest basketball players leave their asphalt playgrounds and head for the Division I universities of their choice, fueled by four-year scholarships and the vision of major-college stardom.
Wilfred Kirkaldy took part in this ritual a little over a week ago when he loaded his belongings into a van and embarked on a 10-hour journey from his Brooklyn apartment to a West Virginia University dormitory, leaving behind his family, his neighborhood and his courts.


For City Council From Queens
This year's City Council primary election in Queens has sparked a number of spirited contests, providing voters at least a few chances to raise the caliber of their representation.
Here are our recommendations among Democratic candidates in districts where the Sept. 12 winner of the Democratic primary is virtually guaranteed election.
19th District:
Anthony Avella Jr., a former aide to Mayors Edward Koch and David Dinkins, would bring a solid knowledge of city government to the Council and a refreshing independence that his chief opponent, Lawrence Gresser Jr., sorely lacks.
Mr.
Gresser, a real estate developer and hand-picked choice of the Democratic organization, is likely to favor its need over the district's.


Debt Revamping If Bottlers Merge
Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. is considering refinancing some of the Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Group's high-yield debt if it acquires Johnston Coca-Cola, said Doug Scovanner, treasurer at Coca-Cola Enterprises.
Coca-Cola Enterprises on Friday offered to acquire Johnston Coca-Cola for $439 million in stock.
The company would assume Johnston's $1 billion debt.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
AD HOC COMMITTEE FOR REVIEW OF PROGRAM FOR AFRICA RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Washington Journal; Neighborhood Builds on Its Rubble
Two years ago, Ana Ventura and her family lived in squalor in a run-down apartment building in this city's Shaw neighborhood, trying to avoid the drug trafficking that occurred on every floor.
Today, Ms.
Ventura, along with the other tenants, is about to take ownership of the building, which has been cleaned up with the help of a city program and a local church.


Bridge
Each year thousands of players are allocated random partners by a pairing desk at a tournament or by a club manager.
One such pairing two years ago at Jourdan's Club, in Boca Raton, Fla., may have set a remarkable record.
Julius Smith and Alex Cohen, the "new" partnership, found they were really an old one: they had played together regularly during lunch hours at Tufts Dental School 56 years earlier.
After more than 40 years of dental practice for each, Smith in West Hartford, Conn., and Cohen in New York City, the old partnership was reborn.
They celebrated Smith's 80th birthday with a duplicate game.


New Campaigns
*
For the second year of an effort supporting Operation Exodus, which raises money for Soviet Jews resettling in Israel, the UJA-Federation is introducing a revamped campaign by Taylor-Gordon, Aarons &amp; Company, New York.
Several print advertisements focus on contributors who make statements like "Good economy, bad economy, if we don't help one another, who will?"


CHRONICLE
It's not often that the postal service elicits chuckles from the letter-writing public, but that may change with the issuance of a series of five 29-cent stamps depicting renowned comedians as seen through the eyes of AL HIRSCHFELD.


Israel Request Raises Issue of Settlements
Israeli officials said today that they planned to request $10 billion in housing loan guarantees from the Bush Administration later this week, a move that could force the Administration to choose between its desire to get the Israelis to attend peace talks and President Bush's longstanding desire to tie any extra aid to a freeze on Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
President Bush is said by aides to feel very strongly about the fact that, although the Israeli Foreign Minister, David Levy, signed a letter last Oct. 1 promising Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d that previous housing guarantees of $400 million would not be used to build new settlements in the occupied West Bank and Gaza strip, Israeli settlement activity there increased, financed by Israeli money instead.


Frank Capra Dies at 94


Communists in Spain Roiled By Calls of Some to Disband
The Spanish Communist Party, which managed to survive defeat in a civil war followed by almost four decades of rightist dictatorship and 16 years of democracy, has now been thrown into disarray by calls for its dissolution after the failed Soviet coup.
In recent days, several prominent Spanish Communists have argued that the party should be absorbed by the United Left coalition and, in the process, abandon its name and much of its dogma as a way of keeping alive a leftist option in Spain.


Real Estate Executive Likes Deal With NCNB
Guerrino Savio, president of SCI Real Estate Development Ltd., the United States arm of one of Italy's biggest developers, says he got a bargain on Friday when his company paid $120 million to the NCNB Corporation for 1.8 million square feet of office space in Texas, plus eight land parcels.
"The price was much, much lower than anything you could buy in Italy right now" in major commercial real estate markets, Mr.
Savio said.


Review/Film; Mysticism and Love Inside a Hammer and Sickle
Yuri Iliyenko's "Swan Lake: The Zone," which opens today at Film Forum 1, is a beautiful, dour Ukrainian film of both political and mystical import.
The story, told elliptically and with very little dialogue, is about a man who escapes from a prison camp and finds brief, brutal solace inside a battered tin monument by a highway.


Nomura Inquiry Reopened Amid Additional Findings
Amid new disclosures of possibly illegal stock market dealings, Japan's Finance Ministry has reopened an investigation of whether the Nomura Securities Company manipulated a stock on behalf of a well-known organized crime figure.
The new developments raise the prospect that the brokerage may face serious new penalties.
Government officials also say they suspect that Nomura, the world's largest brokerage, provided improper compensation for trading losses to more of its customers than it has disclosed so far.


Quotation of the Day
"Today you have a President. Tomorrow you may have another president. In any case, we are all one, side by side, and we shouldn't spit on one another. This is just my reaction to all of these doubts that have been cast upon my conduct." -- President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ A1:6. ]


Taming Bensonhurst's Annual Zucchini Glut
A BUMPER crop of zucchini isn't something you'd expect in Bensonhurst.
The Brooklyn asphalt that stretches from 17th Avenue to Avenue U, between the water and 60th Street, appears to be sown only with row upon row of brick and stone houses.
But just as most houses in this Italian neighborhood have a stoop and a well-polished car out front, most also have a zucchini patch behind.
In late summer, harvesters roam the blocks on a primordial neighborly mission: giving away the squash.
They are unswayed by gushing fire-hydrants, the skateboarders that career by them, the hard rock that booms from the cars that cruise the blocks or by any other evidence of modern urban life.
Through it all, they carry baskets of blossoms and zucchini on their arms and the fullness of tradition in their hearts.


Treasury Securities Gain Slightly
Prices of Treasury securities inched higher and interest rates fell a bit yesterday, despite a report showing that conditions in the manufacturing sector improved further in August.
Results of the monthly survey of the nation's purchasing managers showed that the manufacturing economy expanded for the third straight month in August.


Corrections
A picture on the first sports page on Saturday with an article about Mike Powell's record long jump was published in error.
It showed a subsequent jump by Powell at the meet; the record jump was shown only on the front page.


An American Passion: Who Did What When?
CHRISTIE McCOY is big on anniversaries; her second anniversary on the job was in June.
But the really important one is next week: the 150th anniversary of the tube.
Not the kind that used to glow inside radios in the pre-transistor days, not the kind in tires, but the kind that artists' paint and toothpaste and stick-to-you-forever glues ooze out of.
At the Tube Council of North America, which she represents, the anniversary is stop-the-presses, squeeze-it-all-out-at-once news.
This is why she has been trying to eke out every last bit of attention for tubes ("older than Spam," she said, enviously recalling the hoopla for the 50th anniversary of processed luncheon meat, in 1987).
This is also why she arranged a briefing featuring people she called "industry experts and historians." This is why she is doing her best to stake John Goffe Rand's claim to fame.
Rand, a largely forgotten 19th-century artist (Ms. McCoy considers him "the first Impressionist"), patented the squeezable tube.


Sports of The Times; No Tolls On Handley's Bridge, Yet
IN time, the test of the Giants' transition to Ray Handley from Bill Parcells will occur in the Super Bowl XXVI playoffs, or if a losing streak develops.
But there are no tollbooths yet on the bridge to the rookie head coach from the best coach in the history of the franchise.
During the 16-14 victory over the 49ers on Monday night, Handley sprung a new starting quarterback in Jeff Hostetler, a few new plays, a few new formations, a few new coverages on defense.


Bystander Shot in Brooklyn
A 72-year-old Brooklyn woman leaving a grocery store was hit yesterday by a bullet intended for a young man who was also wounded in the shooting the police said.
The woman, Connie Braccia, was struck in the chest by the gunfire outside 790 13th Avenue in Bay Ridge at 3:30 P.M.
The wounded man, who was involved in the fight that led to the shooting, was hit in the stomach, the police said.l Both were in serious but stable condition last night.


The Day's Highlights
A Crucial Vote Nears
Gorbachev and Yeltsin in a Tense Tandem: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, togeter urged a national congress to adopt a new governing structure ceding greater powers to the republics.
A vote is expected today.
In a speech, Mr.
Yeltsin paid Mr.
Gorbachev a back-handed compliment by saying the Soviet President had emerged from last month's coup "a different man" who could now be trusted as a reformer.
Page A1.


McMullen Giving Up Best Seat in the House
When all is said and done, owners of baseball's two expansion teams are each expected to pay out at least $120 million each for expenses, including a $95 million sign-up fee, before one pitch is thrown.
In Baltimore, owners of the Orioles are trying to sell their team for a reported $200 million.


Wireless P.L.C. In Shifts at Top
Cable &amp; Wireless P.L.C. said today that it was reorganizing its top management and appointing a new chief executive at its Mercury Communications unit.


Lithuania's New Defense Minister: Young Man With a Nonviolent Strategy
In Lithuania, where no one has experience in running government agencies, it is perhaps not surprising that the Minister of Defense is a 31-year-old psychotherapist dedicated to nonviolent resistance.
The Minister, Audrius Butkevicius, is charged with defending Lithuania at a moment of great uncertainty.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Nancy G. Wackstein, the new director of the Lenox Hill Neighborhood Association, misstated the association's annual budget.
It is $5 million, not $50 million.


Grand Met Unit
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.'s International Distillers and Vintners unit said it had established a wholly owned subsidiary in Hungary.
The new company, IDV Hungaria Ltd., will manage International Distillers' major brands in the local market.
IDV Hungaria has signed a distribution agreement with Hungary's largest wine company, Hungarovin.


BUSINESS DIGEST
MARKETS
The S.E.C. is investigating whether improper bond bids by Salomon were part of a broader effort by a group of investment houses to corner the bond market.
In a letter to Congress, the commission's chief, Richard C. Breeden, said it had issued more than 135 subpoenas and requests for information to determine whether Salomon acted alone in violating regulations.
He did not identify other firms suspected of manipulating bond prices.  [ Page D1. ]


Saudis Increasing Oil Storage
With Soviet oil production falling precipitously, Saudi Arabia has significantly increased its stocks of oil in storage to around 60 million barrels and is signaling its determination to keep worldwide supplies plentiful and prices down.
A senior official in the Persian Gulf oil industry, in a telephone interview today, confirmed a published report that the Saudis have been storing oil at the impressive rate of 400,000 to 500,000 barrels a day since July.
The report appeared in Petrostrategies, an oil newsletter published in Paris.
The publication, which is close to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, noted that Saudi Arabia would be going to the Geneva meeting of OPEC oil ministers this month "with some 50 to 60 million barrels of onshore and offshore oil stocks."  On Land and at Sea
Because Saudi Arabia has the oil stored both on land and in tankers at sea, the country is in an ideal position to replace immediately any supply shortfalls, particularly from the Soviet Union.
Most other oil-producing nations are operating at capacity and do not have ample stored supplies.


Study Calls for More TV Time for '92 Candidates
A Harvard study today called for presidential candidates and the television networks to agree to schedule substantial televised appearances by the candidates each Sunday in the fall 1992 campaign.
The study, issued by the Joan Shorenstein Barone Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy, called for two 90-minute debates between presidential candidates, and one such debate between vice presidential candidates.
It also urged five sets of 30-to40-minute interviews with Presidential candidates discussing the same issues with moderators and experts, and finally paired 15-to-30-minute addresses to the nation by the Presidential candidates on the Sunday before election day.


Salomon Inquiry Widened
The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission said today that his agency was investigating whether the improper bids for Treasury securities submitted by Salomon Brothers were part of a broader effort by a group of investment houses to corner the bond market.
In a letter sent to Congress today, the chairman, Richard C. Breeden, said the commission had issued more than 135 subpoenas and requests for information to determine whether Salomon acted alone in violating Government securities regulations or had worked with other bond-trading firms to drive up the price of bonds.
He did not identify any other firms.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.50
8.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.34
7.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.37
7.36
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.62
7.64
8.76
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.03
8.05
9.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.00
10.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.97
6.97
7.65
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


How to Make Medicaid Popular
The dire problems of the Medicaid program reflect the lack of middle-class support for domestic programs for the poor.
The solution -- becoming part of a universal health-care system in which the middle class has a stake -- can become a model of how to regain the public confidence necessary for further social advances.
Medicaid and Medicare were passed in 1965, at the height of Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society, to serve similar goals: extending health coverage to an underserved population, in Medicaid's case to poor people and for Medicare to all the elderly.


Three Tests of Soviet Survival
Can the Soviet Union survive?
Its political leaders are straining to construct a new political association of independent republics.
Great constitutional and human rights issues are at stake as delegates to a national congress pass on how to reshape their country.
But the ultimate answer to survival will be economic: whether what one leader calls the "corpse" of the Soviet economic system can be brought to life.
Yes, political issues are paramount and will ultimately be settled on political grounds.
And yes, the republics may eventually control their own economic affairs.
But if their economies are to survive, the new constitution will have to embrace economic cooperation.


A.T.&amp;T. Helps Conner, Koch
The gap between Dennis Conner and Bill Koch was narrowed slightly yesterday when A.T.&amp;T. chipped in with about $3 million to help sponsor the competing yachtsmen.
Part of the amount will help the America's Cup Organizing Committee put together the competition between Conner and Koch, which starts Jan. 14 in San Diego.
The two will also share in A.T.&amp;T.'s sponsorship.


World Bank Lives High on the Taxpayers
To the Editor:
Lance Taylor's letter (Aug. 5) criticizing World Bank policy toward third-world countries omitted some reasons the poverty tycoons at the World Bank deserve to be maligned.
One is the World Bank's serious consideration of private-sector loans as a major field for future activity.
The institution's most recent annual World Economic Development Report encourages a new focus on promoting private production and trade in addition to sale of state-owned enterprises -- a policy the United States, as the bank's largest stockholder, has long demanded.
As a part of President Bush's new world order, the Treasury recently attempted, but was stymied in its efforts, to cajole the World Bank into diverting 50 percent of its lending capacity to private-sector loans.
Nevertheless, Barber Conable, the lame-duck president of the institution, agreed to increase the tempo of loans made with the intention of "supporting" the private sector, as well as to consider diversion of World Bank resources, even though this would clearly violate its founding charter.


Wine Talk
FOR many New Yorkers, a brisk walk to the wine shop is a favorite fall exercise.
"My cave (pronounced CAHV)," they like to say, "is practically empty." Even when they live on the 18th floor and the cave is the hall closet.
Whether you keep your wine in a cave or a cahv or under the kitchen sink, fall is a traditional time to fill the empty spaces on the rack.
So here are some suggestions for European red wines (we'll look at American wines another time) with which you might fill them.


Laura Riding, 90; Poet and Founder Of New Criticism
Laura Riding Jackson, a poet, critic and co-founder with Robert Graves of various literary publishing ventures, died on Monday at the Humana Sebastian Hospital in Sebastian, Fla.
She was 90 years old and had lived in Florida since 1938.
She died of cardiac arrest, said Theodore Wilentz, a close friend.


Nationwide Insurance Shifting to Ketchum
The Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, Columbus, Ohio, has reassigned its national advertising account to Ketchum Advertising, Pittsburgh, from its agency of 28 years, Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York, effective in January.
The account will have billings of $11 million next year, a Nationwide spokesman said yesterday.
Leading National Advertisers, which tracks advertising spending, reports that Nationwide spent about $6 million in 1990.


Don't Look to Arizona As Health-Care Model
To the Editor:
"Late Starter in Medicaid, Arizona Shows the Way" (front page, Aug. 7) fails to mention that Arizona's health-care system for the indigent does not cover mental health care for adults.
Moreover, children and youths would still be denied coverage but for a recent Congressional mandate requiring this coverage in all states.


Book Notes
Autumn Leaves
Are publishers, desperate to revive sagging sales, putting too many eggs in the fall basket?


Yields Drop On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts fell in the week ended yesterday.
The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., that focuses on interest rates, said declining C.D. yields had nearly caught up with the last reduction in interest rates by the Federal Reserve Bank, but added that they might soon be caught in another round of reductions by the central bank.


Avent Headed for Italy
The agent for Milwaukee Bucks rookie ANTHONY AVENTsays his client will play in Italy next season because the National Basketball Assoication team cannot fit a contract for the 6-foot-10-inch forward under the salary cap.


Smallest Ever In Disk Drives
A small Colorado disk drive company said yesterday that it had begun shipments of the smallest hard disk drives, which are about the size of a deck of cards.


Value of Cold Remedies Challenged
MEDICATION is probably unnecessary for a young child sniffling from a common cold, a new study suggests.
Dr.
Nancy Hutton, a pediatrician at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and colleagues studied 96 children ranging in age from 6 months to 5 years old.
The children were randomly selected when their parents brought them to a walk-in clinic because of cold symptoms.
Only children with uncomplicated colds were selected.


Architects Conquer The Smear Problem
A smudged drawing is to an architect what a fallen cake is to a chef: a minor disaster.
To prevent smears, two architects, Cindy Coleman of Chicago and Sava Cvek of Boston, have designed a 16-inch ruler, or scale, and a 45-degree triangle with tiny retractable ball bearings.
When pressure is applied by a draftsman, the ball bearings retract, keeping the tool stable but raised one sixty-fourth of an inch above the paper, so that ink cannot run underneath the edges.
When a draftsman slides the tool across the paper, it is raised one thirty-second of an inch above the surface of the paper.


Rams Trade Pankey
The Los Angeles Rams traded tackle IRV PANKEY to the Indianapolis Colts yesterday for a third-round pick and an undisclosed lower-round choice in next year's N.F.L. draft.


Intermetco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Karachi Journal; A Hindu Romeo, a Muslim Juliet and Woe Aplenty
Zeba Bakhtiar, the angel-faced Pakistani star of the hit summer film "Henna," received her first set of reviews even before filming began.
They were death threats.
"I got some letters and phone calls, people saying they would kill me if I made the movie," the 24-year-old actress said.
"They said Muslim girls should not be appearing in films with Hindu actors. Lots of people warned me not to appear in the film, not to take the risk."


CHRONICLE
A man charged in the death of the daughter-in-law of MARLON BRANDO has pleaded not guilty to hit-and-run and drunken driving, the Associated Press reports.
The man, DENNIS ALBERTO VANEGAS, 34 years old, entered the plea on Tuesday.
Jiselle Honore Brando, 29, of Buena Park, Calif., was killed on June 2 on a freeway south of downtown Los Angeles.
She was the wife of MIKO BRANDO.


He Is the Camera That Captured Glamour: Images of Horst
HORST P. HORST was one of the early photographers who defined modern glamour -- a fleeting quality, surely, and one that changes from era to era.
But in a photograph by Horst, where the light turns skin into marble and chiffon into whipped cream, the glamour is timeless.
He began working at a time when big box cameras were mounted on huge tripods and models ran off with lion tamers, not guitarists.
Society seemed like something worth aspiring to, Hollywood stars were bigger than life and fashion had the seductive power of dreams.


KCS Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Top Management Is Appointed at Eaton
William E. Butler was promoted to chief executive of the Eaton Corporation yesterday.
He assumes the title from James R. Stover, who is also chairman.
Mr.
Stover will retire at the end of the year, when Mr.
Butler, who had been the chief operating officer, will also become chairman.
At that time, Mr.
Butler will relinquish the president's post.


Pop in Review
Don Bennett  Birdland
Though it might be hard to define New York jazz, it exists.
When outsiders come in, it is immediately clear that they haven't been working the same clubs, or listening to the same musicians, and that they come from a different environment.
Don Bennett, a pianist who played mainstream jazz at Birdland on Thursday night with a quartet, has recently moved to New York.
His show was full of blue ideas, underscored, and rumbling organlike tremolos, things that aren't usually heard here.


A Director of Research Is Named at Microsoft
The Microsoft Corporation yesterday appointed Richard Rashid, a professor of computer science at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, to the new position of director of research.
Mr.
Rashid, 39, is widely known for his work in designing advanced computer operating systems, including a project known as Mach, which has become the basis for the commercial operating systems used by Steven Jobs's Next Inc. and the Open Software Foundation.
Mr.
Rashid will report to Nathan Myhrvold, Microsoft's vice president of advanced technology and business development.


Tarpley Not Guilty On Driving Charge
There was testimony that he had been drinking, that he was going more than 60 miles an hour in a 35-mile-an-hour zone and that his car was weaving wildly as he sped along a Dallas street last March 30.
But after all the testimony was heard and weighed yesterday, a jury found Maverick forward ROY TARPLEY not guilty of drunken-driving charges.


Nebraska Senator Comes to Brink Of Democratic Bid for Presidency
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska edged closer to a race for the Democratic Presidential nomination today, saying he would formally announce his plans in late September but leaving little doubt among Democrats that he intended to plunge in.
Mr.
Kerrey's statement, issued this afternoon, came after two weeks of rising speculation about the Nebraska Democrat, a first-term Senator, a former Governor and a Medal of Honor winner who lost part of his leg in Vietnam.


Europe's Electronics Rescue Plan
European governments are stepping up efforts to rescue the Continent's beleaguered electronics industry.
They fear that further deterioration could leave Europe hopelessly behind Japan and the United States, not only in electronics but also in automobiles, aerospace and the many other industries that depend on electronic components.
In sharp contrast to Washington's hands-off approach to the United States' electronics industry, the European Community and several national governments are spending billions of dollars to buttress the Continent's computer and semiconductor manufacturers.


Gooden Out for Season and Major Surgery Is Possible
Dwight Gooden will not pitch again this season and the marquee right-hander for the Mets is facing the prospect of major surgery to repair his damaged right shoulder.
Gooden said the organization's medical consultants said that the surgery, if required, would not imperil his career, but there remains the very real chance that the brilliant right-hander with the astonishing 132-53 career record, the intimidating fastball and multimillion-dollar contract will never again be the same pitcher.


Handex Environmental Recovery reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Doctor to Rejoin Stanford Staff
A prominent female neurosurgeon who quit her post at the Stanford Medical School has decided to rejoin the faculty, explaining that she was encouraged by steps taken by the school to combat sexism and persuaded that further changes were "more apt to happen if I'm around than if I'm not."
The neurosurgeon, Dr.
Frances K. Conley, announced her resignation in June, charging that she had been subjected to 25 years of subtle sexism in her male-dominated specialty.
Her resignation prompted widespread discussion at Stanford and elsewhere about how women could be demeaned or ignored in the hierarchical world of academic medicine.


Money Fund Yields Are Mixed in Week
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the second consecutive week in the period that ended yesterday.
Tax-exempt money fund yields moved up in the week because of a combination of more supply and less demand, as investors shifted to the higher yields offered in longer-term investments.


Square Two Golf reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


James H. Fogelson, 48, Lawyer And Supporter of Jewish Causes
James H. Fogelson, a corporate lawyer based in Manhattan who was active in Jewish affairs, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 48 years old and lived in Manhattan.
One of his partners, Martin Lipton, said he died of lung cancer.


Rams Are Ramming on Defense
The Giants started preparing today for Sunday's game here against the Philadelphia Eagles.
Well, not exactly against the Eagles, but the Eagles' defense.
The opponent is the Los Angeles Rams, a team that in the past usually played well against the Giants and most other teams.
But last year, the Rams played poorly, took a 31-7 beating from the Giants and finished with a 5-11 record.


Company Jet With 12 Americans Reported Missing Over Malaysia
A small plane carrying 12 Americans, including four high-ranking oil executives of Conoco and their wives, was reported missing over Malaysia today.
The fate of the Grumman G-2 jet was unclear this evening as a rescue mission dispatched by the Malaysian Government renewed its search after dawn.
The aircraft is owned by Conoco's parent company, E. I. Du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company.


A Centerless Soviet Economy May Not Be So Bad, Western Experts Say
Demoralized by shoddy goods, chronic shortages and exploding inflation, the Soviet people have learned the hard way that they cannot live with central planning.
But with the center withering and negotiations for a new economic order stalled until lawmakers approve a transfer of power to the republics, the people are wondering whether they can live without it.
Stalin's empire builders locked the republics in a hostile economic embrace, pacifying the periphery with a flood of cheap resources and capital.
Now leaders face the formidable task of untangling the web without renting vital strands of commerce.


Westchester Teacher Given Different Duties After Trial
The Edgemont school district in central Westchester, stung by the notoriety of a murder trial involving one of its teachers, has assigned him to duties outside the classroom when school opens on Thursday.
Paul Solomon, a popular sixth-grade teacher and coach for 17 years, admitted in court earlier this year to having had an affair with Carolyn Warmus, another teacher, who was accused of the 1989 shooting death of Betty Jeanne Solomon, Mr.
Solomon's wife of 19 years.
A 'Mutual Agreement'
The trial ended in a hung jury after drawing national attention with Ms.
Warmus being described as obsessed with Mr.
Solomon.
Ms.
Warmus faces a second trial this fall.


Maris's Feat Finally Recognized 30 Years After Hitting 61 Homers
Thirty years after he hit 61 home runs, Roger Maris gained recognition yesterday as the holder of baseball's official home run record.
But Andy Hawkins lost a no-hitter he pitched a year ago.
The major leagues' committee for statistical accuracy, chaired by Commissioner Fay Vincent, acted on the home run record and the definition of a no-hitter.
Curiously, in dealing with the home run record, the eight-man committee acted on a matter that had been decided precisely the same way 23 years ago by another major league committee.


Lasertechnics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rada Electronic Indus reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Warner Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Haley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BAKER ASKS DELAY ON ISRAEL AID BID
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, having failed to persuade Israel to postpone its request for $10 billion in housing loan guarantees until after a planned peace conference in October, appealed to Congress today to hold off for a time on the Israeli request.
State Department officials said Mr.
Baker telephoned Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel on Sunday and asked him to delay the formal request for the loan guarantees that Israel's Ambassador, Zalman Shoval, plans to deliver Friday.
Mr.
Baker told Mr.
Shamir that it would be easier to avoid a clash if no formal request was made and compromises could be sought.


Gooden Out for Season


Cocoa Gains as Small Crop Shapes Up in West Africa
Cocoa futures surged upward for the third consecutive session yesterday, amid concerns about the West African cocoa crop.
While yesterday's $62-a-ton increase in cocoa futures was attributed to technical factors, it continued a recovery from 18-year lows set earlier this summer in a market smothered with oversupply.


NEWS SUMMARY
SOVIET TURMOIL A10-13
Demands for fast passage of a plan for revamping the current Soviet Union encountered stiff opposition in the national Congress.
At best, President Gorbachev could win only a vote to keep discussion alive.
Page A1
The new Government of Lithuania has begun issuing certificates of exoneration for thousands of people who had been condemned as Nazi war criminals by Soviet courts.
A1


Corrections
An article about discrimination against black and Hispanic house-hunters, mentioned in the News Summary on Sunday and in some editions on Saturday, was omitted from some copies of the newspaper on those days.
Copies of the article may be obtained from the News Desk, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Pep Boys-Manny, Moe &amp; Jack reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article in some editions on Friday about John F. Kennedy Jr.'s first prosecution as an assistant district attorney misidentified the defendant's lawyer.
He is Joseph Lavine.


Aides' Pay Pivotal to Nursing Homes' Future
In the sluggish American economy, health care is one of the few industries that has rapidly grown and prospered.
But not everyone in the field has shared in the bounty: about 1.5 million workers -- mostly nursing home aides and mostly women -- are still paid close to the minimum wage of $4.25 an hour.
Now, industry officials say that dam is about to burst.
Workers at the bottom of the health-care system should soon see big wage increases -- just as governments, insurers and health-care providers themselves are desperately seeking ways to keep costs down.


House Panel Assails Treasury Regulation
Brushing aside regulators' appeals for time to weigh the results of an investigation into the Salomon Brothers scandal, influential members of Congress said today that they were prepared to move quickly to tighten surveillance of the $2.2 trillion Treasury securities market.
The warning came after representatives of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve and the Securities and Exchange Commission were questioned closely by a Congressional panel reviewing the supervision of Treasury auctions.


Mediplex Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Legal Problems or Not, Fight and Hype Go On
No fanciful name embellishes the heavyweight fight the public has been waiting for.
Nothing like "the Thrilla in Manila," Muhammad Ali's 1975 fight against Joe Frazier.
It is simply Evander Holyfield (26-0, 21 knockouts) versus Mike Tyson (41-1, 36 knockouts).


General Magnaplate reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wilson Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Geriatric &amp; Medical Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Centocor's Drug Is Ruled Safe
An advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration endorsed a drug produced by Centocor Inc. today to treat bacterial infections that kill tens of thousands of patients a year.
The committee's finding that the drug is safe and effective appears to be a victory for Centocor in its battle with the Xoma Corporation.


Metro Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Chase Issuing Certificates Backed by Card Receivables
A $750 million issue of asset-backed certificates being sold through a Chase Manhattan Credit Card Master Trust Series, 1991-2, was priced yesterday by a group of underwriters led by Chase Securities Inc.
The securities, which are collateralized by Visa and Mastercard receivables sold to the trust by Chase Manhattan Bank, have a weighted average life of about four years and carry a 7.65 percent coupon.
They are priced at 99.842 and yield 7.732 percent, or about 76 basis points more than the combination of yields on the three-year and five-year Treasury notes.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Hi-Lo Automotive Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Joyce Dances On Despite Soggy Stage
The American Indian Dance Theater will open the dance season at the Joyce Theater on Sept. 17 with a traditional blessing of the ground on which it will perform.
That blessing will have an extra resonance this year, for the Joyce might very well have been closed for the season after a faulty sprinkler system in early August flooded the theater with 227,000 gallons of water, creating what one staff member described as "a reflecting pool" in the lower lobby.
The stage floor was ruined, as were the theater's piano and its 464 seats and carpeting.
Red dye dripping from the soaked front stage curtain stained the buckling ceilings and walls of downstairs offices, dressing rooms and rehearsal areas.
But in the days that followed, it became clearer than ever to the founders and staff of the Joyce, once a rundown movie house with sagging seats and a floor like flypaper, that the theater occupies an important place in New York's dance life.


He is the camera that captured glamour


Thinking '92: Voters Have Got to Care Again; The Roosevelt Upset
To the Editor:
Allow this lifelong Republican and firm Bushophile to cite a bit of history for Democrats who believe their party's 1992 Presidential nomination isn't worth striving for.
It is to be found in "The Brains Trust," an account of how Franklin D. Roosevelt came to be elected President in 1932, written by Rexford G. Tugwell, a leading figure in that effort.


Judge Orders a Lawyer Sent To Prison for Racketeering
One of New York City's leading personal-injury lawyers, Morris J. Eisen, was sentenced to almost five years in prison yesterday on racketeering charges that involved bribing witnesses and falsifying evidence.
In imposing the sentence, Judge Charles P. Sifton said Mr.
Eisen was responsible for "poisoning the well of justice." Mr.
Eisen was also ordered to pay a fine and forfeiture of $600,000 and must face disbarment.


Morgan Keegan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Britain Ousts Salomon From Role in Stock Sale
The British Government announced tonight that it had dismissed Salomon Brothers from its prestigious and potentially lucrative position as lead manager in the United States of the planned sale of British Telecommunications P.L.C. shares.
The British Treasury cited the scandal over Salomon's illegal dealings in United States Treasury securities.
"In the light of recent events in New York and investigations in progress there, it is regretfully concluded that a change is appropriate," a British Treasury spokesman said.


Genelabs Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unilab Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Flushing Journal; Pilgrims Find Vision At a Park In Queens
For a certain devoted following, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park is as sacred as Lourdes.
Pilgrims from around the world gather in the shadow of the Unisphere to pray for the world's salvation, witness miraculous healings and receive messages from the Virgin Mary and Jesus Christ.


In Which Timorous Growers And Frail Roses Defy Beetles
WHEN my father went into the hospital last summer, the Japanese beetles decimated his roses.
It was almost obscene how much they enjoyed themselves, mating on the deep green leaves, burrowing into the blossoms.
Where before nary a leaf on a hundred plants had black spot or powdery mildew, now all seemed blighted.
Where a mass of pale pink, creamy white, fiery orange and deep velvety red had bloomed in front of the hollyhocks by the old henhouse, flanked the century-old grape arbor and marched down the side of the old lilac bushes (my father, the son of a farmer, couldn't get out of straight lines), there now stood a wasteland of skeletonized leaves.


National Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Inside the Old K.G.B. Center: Evidence of Hunkering Down
Last month, when an angry crowd tried to pull down the statue of the K.G.B.'s founder, Feliks Dzerzhinsky, from Lubyanka Square and swastikas were spray-painted on the door of its hulking headquarters, it looked as if an Eastern European-style revolution had begun to bring down and disband the secret police once and for all.
It has not yet quite happened that way.
The K.G.B. has lost its army of 220,000 border guards, has been given a new chairman, an outsider who favors change, and has been ordered to break all its Communist Party connections and release some of its historical archives.
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic says it has also stopped tapping his telephones.


Maxco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Texfi Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


Early Election Seen as Britain Cuts Interest Rates
Speculation grew today that the governing Conservative Party might call a general election as early as November, after the Government shaved interest rates half a point amid claims that Britain's battered economy was on the mend.
Although Prime Minister John Major has given no clue of his own intentions about the timing of the next election, the unexpected decision by the Treasury to lower the British equivalent of the prime interest rate to 10.5 percent from 11 percent suggested that the Conservatives may move sooner than expected to take advantage of what they may regard as a more favorable climate of public opinion.


Lawter International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday about the friendship between Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman referred incorrectly to Mr.
Altman's son.
He is James Clifford Altman.


Quotations of the Day
"It offers full participation to all South Africans at all levels of government and does so on a universally acceptable basis." -- President F. W. de Klerk, outlining proposals for a new South African constitution.  [ A9:1. ]
"The National Party proposals are a recipe for disaster, designed to deny a future South African government the power to truly liberate the country from the misery that apartheid has wrung." -- Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress.  [ A9:3. ]


Questa Oil &amp; Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Voplex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PEC Israel Economic reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Glenmore Distilleries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Consulting Activities At Issue for Helmick
Robert Helmick, the president of the United States Olympic Committee since 1985, has informed his fellow officers that while president he has served as a paid consultant to several sports companies with at least indirect ties to the Olympic committee.
Those organizations include the Turner Broadcasting System, a cable network heavily involved in the Goodwill Games, an Olympic-style event held in 1986 in Moscow and again last year in Seattle.
TBS is the only company with whom Helmick has maintained his association.


Man Charged in '46 Slaying Will Be Freed, Lawyer Says
A 62-year-old New York City man charged in the 1946 slaying of Miami's first black police officer will be extradited to Florida but will not go to prison, one of his lawyers said yesterday.
The man, Leroy Strachan, led an exemplary life in New York for more than 40 years, neighbors said, and they were stunned by his arrest last year.


Toon's Still Injured, but the Reason Has Changed
The Jets' injury report came out today and wide receiver Al Toon was again listed as probable for Sunday just as he was last week, but there was a significant difference.
This time his injury was listed as post-concussion syndrome, which was the reason given for his not playing last Sunday, instead of the bruised chest listed on the injury report a week ago.


Excerpts From Statement By Salomon to House Panel
Following are excerpts from the statement submitted by Salomon Inc. with the testimony of its chairman, Warren E. Buffett, describing the key event that led to Treasury Department inquiries into the firm's bidding at securities auctions.
The people referred to are: Paul W. Mozer, former managing director in charge of the firm's government trading desk; Thomas Murphy, also a former managing director who assisted Mr.
Mozer in managing that desk; Christopher Fitzmaurice, a trader; John W. Meriwether, former vice chairman; Thomas W. Strauss, former president, and John H. Gutfreund, former chairman and chief executive of Salomon.
Also mentioned is Charles Jackson, a senior director of Mercury Asset Management.


Varity Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Hiao-Tsiun Ma, 80; Founded Orchestra For Young Players
Dr.
Hiao-Tsiun Ma, a musicologist, conductor and teacher who founded the Children's Orchestra in New York and who was the father of the cellist Yo-Yo Ma, died on Aug. 28 at Long Beach Hospital on Long Island.
He was 80 years old.
He died of a stroke, said his daughter, Dr. Yeou-Cheng Ma.


Hampton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


National Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Saving Old Documents
Northeast Document Conservation Center
100 Brickstone Square, Andover, Mass. 01810; (508) 470-1010.
When the Northeast Document Conservation Center opened 18 years ago, most of its work came from libraries with books in need of restoration and repair.
But these days the center, which specializes in paper conservation, restoration and repair, often works on family documents, from 19th-century immigration papers to old marriage licenses.


Manitoba Offering $300 Million Issue
The Canadian province of Manitoba is offering $300 million in 30-year debentures through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Underwriters said the issue had a coupon of 8 7/8 percent and was priced at 99.624 to yield 8.911 percent, or about 87 basis points more than the Tresaury's 30-year bond.


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH TAYLOR, whose health has once again aroused concern, is on the move, too.
Earlier this week at a dinner in Tokyo she accepted a check for $1 million from HIRO YAMAGATA, a Japanese painter.
It was a gift to the international program of the American Foundation for Aids Research.
"It has been several years since I was last here in Japan," Miss Taylor said at the dinner.
"AIDS has taken many more fine young lives, discrimination against people with AIDS continues in our most sophisticated societies, and in some countries AIDS threatens to eradicate whole cultures."


Renewed Fighting Wounds Yugoslav Economy
Fighting raged today across the secessionist republic of Croatia, so Milos Petrovic was not entirely stunned when this morning's board meeting was punctuated by the thud of mortar shells pounding the steel mill here.
A half-mile up the road, Ivica Billega, general manager of the big Ina oil refinery, sympathized.
On Monday, a dozen mortar shells smashed into pipelines and a tank farm, and this morning heavily armed militiamen and light cannon guarded the refinery gates.


George C. Scott Takes On a Play About Death
He doesn't look like Patton anymore.
The voice of the general is there, emanating from vocal cords that must have been filed with a rasp.
But the hair is white and thinning, the beard is even whiter and the eyes require alternate pairs of gold-rimmed glasses.
He is wearing a large safari jacket whose pockets are stuffed with something or other, but what stands out about the jacket is not the bulging pockets but the bulging waistline.


Treasuries Down in Thin Trading
Prices of Treasury securities dipped in very thin trading yesterday, as credit market participants settled down to wait for August employment data, expected to be released tomorrow morning.
"The market is basically in equilibrium, waiting for the numbers," one government bond trader said.
"I don't see people with any need to do anything between now and then."


BUSH CRITICIZES AD BACKING THOMAS
A television commercial that supports Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court continued to generate political sparks today because of its harsh attacks on three Democratic Senators.
President Bush personally spoke out against the advertisement, which is sponsored by two conservative groups, calling it offensive and counterproductive.
But while the Administration moved to distance itself from the commercial's sponsors, the head of one of the conservative groups that created the advertisement said today that he had also helped create the Willie Horton advertisement to promote George Bush's Presidential candidacy in 1988.


British Furor Over Benetton
Benetton, the Italian clothing retailer, was expecting some problems over its latest advertising campaign, and it found one in Britain.
A nonprofit monitoring organization, the Advertising Standards Authority, has asked Benetton to withdraw 3,800 billboards -- featuring a blood-smeared newborn girl, with umbilical cord -- after receving 800 consumer complaints.


Yanks End 15-Game Skid At Rangers' Ball Park
The Yankees usually depart from Arlington Stadium cursing the place and dreaming about winning a game in their temple of doom.
It had been 15 dreary games and more than two years since they last won against Texas here.
They finally stopped dreaming and cursing tonight after defeating the Rangers, 3-2, and vanquishing an ugly skein on a steamy evening at Arlington.
It always seems to be muggy when the Yankees play in Arlington and they always seem to concoct a way to lose.
Tonight, it changed.
Barely.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 5


Soviet Congress Resists Reshaped Union
In a day of mass parliamentary confusion, the national Congress offered stiff resistance today to the Soviet leadership's demand for fast passage of its emergency plan for replacing the current Soviet Union with a loosely bound mixture of the central and republican governments.
At best, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev could win only a preliminary vote to keep discussion alive on the radical plan to suspend the current Constitution and Government, including the Congress of People's Deputies.


Cunningham Surgery
RANDALL CUNNINGHAM underwent major surgery on his left knee yesterday and the surgeon said the Eagles quarterback should be ready by next year's training camp.
Dr.
CLARENCE SHIELDS , who repaired Cunningham's other knee 10 years ago, performed the two-hour operation in Los Angeles.


Southern Union Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ABC Program Still on Hold
ABC News again postponed its special interview program with the Soviet leaders Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin, which had been tentatively scheduled for last night, because the Congress of People's Deputies had not adjourned.


Political Gifts From Salomon
As a powerhouse on Wall Street and big campaign contributor, Salomon Brothers wielded considerable influence in Washington before the scandal began unfolding last month.
In five and a half years, the investment house and its employees have contributed almost $1 million to members of Congress, according to a report today by Common Cause, a lobbying group that has sought changes in campaign financing rules.


Thomaston Mills reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Pop in Review
Julie Wilson  Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Through Sept. 28
Among cabaret performers of the sort known as actresses who sing, no one is on a par right now with Julie Wilson.
Besides being a rivetingly dramatic interpreter of pre-rock popular songs, Miss Wilson, who will be 67 years old this fall, exudes an ageless glamour.
And at Tuesday's opening-night show of her engagement at Rainbow and Stars, she swiveled to the stage in a clinging white gown, her trademark gardenia tucked in its usual place behind her left ear.


Integrated Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Navratilova Wins by Taking Her Cue From Connors
Once again at the United States Open, the Grand Slam where players on retirement's cusp are shedding the years and denting the confidence of their younger rivals, a living legend relied more on liveliness than legendry yesterday to fling herself into the next round.
And she used the ageless tennis conjured up here by Jimmy Connors as her talisman for success.
Against the bouncy Arantxa Sanchez Vicario of Spain, Martina Navratilova said she did it "Jimmy's way": she attacked and never looked back.


National Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Inter-City Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mid-American Waste Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Davis Factor, 89, Cosmetics Chief Who Built Up Father's Company
Davis Factor Sr., who helped build his father's business, Max Factor &amp; Company, into an international cosmetics empire, died Saturday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 89 years old.
He died of heart failure, said a daughter, Barbara Bentley.


Wiring Flaw and Battery Failure Cited in Nuclear-Plant Accident
The accident last month at the Nine Mile Point 2 nuclear plant near Oswego resulted from a wiring design error and the failure to replace two batteries no larger than those used in flashlights, the company that runs the plant told the Nuclear Regulatory Commission yesterday.
In the accident, five "uninterruptible power supplies" failed and key parts of the control room were blacked out for more than half an hour.
Control room operators, unsure of what was happening, declared a Site Area Emergency, the second-most-serious category and only the third such emergency since the Three Mile Island accident 12 years ago.


UMC Electronics Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


House of Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


General Cinema Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


And Now, What Ails Cone?
On a sobering night of dire medical reports on two-fifths of their starting rotation, the Mets last night also had to cope with the less dramatic but fully exasperating case of David Cone.
His ailment?
Performance schizophrenia.
Cone, who has been very good and very bad and thus very disappointing this season, was no better than mediocre last night and as a result his record was reduced to a less-than-remarkable 12-11 as the Astros mashed the Mets by 8-3 at Shea Stadium.


Trico Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thinking '92: Voters Have Got to Care Again; Remember Churchill
To the Editor:
Political thinkers say George Bush will be invincible in the next election because of his grasp of foreign policy.
But with the breakup of Russian Communism, domestic issues may soon become paramount.


Whitehall Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Combustible Contest In a Smoldering Brooklyn
The City Council race in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn would seem to have all the ingredients for a Bonfire of the Vanities: Susan D. Alter, an incumbent Council member, is a white, Jewish woman married to an Orthodox rabbi, who is running in the 45th District, which is more than 75 percent black.
Among her seven black rivals in the primary, she counts Colin A. Moore, the fiery lawyer and community advocate who is currently at the center of the racial conflict of neighboring Crown Heights, where he represents a family whose child was killed by a car driven by a Hasid.
But while the oratory between those two candidates occasionally resounds at a pitch worthy of Tom Wolfe, to residents of this working-class, mostly Caribbean immigrant community in the 45th District, Mr.
Moore and Ms.
Alter have much in common.
Both are well known, powerful Brooklyn personalities with shallow roots in the immediate East Flatbush neighborhood.
A Note of Skepticism
"I don't think it's right for people to come into a community just to get elected," said Terri Duncan, a longtime resident of East Flatbush.
She paused and added a note of skepticism that is widely shared in her neighborhood, "But then I don't like the ones who live here, either."


North American Ventures Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Essay; At P&amp;G: It Sinks
Obsessed by leaks, a powerful Chief Executive directs eager-to-please law officers to find out which of his aides have been using the telephone to call reporters.
When caught out abusing his power by causing the invasion of privacy, the leak-plugger insists he broke no law, belatedly admitting only an "error in judgment."
Sound familiar?
In the current case, the chief executive is Edwin L. Artzt of Procter &amp; Gamble; his target was Alecia Swasy of The Wall Street Journal, who dared to make public corporate shake-ups and plans; his plumbers were police and prosecutors of Cincinnati, who subpoenaed the records of 803,000 home and business phones to satisfy a private company's lust to intimidate its critics and conceal its embarrassments.


NHI Nelson Holdings Interntional reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Bastille And the Kremlin
A reactionary military coup is thwarted in a capital city when soldiers defect to the representatives of the people.
A ruler whose allegiances are suspect is returned to the city in a brief triumph that leaves him politically disabled.
Rejoicing crowds surge through the streets bearing the new colors (red, blue and white) that symbolize the birth of a free nation.
Public opinion, unchecked by censorship, demands food and identifies plotters for retribution.
Euphoria and fearfulness march together while the world looks on, its congratulations edged with anxiety.


More Than an Ex-Dictator's Future At Stake as Trial of Noriega Begins
After a full-scale invasion of his country and 20 months of preliminary legal skirmishes, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the former dictator of Panama, will finally go on trial here this week, charged with 10 counts of drug trafficking, money laundering and racketeering that could get him 140 years in prison.
Never before has the leader of a foreign nation been tried in an American courtroom.
But what makes the case of the United States v.
Manuel Noriega even more notable is the promise that it will shed light on some of the most controverisal and embarrassing episodes of American foreign policy over the last decade, ranging from the arming of the Nicaraguan contras to the conduct of the war on drugs.
In Uniform for Court
In testimony expected to stretch over four months, the names of at least two other heads of state, George Bush and Fidel Castro, are sure to be invoked, and there may even be efforts to have them testify.
But most of the dozens of witnesses likely to be called will be drawn from the ranks of renegade pilots, admitted cocaine and marijuana smugglers, corrupt businessmen and bankers or Panamanian military and intelligence officials who have turned against their former chief.
General Noriega, who says he is a prisoner of war and who wore his four-star general's uniform in court today during the last hearings before the start of jury selection Thursday morning, stands accused of allowing cocaine traffickers in Medellin, Colombia, to use his country to process and ship drugs intended for the United States market and to launder their profits in Panama's banks.
He is also accused of sheltering the cocaine bosses after a political assassination they ordered.
In return, he is said to have received at least $4.6 million in bribes.
Government prosecutors have declined to discuss any particulars of the charges publicly, and they try to minimize the case as just another drug prosecution.
Higher Stakes, Same Pattern
Their actions in court have played down the possible national security aspects of the case while simultaneously driving a wedge between General Noriega and former associates like Maj.
Luis del Cid, who was captured in the American invasion.
Panamanian officials describe him as General Noriega's bagman, who may be a star witness against him.
"As unique as this case is, it follows the framework of a standard drug case," said Mark Schnapp, who was head of the criminal division of the United States Attorney's office here when General Noriega was indicted and is now in private practice.
"You plead out the lower-level people and gain their cooperation. The stakes are higher in this case, but the pattern is the same."
The lawyer leading General Noriega's defense, Frank A. Rubino, seeks to frame the case not as a drug trial, but as a seamy outgrowth of this nation's foreign policy.
As part of that strategy, he emphasizes that for much of the period covered by the indictment, General Noriega was also on the payroll of the United States Government and performed services that advanced American interests.
Not only did General Noriega receive payments from the Central Intelligence Agency and the Pentagon's intelligence wing, he also worked closely with the Drug Enforcement Administration; Oliver L. North, the former national security aide linked to the Iran-contra scandal, and other White House emissaries.
"This is absolutely anything in the world but your routine, garden-variety, run-of-the-mill drug case," Mr.
Rubino said.
He calls General Noriega "the C.I.A.'s man in Panama" and argues that the Reagan Administration turned on the Panamanian strongman only after he refused to cooperate with a 1986 plan to invade Nicaragua and overthrow its Sandinista Government.
Mr.
Rubino stopped short of saying that General Noriega would take the stand, but Justice Department officials say the General is unlikely to pass up the chance to portray himself as a martyr of American foreign policy.
Battling Over Documents
For months, Mr.
Rubino and prosecutors have been battling over classified information in closed hearings, with the only hint of the intensity of their struggle coming from documents made public with gaping white spaces.
But both sides scoff at the notion that the case will turn on some damning piece of evidence still under wraps.
"I don't know where the press got this idea we are going to pull some rabbit out of a hat, some smoking gun, some hand grenade," Mr.
Rubino said.
"What the hell could there be? I know there are a lot of things that will show the general's relationship to the U.S. Government that I know the Government does not want out, because they have been screaming bloody murder about them. But there isn't one single thing that stands out with bright lights and flares."
There has been constant speculation that the defense team also hopes to subpoena George Bush, who met with the general both as Vice President and Director of Central Intelligence.
When asked directly whether Mr.
Bush would be called as a witness, Mr.
Rubino left the issue open.
"As President of the United States, I think he has executive privilege," he said.
"As a former director of the C.I.A., I sincerely doubt he has it." Horrified Over Indictment
From the moment General Noriega was named in 11 counts of an indictment handed up on Feb. 4, 1988, the legal proceedings against him have been a political inconvenience that many in the American Government hoped would simply evaporate.
Officials of the State and Justice departments and the D.E.A. were horrified, convinced that the charges would complicate efforts to persuade him to step down.
One minor count was dropped Tuesday, leaving General Noriega to stand trial on 10 charges.
For almost two years after the indictment, negotiations between the Reagan and Bush administrations and General Noriega's representatives, aimed at securing his resignation, continued intermittently.
But on Dec. 20, 1989, 25,000 American troops landed in Panama and overthrew the military government he headed.
Several hundred Panamanians and 25 American soldiers died in that invasion, which governments throughout Latin America condemned as a violation of Panamanian sovereignty and international law.
General Noriega and his lawyers have argued that he was kidnapped, in disregard of norms applying to heads of state, and that his treatment at the Metropolitan Correctional Center here violates the Geneva Conventions on prisoners of war.
General Noriega's surrender on Jan. 3, 1990, revived an indictment that had initially been regarded as a purely political gesture.
His arrest provided prosecutors with the means to strengthen their case: caches of seized documents including bank statements, correspondence and official papers.  'Boxes of Ammunition'
The prosecution appears to have built its case less on sensational revelations on than the sheer accumulation of detail.
"There is no smoking gun," said one Justice Department official who is familiar with the case.
"But there are a lot of boxes of ammunition."
Originally, General Noriega was only one of 16 defendants but, with his last co-defendant pleading guilty today to aiding a drug-and-money-laundering conspiracy, he will stand trial alone.
In all, seven of his alleged associates have pleaded guilty and agreed to testify against him, and two others were convicted on cocaine smuggling charges this spring.
Last month the Government also acknowledged in documents provided to the defense that six of its potential witnesses have received more than $1.5 million, payments that Mr.
Rubino has described as "bribes."
A spokeswoman for the United States Attorney's office declined to comment on the payments.
In documents submitted earlier this year, General Noriega's lawyers argued that he allowed arms, drugs and chemicals to be shipped through Panama at the express orders of the United States Government, in the person of seven former directors of the C.I.A. and four chiefs of the D.E.A.
Whether Mr.
Rubino will pursue that line of argument remains to be seen.
"The defense is ultimately going to have to make a tactical decision," Mr.
Schnapp predicted.
"Your best defense is to say he didn't do it and that these people are liars. If the defense is going to argue that he was acting with the permission and authority of the United States Government, they have to admit that he was involved in drug trafficking, and that's a very risky defense." One Original Lawyer Remains
Of the three main lawyers the general hired to defend him after he was indicted, Mr.
Rubino is the only one who remains.
A former Miami Beach policeman, Secret Service agent and race car driver, Mr.
Rubino specializes in defending accused drug dealers.
He calls the Noriega case "probably the greatest challenge I will ever face in my career."
The defense had originally been headed by Raymond Takiff, who resigned the day after General Noriega's capture for what he described as health reasons.
In June, it was revealed that Mr.
Takiff had been working undercover for the Government in an unrelated judicial corruption investigation at the same time he was representing General Noriega.
Assertion by the Defense
In today's final pretrial hearing, Mr.
Rubino charged that Mr.
Takiff, hoping to "ingratiate himself with the Justice Department," had called General Noriega on Jan. 3, 1990, and urged him to surrender.
Mr.
Takiff and prosecutors have said he never discussed the Noriega case with the Government.
The Government's team will be led not by a politically connected Washington prosecutor brought in especially for the case, as was widely predicted when General Noriega surrendered, but by Michael P. Sullivan, an assistant United States attorney and the top trial lawyer in the Miami office.
Presiding will be Federal District Judge William M. Hoeveler, who at age 69 is semi-retired.
Educated at Harvard University and appointed in 1977 by President Jimmy Carter, the native Floridian is described by those who know him as religious, calm, soft-spoken, patient and meticulous -- qualities they say make him ideal for this trial.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Blockbuster Entertainment Corp., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., a video retail chain, named Carol S. Feinberg senior vice president-general merchandising manager. *
Bloomingdale's, New York, the department-store chain, named James Gundell senior vice president and general manager of its flagship store on East 59th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Gundell was merchandise vice president for home furnishings.


Petroleum Heat &amp; Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Monday about a new edition of The Reader's Digest misidentified the nation's largest-circulation magazine.
According to the Audit Bureau of Circulations, it is Modern Maturity.


North Carolina Examines Inspection Lapses in Fire
The state Labor Secretary said today that the failure to inspect a chicken-processing plant where 25 people died in a fire was a result of his department's shortage of money and staff as well as the Federal Government's failure to hold it to stricter standards.
The Secretary, John Brooks, who is responsible for regulating and inspecting manufacturing plants in the state, must now find out whether fire drills had been held in the 11 years the plant was operating here.
Basic things that would have been checked in any safety inspection, he said, are unlocked fire exits that are accessible and illuminated by exit signs.


Little Movement in Dollar; Gold Prices Rise Modestly
The dollar closed unchanged to lower in an uneventful foreign-exchange session yesterday, as traders awaited tomorrow's release of the August employment figures.
Gold prices rose modestly.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $348.50 an ounce, up 20 cents from late Tuesday.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted a late bid for gold at $348.85 an ounce, up 95 cents.


Lithuania Starts to Wipe Out Convictions for War Crimes
Lithuania's new Government has begun issuing certificates of exoneration for thousands of people who had been condemned as Nazi war criminals by Soviet courts.
Among those who have already had their convictions as collaborators expunged by the chief prosecutor are people who confessed to mass murder in appearances before Soviet courts soon after the war.


MacNeal-Schwendler reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


C. M. Prelinger, 66, Author and Historian
Catherine M. Prelinger, a Yale lecturer, author and historian, died on Saturday at the Yale Health Plan Care Center in New Haven.
She was 66 years old and lived in Killingsworth, Conn.
Her family said she died of cancer.


Pop in Review
Zaiko Langa Langa S.O.B.'s
A guitar unwinds a clear, curling riff.
A second guitar, and a third, immediately join in with counterpoint and basic three-chord harmony.
Then a skipping bass line and a trotting drumbeat kick in, calibrating the groove known as soukous, which has seduced Africa and a good part of the French-speaking world.
By the time the harmony vocals and exhortations to party begin, as the singers swivel their hips or point to the sky in unison, the audience is already dancing.


Idexx Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.82
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.34
7.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.39
7.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.63
7.62
8.70
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.05
8.03
8.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.07
9.00
10.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.97
6.97
7.63
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


United Park City Mines Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Image Retailing Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thomas Tryon, Who Quit Acting For a Writing Career, Dies at 65
Thomas Tryon, a popular Hollywood actor who stopped acting when he became a best-selling novelist, died yesterday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 65 years old.
He died of cancer, said a spokesman for his publisher, Alfred A. Knopf.


Attack at the Milford Plaza Ends With Three Arrested
The setting was the theater district.
The time was morning rush hour.
And hundreds of people on their way to work became spectators to a real-life drama as the police tried to flush from a midtown hotel three men accused by a 14-year-old girl of abducting and raping her.
One of the men, who pointed a shotgun at officers as they burst into his hotel room, had walked away from a prison-release program in Maryland a day earlier after serving more than 20 years for murder, the police said.


Subway Work Train Derails in Manhattan
One car of a subway work train derailed in lower Manhattan early this morning, disrupting service on the southbound No. 2 line between Chambers Street in Manhattan and Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, transit officials said.


Union Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thinking '92: Voters Have Got to Care Again; Abortion Plank Stays
To the Editor:
In "Rust, Roe and Reality" (column, July 17) Anna Quindlen writes: "the Young Republican National Federation voted to remove from its platform an anti-abortion plank. Delegates at the group's convention decided the position was a political liability." That statement is not accurate.
The Young Republicans, at their July national convention in Miami, defeated a minority report to substitute pro-choice language in the platform and overwhelmingly passed the following resolution: "Young Republican National Federation reaffirms its strong support for the Republican national 1988 platform, including the anti-abortion language."


A Communist Legacy in Lithuania, Numbered for Removal


Texas Mother Gets 15 Years In Murder Plot
Wanda Webb Holloway pleaded for mercy today, but a jury sentenced her to 15 years in prison for trying to arrange a killing to further her daughter's ambitions as a junior high school cheerleader.
At a sentencing hearing this morning, the 37-year-old Mrs.
Holloway tearfully apologized for her mistakes and asked for probation so she could make amends to her intended victim, the mother of her daughter's chief rival in cheerleading competitions.


Third World Ecology Investments Sought
Armed with Federal loan guarantees, a private partnership is seeking investors for third world business ventures with environmental goals that are as green as a dollar bill.
But the program is getting a skeptical reception from some environmental groups, who view it with the same suspicion they have long directed toward international corporations and development agencies.


Parents Weigh the Risks Of City vs. Suburbs
PEOPLE with children have always debated leaving New York City.
But previous generations saw their trek to the suburbs as a move up to a better life.
Many New Yorkers who are leaving now have few illusions about suburban life.
Some of them grew up in the suburbs and found the experience stultifying.
The suburbs, however, represent safety.


Baker's Remarks: Policy on Soviets
Following is a statement made today by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d during a briefing on United States policy toward the Soviet Union.
In the last two weeks, we've seen another revolution blowing with full force across the Soviet Union.
Of course, it's obvious that we want to see this revolution remain democratic and we want to see it remain peaceful.
Building democracy and free markets across the Soviet Union is not going to be an easy task after decades of totalitarianism and central planning.
The work of freedom will be hard, and the transition will be painful.


Whittle Holding Talks On a Bid for Healthlink
Whittle Communications is in "serious final-stage negotiations" to acquire Healthlink Television, its only serious rival in selling advertiser-supported media products to doctors' waiting rooms, a Whittle executive said yesterday.
The deal should be concluded by the end of this week, said Alan Greenberg, vice chairman of Whittle.


'Nine Sundays': Sounder Bites
Presidential campaigns have lately prompted two grievances from the public: They are too long, and they are too short.
That is, with all the primaries and caucuses, campaigns drag on for too many months.
But once the public finally gets interested, TV coverage is counted in too few seconds.
The Democrats, who still have no well-known candidate, are providing a masochistic remedy for the first complaint.
The seven dwarfs of the last campaign have turned into a 1992 field that looks more like Bashful and Sleepy.
And now, a team of shrewd students of politics at Harvard offers a healthy remedy for the second complaint.
"Nine Sundays," it is called, describing a package of general election campaign coverage that can enlarge and enrich democracy.


Zonic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Martin Dubilier, 65, an Inventor Who Invested in Companies, Dies
Martin H. Dubilier, an inventor who achieved prominence as an investor in poorly performing companies that he could fix up, died yesterday at the age of 65.
He lived in Greenwich, Conn., and Fisher Island, Fla.
He died of lung cancer, said a spokesman for the firm, Clayton &amp; Dubilier Inc.


Zavitz Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Richmond Paper to Close
Media General Inc., the newspaper and broadcasting company in Richmond, said yesterday that it would close The Richmond News Leader in June and merge the afternoon newspaper into the morning Richmond Times-Dispatch.
The company also announced an early retirement incentive program for employees.
Media General officials said the company could not afford to continue operating The News Leader and a morning paper, The Times-Dispatch, in the same market.
About 190 full-time employees in the editorial, circulation and production departments will lose their jobs.


Erich Schatzki, 93, A Designer of Aircraft
Dr.
Erich Schatzki, an internationally known aeronautical engineer and aircraft designer, died Aug. 28 at a nursing home in Palo Alto, Calif.
A resident of Palo Alto, he was 93 years old.
A native of Germany, he became involved in the early development of the aircraft industry there after World War I, joining Junkers, the aircraft builder, and the budding Lufthansa airline as a test pilot and then commercial pilot.


BRIEFS
*
Adage Inc., West Chester, Pa., a maker of recycled paperboard, and Relm Communications Inc., Indianapolis, a maker of electronic communications equipment, said they had signed a definitive agreement under which Adage would aquire Relm. *
American Biodyne Inc., San Francisco, a provider of substance abuse and mental health programs, said it would acquire all of the assets of Assured Health Systems Inc., a vendor of employee assistance programs.


Class and Race Decide New York Transit Cuts
To the Editor:
Who is surprised by the memo circulated by Alan F. Kiepper, head of the New York City Transit Authority, stating that service cuts and changes be implemented in areas that have no political or community clout -- oops!
I believe the memo said "opposition" (news article, Aug. 14)?


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Salomon Scandal
A report from Salomon says rules were ignored and documentation was lax on its government bond trading desk.
That casual approach also seemed to characterize the way senior management dealt with the scandal over improper bidding for bonds.  [ Page D1. ]
Some in Congress say they will move to tighten regulation of the $2.2 trillion Treasury securities market.  [ D1. ]
Britain has dismissed Salomon as lead manager in the U.S. of the planned sale of British Telecom shares.  [ D23. ] Companies
An anti-bacterial drug from Centocor won Federal approval, giving the company a victory over Xoma, a rival that was told by regulators that its competing drug would need more study.  [ D1. ]
Union Pacific said it had taken a $575 million charge to offset the cost of reducing the size of crews on its freight trains.  [ D1. ]
Coca-Cola is hiring a powerful Hollywood talent ageny to help it mold worldwide marketing and media strategies.  [ D1. ]
I.B.M. introduced its least expensive AS/400 minicomputer to date and said it might redesign the computer line.  [ D4. ]
Ford is making few changes in it Taurus model, apparently reluctant to tamper with success.  [ D2. ]
Nordstrom opened a bank to issue and service its credit cards, in a move to avoid state limits on finance charges.  [ D4. ]
Whittle says it is in final talks to acquire Healthlink Television, a rival in putting media products in doctors' waiting rooms.  [ D6. ]
An oil industry a group formed to handle oil spills will operate from five centers around the nation.  [ D7. ]
A Times ad about U.S. Surgical was apparently a hoax, the newspaper said.  [ D21. ]
Occidental Petroleum will sell its stake in IBP, a beef processor, to stockholders and, if necessary, to other investors.  [ D4. ]
Woody Allen's next film will be made for Tri-Star, ending, at least temporarily, his relationship with Orion Pictures.  [ C15. ]
A Du Pont corporate jet was reported missing over Malaysia.
Five Conoco executives and four spouses were aboard.  [ A5. ] Markets
Stocks closed lower after the Dow dipped to 3,000 and then rebounded to close at 3,008.50, down 9.17 points.  [ D10. ]
Prices of Treasury securities dipped in very thin trading,as traders awaited the August employment data.  [ D18. ]  Money market yields were mixed for the second straight week.  [ D9. ]
The dollar closed unchanged to lower in uneventful trading.
Gold prices rose modestly.  [ D19. ]  Cocoa futures surged upward for the third consecutive session.  [ D19. ] International
Europe's governments are stepping up efforts to rescue the Continent's beleaguered electronics industry, fearful of being left hopelessly behind Japan and the U.S.  [ D1. ]
The lack of a central power in the Soviet Union may not be as much a problem for the economy there as many fear, Western experts say.
Economic Analysis. [ A13. ]
A fund to finance environmental projects in the third world is being set up with backing from a Federal agency.  [ D7. ]
Japanese brokerage officials made new acknowledgments of improper payments.  [ D10. ] Today's Columns
One waste disposer seems more prone to burying its stock price than garbage in recent years.
Market Place.  [ D10. ]
Maybelline is spending lavishly to refashion the advertising and marketing of its cosmetics.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D21. ]


Israel Plans Big Deficit
With Israel poised to ask the United States for $10 billion in loan guarantees to help absorb new Soviet immigrants, the Government approved a budget proposal today that some political commentators here warned could undercut Israel's case in Washington.
The proposed budget for 1992 includes a projected deficit that is higher than the Finance Ministry had wanted and that critics say may fuel American concerns about Israel's economy.


SOVIET TURMOIL: Pentagon Besieged; The Soviets' Eclipse Is Likely to Spur Calls for Curbs on Military Spending
Fundamental changes in the once-monolithic Soviet military establishment are likely to force a re-examination of the United States armed forces soon, focusing on the still commanding size of the Pentagon's budget and the broad array of defense industries that support it, American military experts say.
The expected reassessment is at hand just months after defenders of present American military spending plans appeared to be in an unassailable position with the impressive United States victory in the Persian Gulf war.


Thinking '92: Voters Have Got to Care Again; Unpopular Populist
To the Editor:
In "Iowa's Earlier Populist" (letter, Aug. 25), Russell A. Simmons asserts that Henry A. Wallace "served four years as Secretary of Agriculture and two terms as Vice President under Franklin D. Roosevelt."


South African President Outlines Plan for Universal Voting Rights
President F. W. de Klerk today outlined his Government's proposals for a new constitution that would provide universal suffrage for the first time in the history of modern South Africa.
The plan, disclosed at a special convention here of the governing National Party, offered the most detailed look yet at the negotiating position that Mr. de Klerk and his officials are likely to take at constitutional discussions when these talks finally get under way later this year or next year.
It amounts to an opening bid in those negotiations.


Accounts
*
Motorola Communications and Electronics, Chicago, which produces mobile communications products, to Martin/Williams Inc., Minneapolis.
The agency said that the review for the $5 million account included four other finalists: the incumbent, Rapp Collins Marcoa, Chicago; FCB Direct, Chicago; Cramer-Krasselt, Chicago, and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, New York.
The agency has also been awarded a $5 million account for a new product from Carlisle Plastics, Minneapolis.
The other finalist was Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis. *
Bandai America, Cerritos, Calif., a subsidiary of the Japanese toy maker Bandai Inc., to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific, Torrance, Calif.
The $6 million account is for the introduction of Bandai's toys in the United States next year.


Knowledge House Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
The British royal family is on the move again: SARAH FERGUSON, the Duchess of York and wife of PRINCE ANDREW, arrived yesterday evening in New York.
She is scheduled to visit the future site of a Veritas therapeutic community for drug-addicted pregnant teen-agers, Hale House and the Mary Manning Walsh nursing home.
Also on the agenda is a reception this evening at Gracie Mansion by Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS and JOYCE DINKINS.
The visit is being sponsored by the British-American Chamber of Commerce to promote its Fulbright business scholarships.


Pressure on Pentagon
After months in which American military spending seemed unassailable, the decline of the Soviet monolith may prompt the Bush Administration to take a closer look.
Some experts question whether new generations of weapons or strategic defense systems can now be justified.
Article, page A12.


U.S. Surgical Ad in Times Apparent Hoax
The New York Times said yesterday that an advertisement in Business Day on Tuesday concerning the U.S.
Surgical Corporation was apparently a hoax by a person or group that has not yet been identified.
The four-by-five-inch ad asked that shareholders of U.S.
Surgical interested in joining a class-action suit against the company contact the law office of Siegel &amp; Kaplan P.C. at 264 Pondfield Road in Bronxville.
The ad asserted that "certain irregular trading patterns" in the company's stock had occurred between March and July 29.


Piedmont Federal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gull Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Video Jukebox Network reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Penn Traffic Co. reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 3


Miscellany
*
Yugo America, Upper Saddle River, N.J., the American importer of Yugo automobiles, is reviewing its $7 million to $9 million account.
The incumbent agency, Frankfurt Gips Balkind Advertising , New York, is expected to be included in the review; it inherited the account when it merged with Buckley DeCerchio Cavalier, New York, Yugo's previous agency.


The Day's Highlights
Putting Up a Fight
Congress Resists Gorbachev's Plan: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev kept discussion alive on a plan to replace the Soviet Union with a mix of central and republican governments, but lawmakers pressed for concessions, warning that the move was too authoritarian.
Page A1.


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Noted: The No. 4 Train, Like Life, Goes On
Beyond the darkness of Woodlawn Cemetery, the subway roared to life and roused the attention of the sleepy bench-sitters along the elevated platform.
A scattering of passengers in batches of two's and three's moved through the doors and onto the train, scheduled to depart at 11:29 P.M.
Up in the dispatcher's shabby office, the crew sheet for the day's trains, printed well in advance, presented an eerie reminder of the recent past.
Crew 106, assigned to this No. 4 train, had a pencil line struck through the name R. Ray.
Scribbled beneath it was R. Strawn.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MANY adolescents announce their future careers with the same blind passion with which they fall in love.
They shun practicality in favor of idealized images and wishful thinking.
Parents who hear their teen-agers say that they want to become full-time poets, sculptors, philosophers or professional football players are likely to cringe at the odds against success.
They worry that such unrealistic choices will leave their children emotionally distraught and financially dependent upon them for a long time.
But adolescents and young adults tend not to pay attention to those odds.
Such short-sightedness is normal.
It is a way of toying with their images of themselves as self-sufficient adults, of trying on new roles and seeing how they feel.
That is why their attachments to careers are often as fleeting and fickle as their love lives, and potentially as volatile.


New York Testing Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


How Gooden's Injury Will Be Judged
It is too early to tell whether Dwight Gooden's recent injury will have a lasting impact on his career, doctors say, but a procedure to be performed this weekend should clarify the situation.
A test yesterday, called a CT-arthrogram, revealed a "slight pulling away" of the shoulder's capsule from the bone.


Union Pacific Sets Charge For Cutbacks
The Union Pacific Corporation said yesterday that it had taken a special after-tax charge of $575 million to offset the cost of reductions of the size of crews on its freight trains.
The charge, which will bring big improvements in productivity, is mostly for severance pay for brakemen who will be eliminated on trains that will now have a crew of two instead of three.


Bible Videos Called Offensive to Jews
A series of animated Bible stories on videotapes that has sold hundreds of thousands of copies over the past three years has been assailed for what some see as unflattering, stereotypical portrayals of Jews and Judaism.
Condemning "anti-Semitism of any kind" and agreeing to meet with his critics, the producer of the videos, Stephen W. Griffin, says his enterprise has no intention of propagating prejudice.
At least some of his critics seemed to agree.


Home Video
Soviet Crisis
The video is about the Soviet coup, and in Atlanta a CNN production crew is working fast.
"This Friday is the last day they can add footage," said Steve Chamberlain of Turner Home Entertainment.
"We'll have the program out of postproduction on Monday. Within 10 days the cassettes will be in the stores." If that schedule holds, it will be around Sept. 20 when CNN Video, a new Turner division set up to dispense news coverage by the Cable News Network, will release "The New Russian Revolution." The hourlong tape will cost $14.98.


Boston Journal; Pat on the Back Strains Police Force
It was billed as a community-organized event, and it certainly seemed like a genuine grass-roots show of affection: 300 poster-toting citizens gathered in front of Boston's police headquarters last week to demonstrate their support.
But the spontaneous grass-roots rally, it turned out, was neither spontaneous nor grass roots.
In fact, the police department itself did most of the organizing for the event, spending more than $1,000 in department money to mail out flyers.


Food Experts to Study Soviet Distribution System
Two teams of agricultural experts ordered to the Soviet Union by President Bush this week will be led by Department of Agriculture officials concerned that the distribution of food there may be as much a problem as food supply.
The findings of the two teams will influence how the United States, Japan and Western Europe handle the possibility of food shortages and perhaps civil disorder in the Soviet Union this winter.
One of the main issues is how the industrialized democracies should balance food shipments to the Soviet Union with technical assistance to improve the transportation and sale of food produced there.


A Maybelline Face Lift By Lintas
SEEKING to infuse its plain and practical cosmetics line with generous helpings of glamour and glitz, Maybelline Inc. is spending lavishly to refashion its advertising and marketing plans.
And in an intriguing twist, the agency responsible for remaking Maybelline's image is the one that created campaigns for Maybelline's archrival, Cover Girl.
"Maybe she's born with it. Maybe it's Maybelline," is the new ad theme, from the Lintas New York agency, for the lipsticks, mascaras and other products made by Maybelline.
Under its previous owner, the Schering-Plough Corporation, Maybelline became known as a staid, stodgy brand whose most exciting slogan was "Fine makeup, sensibly priced."


Vicorp Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4


Furon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Dozier Is on the Spot
He is a .269 hitter who averages 3.9 yards a carry, and after winding up his latest minor league stint with the Tidewater Mets, outfielder/running back D. J. DOZIER is apparently ready to return to the Minnesota Vikings.
At his agent's request, Dozier was removed from the lineup for Tidewater's final International League game last night, according to the Mets' director of baseball operations, GERRY HUNSICKER , who said Dozier did not want to risk an injury that might impede his footall career.


New Jersey and 'Shocked' Stevens: Not Quite Perfect Together
As of early this evening, Scott Stevens, the defenseman awarded to the Devils as compensation for the St.
Louis Blues' signing of Brendan Shanahan, was, according to his attorney, undecided about whether to join the New Jersey team.
"We're evaluating our options and we haven't come to a conclusion yet," Rick Bennett, Stevens's attorney, said by telephone from his office in Washington.


Occidental Is Selling IBP Stake
In an expected step to narrow its operations, the Occidental Petroleum Corporation said today that it would sell its majority stake in the beef processor IBP Inc. to stockholders and, if necessary, other investors.
The transaction, part of a major restructuring program that Occidental announced in January, will enable Occidental to pare another $760 million in long-term debt from its balance sheet, after reductions of more than $1.6 billion from deals earlier this year, said Ray R. Irani, chairman and chief executive.
His plan is to focus Occidental, the country's eighth-largest energy company, exclusively on oil, natural gas, coal, and chemicals by the end of 1992.


Salvatori Ophthalmics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Maple Leaf Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Computer Breaks Monopoly On Study of Dead Sea Scrolls
Researchers using a desktop computer say they have broken the grip a coterie of scholars has held for 40 years on the Dead Sea Scrolls, one of the great finds of Biblical archeology.
The scholars have published transcriptions of less than half of the scrolls and have allowed only limited access to the rest.
The scrolls, containing accounts and insights into the history of Judaism and the origins of Christianity, have long tantalized Biblical researchers who have sharply criticized the slow pace in publishing transcriptions and translations of them.


Market Place; Browning-Ferris Unnerves Wall St.
BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES, the nation's second-largest waste-disposal company, has frequently seemed more prone to burying its stock price than garbage in recent years.
The company's latest unpleasant news for Wall Street was Tuesday's announcement that earnings in the current quarter -- the last of its fiscal year ending Sept. 30 -- will be down as much as 25 percent from its disappointing third-quarter result of $58.9 million, or 38 cents a share.
Investors responded by hammering the price of Browning-Ferris on the New York Stock Exchange, driving the shares down $4 on Tuesday and lopping off $1.25 more yesterday, to $20.50.
It was the most active stock on the Big Board, with 3.8 million shares traded.
No one was mollified by the announcement yesterday that the quarterly dividend would remain at 17 cents a share.


Phonetel Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption in The Living Section yesterday with an article about cooking for Rosh ha-Shanah referred incorrectly to the candles at a Hasidic dinner table.
The family was not photographed on the Sabbath.


Youth League May Disband
Komsomol, the Communist Youth League, will meet Sept. 27 to consider disbanding itself, the Tass news agency reported today.
Komsomol's central committee called for the special session today, the report said.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article on Monday about the declining influence of labor unions included scrambled paragraphs in some copies that truncated the identification of a labor expert and rendered a quotation from him incompletely.
The expert, Greg Tarpinian, senior economist at the Labor Research Association, a labor advocacy group in New York, said: "There's a much higher level of debate within the labor movement over the kinds of demands that labor should make on the Democratic Party. We've had a decade of openly reactionary anti-labor rule by Republicans, and the Democratic Party has yet to come up with an alternative."


Odetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Roofs That Cave In on Israeli Palestinians
To the Editor:
"Where Arabs and Jews Live Together" (Acre Journal, Aug. 17) tells of a much different city from the one I visited two months ago.
The photograph accompanying the article showing a peaceful scene in the courtyard of one of the old buildings belies the realities facing the majority of Palestinian Israelis who live in this once-beautiful ancient city.


Footwork, Flat Shots Keep Connors Going
Alex Reynders runs a private tennis academy called Vanhulst in the south of the Netherlands.
One of his pupils for the last four years has been Paul Haarhuis, who will play a quarterfinal United States Open match tonight at Jimmy Connors's house, also known as the National Tennis Center.
Since Haarhuis took out top-seeded Boris Becker in the third round last week, Reynders has closely studied Connors in anticipation that his man Haarhuis would have to play tennis's gyrating geriatric.
The teacher came away from watching Connors outlast Aaron Krickstein in the fourth round feeling like a very important man.
Preparation for Connors, he decided, is more important than perhaps against any other opponent, including the five top-seed players.


Judge Drops Final Charges For Legislator
Four years after State Senator Manfred Ohrenstein was charged with abusing his legislative power for political ends, the few remaining charges against him were dismissed yesterday at the request of the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.
The ruling by a judge in State Supreme Court in Manhattan brings to a close a long and bitter chapter in Albany politics.
The indictment of Mr.
Ohrenstein, the powerful Democratic minority leader, suggested that widespread practices in Albany were illegal, convulsed the Legislature and led to a series of new ethics laws.


Manhattan National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Read All About It! A Petrified Press in New Guise
On Friday, the newspaper called Leningradskaya Pravda, the organ of the Central Commmittee of Leningrad's Communist Party, quietly died.
On Tuesday, it was reborn as Sankt-Peterburgskiye Vedomosti, or The St.
Petersburg Gazette, a "news exchange" dedicated to delivering "all aspects of socially significant information for the population of Leningrad-St. Petersburg."


Thinking '92: Voters Have Got to Care Again
To the Editor:
I support Anna Quindlen's proposal that the Democratic Party stop worrying so much about winning the 1992 Presidential election and concentrate on discussing the issues ("Run, Mario, Run," column, Aug. 17).
Nevertheless, such a stance will be a voice crying in the wilderness if two critical elements are missing.


NEW INCINERATORS TERMED ESSENTIAL IN NEW YORK CITY
New York City will have to build as many as three new garbage incinerators, in part because it will not be able to recycle as much trash as state goals call for, the Dinkins administration has concluded.
The new incinerators could cost at least $1 billion and will most likely prompt fierce opposition from environmental and community groups.
In his 1989 mayoral campaign, David N. Dinkins had held out hope that the city would be able to address its trash disposal needs without resorting to new incinerators.
But in a plan to be disclosed today, Dinkins administration officials acknowledge that in addition to expanding three existing plants, two to three additional new incinerators will be needed.
Burning Plus Recycling
The administration also said that the city would have to burn 68 percent of its trash, slightly less than what was contemplated by the Koch administration.
The city collects 14,500 tons of waste a day.
"Even with very aggressive recycling, we still need to burn 10,000 tons," Steven M. Polan, the city's Sanitation Commissioner, said in an interview yesterday.
Many environmental and community groups have vehemently opposed building new incinerators because of concern over worsening air quality and neighborhood disruption by truck traffic.
Incinerators emit several kinds of contaminants including soot particles containing lead, acid gases and dioxin, considered to be health risks.
The city will be able to recycle 25 percent of its trash by the year 2000, the same level required by city law but less than a state goal of as much as 42 percent by 1997, Mr.
Polan said.
But any more than 25 percent cannot be economically justified because recycling markets will not be sufficiently developed to absorb all the material that New Yorkers could separate for recycling, he said.
Opponents of incinerators are very likely to take issue with the Sanitation Department analysis that only 25 percent recycling is economically feasible.
But city officials say that just to reach the 25 percent level will require adding to the six materials many New Yorkers currently separate for recycling pickup.
About 6 percent of the trash collected by the Sanitation Department is now being separated under the city's struggling two-and-a-half-year-old recycling program.
Mr.
Polan is to present highlights of the administration's plan at a state legislative hearing on solid waste today at 11 A.M. at 270 Broadway in New York City.
A city solid waste management plan required by state law -- already five months late -- is expected to be completed and released for public comment by Nov. 1, Mr.
Polan said.
In the interview yesterday, Mr.
Polan offered only an outline of the plan, and it was unclear when the new incinerators would be built.
After hearings in November and December, the plan will be modified and submitted to the state Department of Environmental Conservation.
The city cannot build trash processing or disposal plants until the plan receives state approval.
Many officials, including Mr.
Dinkins's First Deputy Mayor, Norman Steisel, maintain that recycling has limits and that with landfill capacity running out, the city has no alternative except to burn a substantial amount of its trash.
Incineration proponents say modern plants are safe if properly maintained.
Dinkins' 1989 Promise
In 1989, Mr.
Dinkins promised to delay a decision until 1993 about building more incinerators, pending a review of the city's trash disposal needs.
"We're not going to have giant, mass-burn incinerators in every borough belching poison into the air," he said, after receiving the endorsement of the New York League of Conservation Voters.
The next February, Mr.
Dinkins said at a conference on the environment: "You all know that I have some very serious concerns about the consequences of proceeding with resource-recovery plants, especially with regard to the toxic ash produced by that technology. Unless my concerns are adequately answered, we will not proceed with incineration."
Resource-recovery plants are incinerators that convert garbage-generated steam into electric power.
Under one Koch administration plan, new incinerators would have been built in each borough.
Mr.
Polan said the Dinkins plan would require building two or three new incinerators and the expansion of three existing units, which is under way.
Construction of an incinerator at the old Brooklyn Navy Yard remains a possibility, a department spokeswoman, Anne Canty, said.
The Sanitation Department's study found that incineration is the cheapest way to dispose of trash, Mr.
Polan said, but an approach limited to burning would be at odds with the state's environmental priorities and increasing national emphasis on more recycling.
He reiterated that the city's current recycling program is struggling and needs an overhaul badly.
Such an overhaul would require big revisions in the city's mandatory recycling law, which contemplated 25 percent recycling by spring 1994.
Sounding an old theme, Mr.
Polan said achieving 25 percent recycling at an affordable cost will require changes in sanitation union work rules.
The department needs more flexibility to move workers from collection to recycling routes, he said.
Bargaining between management and the union has gone nowhere on the issue.


I.B.M. Has New Model At $12,000
I.B.M. introduced its least expensive AS/400 minicomputer to date yesterday and said that it was considering redesigning the computer line to take advantage of the greater performance offered by RISC speed-up techniques now used by most work station makers.
The new model, known as the Application System/400 Model D02, will be sold directly by I.B.M. for an entry price of $12,000.
The company said it was meant to offer large corporations and small businesses like real estate, insurance or law firms an alternative to networks of four to six personal computers.
Robert J. Labant, I.B.M. vice president and general manager, cited Lexus car dealerships as an example, saying it had placed AS/400 computers in many of its 1,000 sales and repair offices.


Toward a Soviet Re-Union
The collapse of the centrally controlled Soviet Union leaves a frightening void.
It's no wonder that Soviet leaders are struggling to create a new confederation that decentralizes power but retains elements of unified control.
Americans who welcome the impulse to escape the stifling grip of centralized power can also welcome these aspects of a limited re-union.
One compelling reason for cooperation is the short-term need to forestall economic collapse.
Two other problems are just as worrisome.
The world will not breathe easily until there is firm control of the 27,000 Soviet nuclear weapons.
And without a compact among the republics, it will be harder to prevent or contain explosive ethnic clashes between and within republics.


Sports of The Times; Can Connors Dominate The Chair?
IT has long been my contention that the fans at home often see more of a sports event than the people in the stadium do.
This was certainly true on Monday, when people watching television knew that Jimmy Connors had lapsed over the line of acceptability, helped by the officials.
New York's current sports hero returns to action tonight against a Dutchman named Paul Haarhuis, who can only expect more of the same antics or worse, given that tennis officials did not stop Connors on Monday.


Genesee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Let Landlords Share In Tree Responsibility
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 27 front-page article on the declining number of trees in New York City because of budget cuts: why don't we switch the responsibility of planting, maintaining and replacing trees from the city to the landlord?
We could legislate that property owners begin tree planting every 12 to 15 feet in front of their buildings, just as the city requires that sidewalks and building facades be maintained by property owners.
In addition, property owners should be required to keep their trees alive and to replace them whenever necessary.


Note Pricing by Johnson
Johnson &amp; Johnson yesterday priced $200 million in seven-year notes through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The notes have an 8 percent coupon and are priced at 100 to yield about 38 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Tacoma Boatbuilding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
Of the 24 players who will represent the United States in the world team championship beginning in Yokohama, Japan, on Sept. 29, exactly half will be subsidized by the American Contract Bridge League.
One of the unlucky ones is Alex Ornstein of Roslyn, L.I., a law student, but his bridge club has decided to help.
The Beverly, at 130 East 57th Street, will hold a club championship at 8 P.M. tomorrow, with all the proceeds to go to Ornstein.
Those who want to embark on the road to tournament success can do so at the Beverly, whose classes for the novice duplicate player will resume on Oct. 7.
In one of them last November, a good playing effort by Judy Rosenblum of Manhattan, was noted by Mike Kallman, the course instructor.
West made an attacking lead of a diamond, which proved effective.
South won with the ace, cashed the ace-king of hearts, and when the bad break was revealed turned her attention to spades, leading to the nine.
East won with the queen and led a diamond forcing a ruff.
Another spade was led to the king, and again East won and led a diamond.
This time South threw a club, and West was on lead in this position: [ DIAGRAM ]
West did the best he could by leading a diamond, but South was in control.
She ruffed and cashed two club winners and a spade winner.
At the finish she cross-ruffed while West helplessly underruffed.
Play like this suggests that South was moving very rapidly out of the duplicate beginner stage.


Vestro Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nordstrom Opens Bank for Its Credit Cards
Nordstrom Inc., the Seattle-based specialty retailer, opened a nationally chartered bank Tuesday to issue and service its credit cards.
The move will exempt the company from state limits on finance charges for consumer credit.
The creation of the Nordstrom National Credit Bank in Englewood, Colo., a limited-charter bank with no checking or savings operations, allows Nordstrom to standardize its credit operations nationally without having to negotiate the thicket of state regulations governing consumer credit.


Gates/FA Distributing reports earnings for Year to June 30


Islanders Are Back, So Are Problems
While the National Hockey League prepares for its 75th season with several storm clouds on its wide horizons, the Islanders opened their 20th training camp today under their localized version of threatening skies.
The leaguewide problems include a possible players strike, an embarrassing lack of a United States television contract and the reluctance of the league's top draft choice, 18-year-old Eric Lindros, to sign with the the Quebec Nordiques, the team that selected him.


Beijing's Shivering Spine; Ethnic Groups, Watching Soviets, Worry Their Leaders by Hoping for Independence
A young Tibetan's face lit up the other day as he reflected on the implications of the collapse of empire and Communism in China's former ideological "Big Brother."
"We see parts of the Soviet Union getting independence," he said in an interview last week in the countryside of Gonghe County in Qinghai Province, what was once part of Tibet.
"We too want independence, and we hope that now it is more likely to happen."


HDR Power Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Dow Edges Down 9.17 to Close at 3,008.50
Stocks closed lower yesterday after the Dow Jones industrial average dipped to the psychological barrier of 3,000 and then rebounded slightly to close at 3,008.50, a loss of 9.17 points.
Anxiety over the employment statistics to be released by the Government tomorrow caused many traders to remain on the sidelines while a batch of program trades in the late afternoon caused the market to fall by nearly 18 points before beginning a slow recovery.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 30
Aug. 23
Aug. 31
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
3.1
Gasoline stocks
209.6
207.6
210.5
Distillate stocks
126.7
124.6
126.7
Crude imports, daily
6.4
6.8
6.8
Product imports, daily
1.8
2.3
1.9
Crude stocks
350.3
348.6
372.2
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
90.5
89.2
92.0
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Ford Tinkers With Design of Taurus
So few models introduced by the American automobile industry in the 1980's qualify as success stories that it is little wonder the Ford Motor Company has been slow and cautious in revamping its formidable Taurus family sedan.
Sure enough, the new 1992 Ford Taurus and the twin Mercury Sable shown to journalists here today have only a few cosmetic exterior changes, like narrower headlights and a more sloping hood.
The cars carry engines and transmissions nearly identical to those in the models they replaced.
The biggest changes are redesigned interiors that are sleeker and more modern-looking.


5 Ex-Los Angeles Deputies Accused of Theft
Federal prosecutors today announced indictments charging five former members of an elite narcotics team in the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department with pocketing hundreds of thousands of dollars seized from drug dealers.
The indictments brought to 18 the number of law-enforcement officers here, most of them sheriff's deputies,who have been charged in a corruption inquiry begun in 1988 by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Internal Revenue Service and sheriff's investigators.
In addition, 12 sheriff's deputies have been suspended pending the outcome of the investigation.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, plans to announce today the interest rate for $650 million in seven-year debentures due Sept. 10, 1998.


Dead Whale Washes Up on Rockaway Beach


For City Council From Brooklyn
City Council redistricting this year has brought a troubling political atmosphere to Brooklyn.
Too many candidates see the expansion of the Council as a chance to split the electorate along racial or ethnic lines and to focus on parochial concerns rather than improve government for everyone.
If divisive candidates win, their communities and the city will be the losers.


Residential Mortgage Investments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thinking '92: Voters Have Got to Care Again; Run, Bill, Run
To the Editor:
I applaud Anna Quindlen's argument for the nomination of New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as the Democratic Presidential candidate (column, Aug. 17), but my hunch is that he means what he says about not wishing to run.


Events: Harvest Time, Decorative Iron
Of and From the Garden
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
A harvest fair of vegetables and flowers from the children's garden program will be held on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The free event, in the children's garden, will include informal workshops, cooking demonstrations and crafts made with garden produce.


Charron, Schwartz In New Perfume Effort
Charron, Schwartz &amp; Partners, New York, has been named to create advertising to introduce another fragrance into a crowded $5 billion perfume market.
The agency yesterday was awarded the account for Sanofi Beauty Products, the United States division of Sanofi Beaute in Paris, one of the world's largest fragrance marketers.
While the assignment includes several leading brands, like Oscar de la Renta, Perry Ellis and Geoffrey Beene, most of the $15 million to $20 million budget -- not uncommon for a fragrance account -- will be devoted to a new fragrance from Oscar de la Renta, to be introduced next year, said Ted Charron, the agency's chief executive.


People
*
Louise Scroggins has been promoted to president and chief executive at Chuck Ruhr Advertising, Minneapolis, from management director and vice president-strategic planning. *
Matt Smith has been named president and creative director at Hawley Martin Partners, Richmond.
He had been senior vice president and associate creative director at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, New York and Boston.
He succeeds Stephen Martin, who becomes vice chairman and chief executive.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Jeff Ballard, pitcher, and Jeff Tackett, catcher, from Rochester of the International League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Purchased the contract of Jim Thome, infielder, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Recalled Sean Berry, third baseman, and Jorge Pedre, catcher, from Omaha of the American Association.
Recalled Archie Corbin, pitcher, from Memphis of the Southern League.
Purchased the contracts of Stu Cole, infielder, and Dave Clark and Bobby Moore, outfielders, from Omaha.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Recalled Rob Maurer, first baseman, and Monty Farriss, second baseman, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
National League
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Recalled Andy Ahsby, pitcher; Kim Batiste, short stop; Darrin Fletcher, catcher; and Ron Jones, outfielder, from Scranto-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Football  National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Placed Elbert Shelley, safety, on injured reserve.
Activated Brian Mitchell, cornerback, from the practice roster.
Signed Joe Fishback, safety, to the practice roster.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Leonard Burton, offensive lineman and William Evers, cornerback; Derrick Douglas, fullback, and Newt Harrell, guard, to the practice roster.
Waived Archie Herring, running back; Pete Lucas, tackle, and Charlie Oliver, safety from the practice roster.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Stephon Weatherspoon, linebacker, to the practice roster.
Activated Bill Jones, running back, from the reserve list.
Placed Tracy Rogers, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Waived Scott Miller, defensive end, from the practice roster.
Waived Dwight Pickens, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Placed Marcus Allen, running back, on injured reserve.
Activated Doug Lloyd, running back, from the practice roster.
Signed Marcus Wilson, defensive back, to the practice roster.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Signed Ernie Thompson, running back, to the practice roster.
Traded Irv Pankey, offensive tackle, to the Indianapolis Colts for a third-round and an undisclosed draft pick in 1992.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Cisco Richard, running back, and Michael Titley, tight end.
Signed Leroy Holt, fullback, and Donnie Gardner, defensive end, to the practice roster.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Darryl Grant, defensive tackle.
Released Joe Weinberg, wide receiver.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Rusty Hilger, quarterback. Hockey  National Hockey League
DETROIT RED WINGS -- Signed Vladimir Konstantinov, defenseman, to a multiyear contract.
Soccer  Major Soccer League
Commissioner Office -- Named John Borozzi deputy commissioner.


Jockey, 69, Retires
He is only 69 years old and has spent just 45 years in the saddle, a full three decades short of his career goal, but WILLIE CLARK , the nation's oldest active jockey, has decided to retire tomorrow after his 10,630th race.
Clark, who spent most of his career at the Charles Town Races in West Virginia, said he had abandoned his dream of riding until his 100th birthday because of a suspension in June for reckless riding.


Salomon Describes Lax Unit
A Salomon Brothers report submitted to Congress yesterday on the activities of the firm's Government bond trading desk paints a picture of a loosely managed operation that ignored many rules and kept little documentation.
A single trader was given enough power that he was able to submit phony bids, alter back-office records to cover up the transactions and then act as a contact between the firm and Government officials investigating those very trades, for which records are now scanty.


Newcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


United Thermal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Factory Fire Leaves Pall Over 'All-American City'
Red, white and blue banners proclaiming Hamlet as an "All-American City" fly from poles all over town.
But today the boast of those proud banners was eclipsed by American flags flying at half-staff and by a steady stream of funeral wreaths being hauled out of the local floral shop.
This town, which sprang up 94 years ago in the piney flats of southeastern North Carolina, is in a palpable state of shock over the fire at the Imperial Food Products plant that left 25 workers dead and 55 others injured.


BASEBALL: Notebook; Johnson the Outfielder Can Count Bonilla In His New Fan Club
Howard Johnson, the Mets' new right fielder, has a fan in Bobby Bonilla.
He also has a role model in Bonilla, who is a pretty good role model to follow.
Bonilla knows more about Howard Johnson than most people because Bonilla, in effect, was HoJo before Johnson was.
Bonilla, like Johnson an impressively productive hitter, played third base for the Pittsburgh Pirates for two and a half seasons, made an abundance of errors and was moved to right field.


U.S. Hoping Moscow Can Retain Control of Soviets' Nuclear Arms
The Bush Administration indicated today that it hopes to see the Soviet Union become a loose confederation of sovereign republics with a central authority that could at least control nuclear weapons, fulfill treaty obligations and work together with the United States on foreign policy initiatives like Middle East peace.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, who outlined Administration policy toward a rapidly changing Soviet Union during a news conference at the State Department, carefully avoided spelling out the type of government the United States would like to see evolve, insisting that this was for the Soviet people to decide.


Europeans, Ending a Delay, Approve Soviet Technical Aid
The European Community approved $11.8 million in technical assistance for the Soviet Union today, the first installment of a long-delayed $1.062 billion program.
The aid package, to be spent by the end of 1992, was allocated by the 12-nation group last December but was then blocked, first in retaliation for repression by Moscow in the Baltic republics and later by jurisdictional disputes.
The purpose of the technical assistance program is to prepare the Soviet markets for reform.


Healthcare Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Trumpeter's Treasure Trove
As a child he wandered the mean streets of Storyville in New Orleans.
His formal education ended in the fifth grade.
As early as the 1920's, his performance contracts forbade him to use the back entrance to clubs and concert halls.
Time magazine put him on its cover in 1949.
He protested publicly when Gov.
Orval E. Faubus blocked integration of the Little Rock schools in 1957, and President Dwight D. Eisenhower sent him a conciliatory telegram.
Miles Davis said it was impossible to play anything on the trumpet that he hadn't already played.
The musician was Louis Armstrong, and today an archive that documents his extraordinary life will be dedicated at Queens College in Flushing.
Scheduled to appear at the invitation-only event will be the trumpeters Dizzy Gillespie, Clark Terry, Doc Cheatham and Jon Faddis, as well as the tap-dancer Honi Coles, the pianist Marty Napoleon, the bass player Arvell Shaw and other jazz luminaries.  'A Prolific Diarist'
Armstrong, who died in 1971, lived in Queens for his last 28 years and is buried in Flushing.
Among the thousands of artifacts in the Louis Armstrong Archive are the musician's collection of 8,000 photographs; 100 scrapbooks and albums, many of which Armstrong assembled and decorated himself; thousands of pages of newspaper and magazine clippings; 20 files full of unpublished musical scores, and 240 acetate disks of live recordings Armstrong made at home.
There are also hundreds of pages of manuscript, much of it unpublished, written by Armstrong.
"He was a prolific diarist, and he wrote a lifetime of reminiscences, observations and criticism," said Michael Cogswell, the collection's curator.
"Louis was a very public man, and this archive gives glimpses into his private life that have not been well documented."
Also in the collection are Armstrong's library of 100 books on music and black history, many of which are autographed first editions.
There are also 500 reel-to-reel audio tapes containing performances, interviews, spoken reminiscences, and performance tapes, many of them not in existence elsewhere.
Among them are performances in his own home, "where he'd play one of his songs on one tape recorder, then toot along with his horn, recording the duet on a second tape recorder," said Dr.
Shirley Strum Kenny, the president of Queens College, who was instrumental in bringing the archive to the school.
One of the more eccentric treasures of the archive is a book of bawdy jokes and stories that Armstrong compiled; among his sources were Bojangles Robinson, Stepin Fetchit, Zutty Singleton and Sid Catlett.
Playing Armstrong's Trumpets
Armstrong's five gold-plated performance trumpets are also among the artifacts in the collection, and they will be in use at the dedication celebration today by Mr.
Cheatham, who is 86 years old and used to play with Armstrong; Mr.
Gillespie, Mr.
Faddis and Donald Byrd, as well as a trumpet student at the Aaron Copland School of Music at Queens College, and a 12-year-old trumpeter from Louis Armstrong Middle School in Queens.
It will take two to three years to arrange, preserve and catalogue the materials, during which time the collection will be unavailable to scholars.
Ultimately, the archive will be open to researchers at the college and in a computer library data base.
"The collection is unusual in that it's suffused with the personality of Louis Armstrong," said Dr.
Kenny.
"Beyond the autobiographical writings, he decorated his own scrapbooks with penned commentaries, and he was even his own archivist: he did cataloguing of his materials in his own hand."
The Louis Armstrong Archive will be part of the technically advanced, climate-controlled Archival Center in the Benjamin S. Rosenthal Library at Queens College.
The archives come from Armstrong's modest frame bungalow with its red-brick facade at 34-56 107th Street in Corona, where he moved in 1943 with his fourth wife, Lucille.
Despite his wealth in later years, he refused to move from the small house in the working-class neighborhood because it reminded him of the streets of his youth.
Lucille Armstrong died in 1983, and willed the house to the city of New York, and the Louis Armstrong Education Foundation donated his memorabilia to Queens College.
The house, now landmarked by New York City, has been administered since 1987 by the college.
"When we examined the archives we discovered that they needed to be properly preserved in a climate-controlled environment," said Dr.
Kenny.
"There were no temperature or humidity controls in the house itself."
The archive has received a $50,000 grant from the Ford Foundation and a $30,000 grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities.
One less-than-crucial issue in Armstrong scholarship may not be resolved by the materials in the archive: unanimity on the trumpeter's proper nickname.
His fans called him Satchmo, a contraction of the phrase "satchel mouth." Many contemporary musicians called him Pops, and Armstrong used the name to describe himself.
Others called him both Louis and Louie.
"We do know that he said 'Hello, Dolly, this is Louis,' " said Mr.
Cogswell, referring to Armstrong's 1964 hit record.
"That's sure a clue to his own preference. But the correct pronunciation has been hotly debated for decades, and that's unlikely to stop now."


Oil-Spill Organization Gearing Up
In partial fulfillment of a pledge made after the Exxon Valdez spill of March 1989, a not-for-profit oil industry organization announced yesterday that it had placed orders for 16 ships, complete with oil skimmers and containment boom systems, plus 20 miles of shoreline booms and other equipment, at a cost of $216 million.
The Marine Spill Response Corporation, which is financed by oil companies, shippers and handlers and aims to become a kind of national fire department for oil spills, will fill many of the requirements of a law that came after the Valdez spill, the Oil Pollution Act of 1990.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
A GARAGE door that slides smoothly up and down is a morale booster as well as a back saver.
Because of their many parts, garage doors need lubrication and minor adjustments once or twice a year.
The job is usually easy, but some procedures can require two people to complete.
Start by lubricating the rollers -- the small wheels attached to the sides of the door.
To do this, simply squirt a few drops of lightweight household oil onto the spindles, or spray them with a small amount of silicone or Teflon lubricant.


Fatal Gunfight Over Dog Stuns Staten Island Neighborhood
The residents of Dunbar and Tudor Streets in Great Kills, S.I., pride themselves as models of middle-class civility.
Children idle away summer days riding bicycles; dads crank up the gas grills on weekends; neighbors watch out for one another's homes when they are away on vacation.
On Tuesday, however, an argument between two families that apparently began when a puppy urinated on a bush escalated into open armed conflict that left one person dead, two wounded and a score of others dismayed that anything like this could have happened in this usually peaceful neighborhood.


In Lieu of Swags and Cloth, Just Simple Country Coziness
EVEN the decorating world is acknowledging the recession, in an oblique way.
Signs of tight finances, if no lack of fantasy, can be detected at Show house 91 in Smithtown, L.I., a benefit for Family Service League of Suffolk County that opens Monday.
Gold-plated faucets, faux fur upholstery and other 80's extravagances are absent.
In their place are vintage sports equipment, bird cages and other relatively inexpensive relics as well as sleights of hand, like a table made of suitcases and shade pulls made of Christmas balls.


CUNY Barred From Punishing White Professor
A Federal judge has ruled that City College of New York may not punish a professor for writing that "on average, blacks are significantly less intelligent than whites."
The professor, Dr.
Michael Levin, who is tenured in the philosophy department, had sued the college president and dean, charging violations of his civil and constitutional rights.


Pistons Waive Johnson
He did his part for the Detroit Pistons, but at the age of 35 guard VINNIE JOHNSON was apparently considered too old -- and too expensive at $1.5 million for the 1991-92 season -- to continue with a team now awash with promising young guards.


Seagram Co. Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Jack Henry &amp; Associates reports earnings for Year to June 30


Allen Goes To Tri-Star, Breaking With Orion For 1 Film
After negotiating with several studios, Woody Allen decided today to make his next film for Tri-Star Pictures, ending at least temporarily his long relationship with Orion Pictures.
Under the terms of a deal worked out between Tri-Star, Orion and Mr.
Allen, Mr.
Allen's commitment to make three films for Orion remains in effect, the studios said in a statement.
But Orion, which has been having money troubles and has been unable to finance production of any new movies in recent months, will allow Mr.
Allen to make his next film, which is to begin shooting in November, for Tri-Star.
Mr.
Allen will write, direct and act in the movie, the plot and cast of which have not been disclosed.
Allen's Other Suitors
Tri-Star, which is owned by the Sony Corporation, is run by Michael Medavoy, who had previously been an executive at Orion.
Mr.
Allen turned to Tri-Star after previously holding talks with 20th Century Fox, where he reportedly came close to a deal, and with Disney, which dropped out early in the discussions.


Vigoro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lindal Cedar Homes reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Charges Dropped Against Ohrenstein
A judge dismissed all remaining counts against State Senator Manfred Ohrenstein of Manhattan, the Senate minority leader.
In an indictment in 1987, he was accused of assigning legislative employees to campaign work and giving no-show jobs to his political allies.
Page B1.
U.S. v.
Manuel Noriega
Twenty months after he surrendered to American forces that invaded Panama, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega goes on trial this morning.
Page D24. 'The Worst Thing Ever'
Until Tuesday morning, Hamlet, N.C., was a town that felt blessed.
Then the fire alarm rang, signaling a tragedy at the poultry plant.
Page D25.


Coke Sees Marketing Help Of Hollywood's Top Agent
In a highly unusual and somewhat mysterious move, the Coca-Cola Company announced yesterday that it had hired Creative Artists Agency Inc., Hollywood's most powerful talent agency, to help Coca-Cola mold its marketing and media strategies around the world.
While both companies described their new relationship in only general terms, Coca-Cola executives said Creative Artists and its increasingly influential chairman, Michael S. Ovitz, would help Coca-Cola develop long-term strategies and present a unified message to consumers in the 107 countries where it does business.


New All-Sports Radio Network
ESPN and ABC Radio said Wednesday that they would begin a national all-sports radio network in January.
The network, to be called the ESPN Radio Network, will provide 16 hours of programming weekly, with weekend shows and weekday reports during morning and afternoon drive times, they said.


When Watchdogs Nod -- A Special Report.; Handling of B.C.C.I. Case Arouses Deep Suspicions
More than two years ago, the Justice Department acquired 16 hours of tape recordings of a former executive of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International pouring out details of how the bank used front men to acquire American banks illegally.
But the Justice officials kept the tapes secret and, as they now acknowledge, deceived bank examiners and other investigators about the tapes' existence.
The story of these crucial recordings begins to shed light on how, and in part why, B.C.C.I., a Luxembourg-based bank owned mostly by Middle Easterners, was able to take control of the American banks and to engage in drug-money laundering for several years without being detected or halted.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.62
5.87
8.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.33
7.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.38
7.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.65
7.63
8.70
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.09
8.05
8.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.10
9.07
9.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.97
6.97
7.61
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NEWS SUMMARY
SOVIET TURMOIL A10-13
The Soviet Congress ceded its power to a new government largely controlled by the republics.
The vote recognized the reality of the collapsing union and bowed to an ultimatum by President Gorbachev.
Page A1
News analysis: President Gorbachev once again displayed his talent for adapting to the inevitable and making it seem like personal inspiration.
The nation's future may be in doubt, but his resiliency as a leader is not.
A1
Soviet notebook: A precedent for Communism: Mongols A12


Icos Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


What It Costs to Keep Tompkins Sq. Deserted
To the Editor:
Last Saturday, I went down to Tompkins Square Park, a churned-up, dispirited space guarded all around its periphery by pairs of police officers.
They were chatting peaceably, and I interrupted to ask why they were there.
To keep people out while the park is rehabilitated, I was told.
How many officers on each shift?
Twenty?
Yes, said one.
More, said another.
Twenty-four hours a day?
They nodded curtly.
I had, after all, interrupted their conversation.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW, WORKING GROUP -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Rhone-Poulenc Names Chief of U.S. Division
The United States subsidiary of Rhone-Poulenc, the giant French chemical company, said yesterday that it had named Peter J. Neff chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Neff has been president and chief operating officer of the subsidiary, Rhone-Poulenc Inc., since 1987 and has had broad experience in administration and strategic planning.
Mr.
Neff, who is 52 years old, sees his primary mission as developing the company's specialty chemical business in the United States and improving the profitability of its commodity and agricultural chemicals businesses.
"We have some leadership positions in the specialty chemical area," Mr.
Neff said in a telephone interview.
"But we're looking to do a lot more developing in that area. We plan to do that by internal investment and through acquisitions."


Holco Mortgage Acceptance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ted and Joe, 1941: September 6


On My Mind; Burning the Bridges
With exquisite care and determined consistency, the black political marauders who goad mobs into the streets against Jews are succeeding in damaging the interests and future of the whole community -- the black community.
The damage to American blacks is not a mere side effect but part of the strategy of the race hustlers.
They are many unpleasant things but stupid is not one.


Guilty Plea By Unisys Is Expected
The Unisys Corporation, one of the nation's largest military contractors, has agreed to pay a record $190 million to settle charges stemming from the Justice Department's investigation into procurement fraud and bid-rigging on Pentagon contracts, Government and industry officials said today.
The settlement, which is to include fines and future profits, is to be announced Friday when Unisys pleads guilty to an array of felony and civil charges in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., the officials said.


F.T.C. Approves Computer Merger
The Federal Trade Commission cleared the Storage Technology Corporation's merger with XL/Datacomp Inc.
Last week Storage Technology, based in Louisville, Colo., and XL/ Datacomp, based in Hinsdale, Ill., said their boards had approved the merger.
A spokesman for Storage Technology said the merger of the computer companies was expected to close "no earlier than the middle of October." The agreement is subject to approval by XL/Datacomp's stockholders.
Storage Technology shares fell $2.75 today, to $42.50.
XL/ Datacomp closed at $11, down 50 cents, in over-the-counter trading.


Review/Photography; 25 Years of Being There (With Camera)
The most important talent any photojournalist can have is the knack simply to be there.
Over the past 25 years, Mary Ellen Mark has consistently demonstrated a remarkable ability for gaining access to situations that might daunt other photographers -- and once there, to record dramatic and emotionally moving images.
As a result, she has become one of the most important documentary photographers working today, taking her place alongside such contemporaries as Sebastiao Salgado, Eugene Richards, Susan Meiselas and a handful of others.
A marvelous exhibition of Ms.
Mark's work opens today at the International Center of Photography Midtown.
It was organized by Mary Ann Fulton of the International Museum of Photography at George Eastman House in Rochester.
Like many other photographers, Ms.
Mark achieved her first success depicting people from other cultures.
In her case, a Fulbright grant in 1965 enabled her to spend two years photographing in Turkey and throughout Europe.
On her return to New York, she began to photograph for magazines, and has continued to do so since.


Review/Art; Cooper-Hewitt Displays More of Its Design Trove
Among long-running shows on Broadway, quite a few lose their first freshness.
Not all cast changes may be for the worse, but the collective energy level inclines to go down.
So do the first luster of the sets and the commitment of the orchestra.
Unchanging, open-ended museum exhibitions can lose their magic, too.
But nothing of that sort can be said of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, which has been engaged for some months now in a rotating anthology from its mammoth and multifarious holdings.


Telemundo Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Weak Sales for Last Month Are Reported by Retailers
The nation's largest retailers yesterday reported weak August sales as consumers' confidence and spending failed to rebound.
The sluggishness was widespread.
A Merrill Lynch index of the nation's 22 largest retailers showed a lackluster 1 percent increase in sales last month at stores open for at least a year, compared with their sales in August 1990.


Dibrell Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pop/Jazz; Personalized Bossa Nova From Veloso
"I go against the grain, sing against the melody, swim against the tide," Caetano Veloso sang in "Branquinha" ("Little White One") on his brilliant 1989 album, "Estrangeiro" ("Foreigner").
In fact, he makes every melody he sings sound luminous and newly discovered.
But in following his own path, Mr.
Veloso has become one of the world's most visionary songwriters.
Although he has been known in Brazil since the 1960's, Mr.
Veloso released his first United States album, "Caetano Veloso," just five years ago.
It was a selection of his songs from the two previous decades, yet it was a detour from the music that had made him a superstar in Brazil.


Don't Call Those Bushy Tailed Rats Cute
To the Editor:
To those of us who have seen squirrels getting their own food in their own style, it is amazing to read of people who actually feed them (letter, Aug. 15).


At the Movies
Crown Heights Movie
Long before the accidental killing of a child and the slaying of a Hasidic student in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, made domestic and international headlines, the esteemed film maker Sidney Lumet had decided on his next project: "Close to Eden," set in the community that has been so much in the news.
"It's a very simple melodrama," Mr.
Lumet said as he described the screenplay written by Robert Avrech, the son of a Crown Heights rabbi.
The film, which is to star Melanie Griffith, is the tale of a police detective, tough and tart-tongued but locked away from her emotions, who is compelled by one of her cases to live in the neighborhood's Orthodox Jewish section.
"It is really about what happens to her emotionally because of her exposure to that community," Mr.
Lumet said..
"The plot of the story is her emotional transition, and the melodrama itself is very slight, just enough to justify getting her into there."
Many of Mr.
Lumet's works are renowned for their sensitive, gritty portrayals of life in New York City, among them "Prince of the City," "Dog Day Afternoon" and "Serpico." He said he "fell in love right away" when he first read Mr.
Avrech's script last winter.
"What's interesting is that he really knows what he's talking about. I've seen scripts before about Hasidic life, but I've never seen one by someone who's on the inside. Robert seriously considered making that his life."
When it came to the starring role, requiring someone whose vulnerability is eventually exposed, Mr.
Lumet said: "In my view, you always cast the third act. You cast the final truth of the character. And one of the things that has always moved me in Melanie's work is how open she is. It's extraordinary -- the degree of vulnerability and openness in it."
Mr.
Lumet plans to begin 10 weeks of filming in a couple of weeks, but he never intended to make his film in Crown Heights.
"The Hasidic community members themselves do not want to partake of anything that has to do with what amounts to the outside world," he said.
"We're going to re-create it in an area that we found in Queens."  Asking Questions
"I start the whole creative process with a lot of questions," Hal Hartley said, "and I usually just wind up with a lot of questions. The questioning is important."
Lately Mr.
Hartley, the writer and director who made his debut with "The Unbelievable Truth," has been very busy with the creative process.
His new film, "Trust," about a pregnant teen-ager at odds with her widowed mother and an angry electronics genius at odds with his father, opened in New York in July after winning the Waldo Salt Screenwriting Award at the 1991 Sundance Film Festival and the grand prize at the 1991 Houston International Film Festival.
Two of Mr.
Hartley's short films, the 10-minute "Ambition" and the 17-minute "Theory of Achievement," were recently televised on the PBS program "Alive From Off Center."
Mr.
Hartley, meanwhile, was in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., making a film called "Surviving Desire" for "American Playhouse" on PBS.
At the same time, he was preparing to film "Simple Men," based on his screenplay about two brothers, a scholar and a small-time criminal, searching for their radical activist father, a former major-league baseball player who vanished 23 years earlier.
"It grew out of a lot of my constant preoccupations," Mr.
Hartley said of the screenplay.
"There is a traditional story form throughout history which, broadly speaking, is called the search for the father -- an odyssey kind of thing where the characters try to reconcile their differences with their father. And a lot of the movie deals with misogyny. The older, criminal brother pledges himself for various reasons to be a terrible, misogynous man, and as things would have it, he can't pull it off."
In terms of his personal preoccupations, Mr.
Hartley said, "Simple Men" is concerned with "how a person's respect for other individuals is manifested, particularly men for women."
Mr.
Hartley said "Surviving Desire" deals with a college professor and his infatuation with a female student.
He said "Trust" began life as a sketch he wrote in 1984 and was rewritten while he was editing "The Unbelievable Truth."
"It really became a story about a lot of different kinds of people who overcome their own selfish natures," he said.
Frederick the Great
He loved literature and art.
He narrowly escaped a sentence of death.
He corresponded with and befriended Voltaire.
He proved gifted at war, politics, government, trade, legal reforms.
He wrote poetry and, with more skill, about politics, history and philosophy.
He played the flute and composed music.
He took snuff and spoke with icy wit.
He was Frederick the Great of Prussia (1712-86), and now the independent film maker Martin Rosen plans to bring his life to the screen in the form of "I, Frederick," based on a script by Fritz Lehner, the Austrian who will direct the production.
The role of the enlightened despot has not been cast.
The producer and director say they have begun a worldwide search for their star.


Concierges: Baedekers In the Flesh; 'Your Yacht Is Here'
For a top-flight Manhattan hotel concierge, aplomb is almost as vital as a full Rolodex.
It's part of the job to be unfazed by the range of requests and services that guests have come to expect, from last-minute arrangements for a wedding ceremony to odd deliveries -- like the yacht that arrived one day at the back door of the Carlyle Hotel.
"I simply called the guest and said: 'Your yacht is here. Where would you like to have it delivered?' " recalled John Neary, chief concierge at the Carlyle since 1981.
Mr.
Neary promptly arranged for a shipping company to fetch the yacht from outside the Carlyle -- "It was blocking 77th Street" -- and deliver it to the customer's home in Florida.


INSIDE
Shortage of Cleanup Fund Seen for Weapons Plants
The Department of Energy said it could cost much more than it expected to clean up polluted nuclear weapons plants and estimated it would receive nearly $12 billion less than it needs to finish the job on schedule.
Page A16.
Accord to Bar Pesticide
The maker of a pesticide linked to illness among farm workers agreed to sharply reduce its use by the end of the year.
The Government will then move to ban it entirely.
Page A16.
Iran-Contra Indictment?
Clair E. George, a former high official of the Central Intelligence Agency, may be indicted today on charges he lied to Congress.
Page A16.
Connors In; Sampras Out
Jimmy Connors gained the semifinals, but defending champion Pete Sampras was knocked out of the U.S.
Open.
Page B7.


A.T.&amp;T. Seeks Lines to Soviets
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company sought permission yesterday from the Federal Government to expand long-distance telephone capacity into the Soviet Union, which is able to receive fewer telephone calls than a medium- size apartment building in Manhattan.
In its request, A.T.&amp; T. asked to activate 42 more circuits, a measure of capacity, on the Soviet telecommunications satellite system.


Sbarro Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 14


Development Stirs Emotions in Long Island City


Spotlight Turning on Those Who Run Billions in Funds
The Salomon Brothers scandal is placing a harsh spotlight on what is normally one of the quietest but most influential groups on Wall Street: money managers and investment partnerships that control billions of dollars in capital.
A number of Salomon clients have been subpoenaed by the Government or asked for information about their involvement with Salomon in the purchases of Treasury securities during several auctions since late last year.


Gamma International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Called up David Haas, pitcher; Rich Rowland, catcher; Johnny Paredes, second baseman; and Shawn Hare, outfielder, from Toledo of the International League.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Called up Rico Rossy, shortstop, from Richmond of the International League.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Called up Jack Armstrong and Steve Foster, pitchers, and Freddie Benavides, infielder, from Nashville of the American Association.
BASKETBALL
National Basketball Association  CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed Rex Chapman, guard, to a multiyear contract extension.
DETROIT PISTONS -- Acquired Darrell Walker, guard, from the Washington Bullets for two second-round draft picks.
Continental Basketball Association
ALBANY PATROONS -- Traded Albert King, forward, to the La Crosse Catbirds for Dwayne McClain, guard.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Acquired Fred Cofield, guard, and a 1992 seventh-round draft pick from the Rockford Lightening for Scott Williams, Lorenzo Williams, Kenny Miller and Paris McCurdy, forwards.
HOCKEY American Hockey League
ROCHESTER AMERICANS -- Announced the retirement of Jim Hofford, defenseman.
SOCCER Major Soccer League
ST. LOUIS STORM -- Signed Greg Muhr, defender, to a one-year contract. COLLEGE
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL -- Named Mike Gillian men's assitant basketball coach and Peter Cinella men's graduate assistant bastketball coach.
CAL STATE FULLERTON -- Named David Stow men's gymnastics coach.
CORNELL -- Named Casey Jones men's assistant hockey coach.


Campaign Trail; When the Name's Vital to the Game
In one of those dirty tricks that has become a time-honored tradition in New York politics, a number of City Council candidates discovered last month that they were running against someone with the same last name.
So it was for incumbent Councilman Jose Rivera, who found Jose L. Rivera on the ballot in the 15th District in the Bronx.
Lucy Cruz, the candidate supported by the Democratic organization in the Bronx, woke up to find a challenge from Lydia Cruz in the 18th District.


Corrections
A film review in Weekend on Aug. 2 about "Doc Hollywood" listed the credits incompletely.
The producers were Susan Holt and Deborah D. Johnson.
Producers' representatives reported the omission at the time, but this correction was delayed by a clerical oversight.


Yankees Don't Want Clubhouse to Turn Into a Kennel
When the calendar creeps into September and your team is mired in fifth place, there are certain players who stop thinking about baseball and start thinking about golf, fishing and anything but what they earn paychecks for.
It is a dangerous time and the Yankees are inching through that minefield now.
Finding someone to concede the Yankees are playing out the string is a chore, but subtle signs are there.
They usually are when a club is 13 1/2 games out of first.
Players arrive later for games, losses mount like an unnoticed pile of laundry and the best opponent is the last one on the schedule in October.


Goal Systems International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Vice President Is Leaving Warner Brothers
Warner Brothers said yesterday that Mark Canton, an executive vice president, would leave the company by mutual agreement.
Mr.
Canton is executive vice president of the studio's Worldwide Motion Picture Production unit.
It had been widely rumored in the film industry that he wanted to leave the studio, reportedly in part because he did not have the power to decide which films the studio would make.
No Comment on Speculation


Islanders: Bidders Are There, Price Isn't
John O. Pickett Jr., the owner of the Islanders, said yesterday that he has "five or six" potential buyers for his hockey team and that "they are getting close to the final-bid stage."
But Pickett said no one has offered him the price he wants for the troubled franchise, which has been on the market since last February.


Mindful of the Pressures, Capriati's Father Watches
They practiced two courts apart yesterday at the National Tennis Center, and Stefano Capriati could not help but notice the difference.
Steffi Graf was in a hurry, the way she is in a hurry to finish whenever she is on a tennis court.
Graf squeezed two hours' worth of hitting with her sparring partner Mark Woodforde into about 50 minutes.
There was no break from the forehands, except to slice a backhand.
There was not a smile from the top-rated player in the world, not a wave of recognition to the fans lining the fence.


For City Council From Manhattan
This year's City Council primary election in Manhattan and an adjoining section of the Bronx has attracted a number of capable candidates.
Here are The Times's recommendations in those districts where winning the Democratic designation next Thursday will be tantamount to election.
First District:
One prominent candidate, Margaret Chin, is vague and misleading about her background and her positions on issues.
She refuses, for example, to clarify her past affiliation with the Communist Workers Party and other radical organizations.
That's troubling because any candidate's record bears on judgment and character.


On the Outside, Calm From Crown Heights
The bustling streets of Crown Heights yesterday absorbed with outward calm the news that a Brooklyn grand jury did not indict a Hasidic man whose car struck and killed a black boy in the neighborhood last month.
The accident ignited four nights of racial unrest.
The disturbances that many political and community leaders had feared did not materialize, and there were not even signs of tension on streets that last month were convulsed by violence.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section yesterday about Showhouse 91 in Smithtown, L.I., misidentified a participating designer.
She is Shelly Azapian.


Geodynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Gary Player Playing for South Africa
GARY PLAYER will lead South Africa's return to world team golf competition at the Dunhill Cup at St.
Andrews in Scotland next month.


Topics of The Times; Redeeming the Ohrenstein Mess
This week's dismissal of remaining payroll-padding charges against Manfred Ohrenstein, the minority leader of the New York State Senate, ends Mr.
Ohrenstein's painful legal ordeal.
But it hardly vindicates the practices that led to his indictment, or the Legislature's failure to enact stricter rules governing its use of legislative workers and resources in political campaigns.
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert Morgenthau, brought the charges after a yearlong investigation found that more than two dozen people had been placed on the Senate payroll in phony job titles to work exclusively on 1986 campaigns.
That was a diversion of public funds and a perversion of fair elections.
But in a lamentable decision last year, the state Court of Appeals threw out the core charges, stressing the Legislature's failure to define the abuse as a crime.


At a Dacha of Communist Ex-Elite, Ownership Becomes Hard to Trace
The van turned slowly in past the green wooden gate and stopped at the front porch of the opulent vacation home, the dacha where for decades the leaders of Leningrad's Communist Party have gone to breathe the fresh winds coming through the firs from the Gulf of Finland.
Two weeks after the Communist Party was dissolved and its holdings in the Leningrad area were transferred to the city government, the new owners from the Leningrad city council arrived in this little town near the city today to take stock.


Washington Talk; 2 Men Lead Democrats In Outlining '92 Tactics
Senator Lloyd Bensten says, almost definitively, that he will not run for President, and no one has ever asked Representative Dan Rostenkowski to try for it.
But the broad jurisdictions of their committees give the chairmen of the Senate Finance Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee the keys to the central issues of the Democrats' campaign for the White House.
Last month, in pushing through bills to provide additional weeks of unemployment compensation for people out of work for more than half a year, they sought to deal not just with the needs of the workers.
In the end the workers got no help because President Bush killed the actual benefits, but the Democrats gained, perhaps substantially.
They now have more ammunition to make the claim that they care about downtrodden Americans while Mr.
Bush is more concerned with Kurds, Turks and Egyptians.


Sverdlovsk Votes to Restore Its Old Name, Yekaterinburg
The city council of Sverdlovsk, site of the execution of Czar Nicholas II and his family, has decided to change the city's name back to Yekaterinburg, the news agency Tass has reported.
Sverdlovsk, an industrial center in the Ural mountains 850 miles east of Moscow, sent a request to the Parliament of the Russian republic asking for approval of the decision, Tass said on Wednesday.


Dodgers Have Some Dates With Danger
September is full of baseball's best images: wild throws, crazy hops on artificial turf, close calls, tight races, magic numbers, champagne celebrations.
These are the pleasures, and pains, of a pennant race.


Goodby, Berlin Loses Honda Dealers' Group
The Northern California Honda Dealers Ad Association is looking for another advertising agency with Honda experience to replace the incumbent, Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco, on its $5 million to $6 million account.
The search began when Goodby, Berlin became a finalist in a review for the $90 million American Isuzu Motors account, said Jim McDonald, the association's head.
Now that the agency has won the Isuzu account, he added, the association wants a new agency to "be up and running" in a matter of weeks.


Asset Freeze On Noriega Is Extended
A British court today indefinitely extended an asset freeze that had been granted to the Panamanian Government as part of its effort to recover $23 million reportedly stolen from the country by Manuel Antonio Noriega, Panama's deposed ruler.
Panama says that much of the $23 million -- part of $90 million it contends that Mr.
Noriega moved via the Bank of Credit and Commerce International -- may now be with Capcom Financial Services Ltd., a London-based currency trader with links to the bank.
In all, Panama says Mr.
Noriega stole more than $500 million.


At the Bar; The Bar Chief Confronts His Belief In Free Speech When His Daughter Expresses Herself, Openly.
By and large, presidents of the American Bar Association lead good, staid lives.
They travel first class, hobnob with politicians and dignitaries, speechify on safe subjects.
But Talbot (Sandy) D'Alemberte, a partner in the Miami firm of Steel, Hector &amp; Davis, has been president of the bar group barely a month and has already faced his first flap, one he could never have anticipated in his nearly lifelong quest for the post.
It came this week, when the October issue of Playboy hit the newsstands.
In it there is a photograph of his daughter, 21-year-old Gabrielle.
She is featured in an article on "The Girls of the Big Ten," and she is almost entirely unclad.


Pic 'n' Save Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4


Gregorio Follari, Cellist, 51
Gregorio Follari, the associate principal cellist in the New York City Opera Orchestra, died on Friday at his home in Park Ridge, N.J.
He was 51 years old.
He died of liver cancer, a spokeswoman for the New York City Opera said.
Mr.
Follari was born in Castel D'Accia, Italy, on Feb. 14, 1940, and began studying the cello at the Palermo Conservatory when he was 8.
He moved to the United States in 1961, and joined the New York City Opera Orchestra in 1963.
Mr.
Follari also performed with the Brooklyn Philharmonic and the orchestras of the New York City Ballet, the Metropolitan Opera, the American Ballet Theater and the New Jersey State Opera.
He is survived by his wife, Susan, a daughter, Lissanna, and a son, Mickey, all of Park Ridge; a brother, Pino, of Cannobio, Italy, and two sisters, Maria Butera and Nunzia Liga, both of Castel D'Accia.


Martin Dubilier, 65, an Inventor Who Invested in Companies, Dies
Martin H. Dubilier, an inventor who achieved prominence as an investor in poorly performing companies that he could fix up, died Wednesday at the age of 65.
He lived in Greenwich, Conn., and Fisher Island, Fla.
He died of lung cancer, said a spokesman for the firm, Clayton &amp; Dubilier Inc.


Transmedia Network Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Grasso Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Serbs in Croatian Cities Are Quiet and Invisible
As the conflict between Serbs and Croats grows angrier, Milorad Pupovac finds it increasingly difficult to explain to his 7-year-old daughter Tihana just which side they're on.
"I asked her one morning whether she thought grandpa was a bad man, and she replied, 'Of course not, he's a Croat,' " Mr.
Pupovac said, recalling a recent attempt.


Seeing F.B.I. Files on Lennon: A Hard Day's Night
Imagine that in the early 1970's, at the behest of the Nixon Administration, the Federal Bureau of Investigation began tailing John Lennon.
Imagine that years later a Beatles fan-turned-scholar seeking to write a social history of the period invoked the Freedom of Information Act to obtain the F.B.I.'s file on the singer.
Imagine the bureau, and the Justice Department, fighting him every step of the way.
For the scholar, Jon Wiener of the University of California at Irvine, all of this is very real.
After a magical mystery tour through the Federal bureaucracy and the courts, lasting nearly as long as Lennon's career as a Beatle, Mr.
Wiener is finally closing in on his cache.
But he admits that a long and winding legal road still lies before him.
In February 1981, three months after the 40-year-old Lennon was slain outside his Manhattan apartment, Mr.
Wiener requested the file the F.B.I. had amassed on the British-born musician a decade earlier.
The material, he hoped, would shed light on Lennon's politicization in the Vietnam era and on how, at the behest of the Nixon Administration, the bureau had monitored his activities.
Many Big Black Blotches
Strictly in terms of pages, the F.B.I. substantially complied with Mr.
Wiener's request, producing roughly two-thirds of its Lennon file.
But much of what it furnished was heavily censored -- white photocopies filled with big black blotches, the work of some anonymous deskbound Rothko in the Federal apparat.
Many other documents, including those that included what Mr.
Wiener believes are the most significant disclosures, were withheld completely.
In court papers, the bureau maintains that its interests in Lennon were both legitimate and quite limited.
But producing everything it came up with, it says, would either jeopardize national security, disclose confidential sources, compromise intelligence gathering or threaten relations with foreign governments, perhaps even prompting them to retaliate.
In July a Federal appeals court in San Francisco ruled that the bureau's explanations were vague, formulaic and unconvincing, and directed the bureau to be more specific.
But the bureau insisted that any further explanations would themselves contain compromising information and asked for a rehearing.
"We're closer today than ever, but I've learned not to be too optimistic about this," Mr.
Wiener said.
Reticence Called Puzzling
He expressed puzzlement that the F.B.I. and the Justice Department, which is representing the bureau in court, would defend their predecessors so doggedly.
"I would have thought the Reagan or Bush administrations would have said: 'This is all ancient history. J. Edgar Hoover is gone and Nixon is, too, and historians are welcome to the files,' " he said.
Their reticence, Mr.
Wiener added, could reflect either a desire to suppress embarrassing information or merely the reflexive behavior of bureaucrats for whom saying "no" is invariably the safest course.
Donnita Clark, a spokesman for the bureau, said it would have no comment on what was in the disputed documents or on any other aspect of the case.
Nor did a Justice Department spokesman, Douglas Tillett, have comment.
Mr.
Wiener said he hoped to use the withheld material to update his 1984 book, "Come Together: John Lennon In His Time," published by the University of Illinois Press.
But to his lawyer, Mark Rosenbaum of the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California, the case has also become a test of the continued vitality of the Freedom of Information Act itself.
"If Peeping Tom surveillance of a dead rock musician constitutes national security, we might as well fold up and discard the F.O.I.A.," he said.
Lennon's widow, Yoko Ono, has taken no role in the case and would not comment on it.
"She wishes the A.C.L.U. and Wiener well, but has just not actively pursued it," said Elliot Mintz, a spokesman for the Lennon estate.
Material Seen as 'Sanitized'
Mr.
Mintz himself expressed doubts that the files still contained anything remarkable or revealing.
"I would assume this material was sanitized a long time ago, that the Magic Marker has already done its magic work," he said.
Mr.
Wiener, now 47, was a Princeton undergraduate when the Beatles made their famous appearances on the Ed Sullivan Show in 1964.
Moreover, at a time when one could categorize people by their favorite Beatle, Mr.
Wiener preferred the more cerebral and sardonic Lennon to the cute Paul McCartney, the shy George Harrison and the lovable Ringo Starr.
By 1981, Mr.
Wiener was teaching and writing late 20th-century American social history.
Believing that Lennon's political activism had been overlooked in posthumous assessments and anxious to show how the Lennon saga fit into political and social movements of his day, Mr.
Wiener asked the F.B.I., the Central Intelligence Agency and the Immigration and Naturalization Service for whatever it had on collected on him.
The immigration agency promptly produced all its files and the intelligence agency's materials were minimal.
The bureau sent only two-thirds of the 281 pages it said it had in its Lennon dossier.
An Antiwar Concert Tour
The bureau opened its investigation into Lennon's activities in early 1972 after linking him to a planned antiwar concert tour that was to culminate in a "political Woodstock" at the Republican National Convention.
Mr.
Hoover, then Director of the F.B.I., sent directives to bureau offices in New York, Los Angeles, San Diego and Washington, and Federal agents began tailing Lennon.
In March one memorandum reported that the musician had established "temporary residence" at "the Saint Regis Hotel, 150 Bank Street" in New York.
In April another partly redacted memorandum, an unsigned letter sent to H. R. Haldeman, then chief of staff of the Nixon White House, described efforts to deport Lennon before the Republicans met.
Some 'Confidential' Lyrics
The investigation fizzled after the Republican convention, which Lennon did not attend.
"In view of subject's inactivity in Revolutionary Activities and his seemingly rejection by N.Y. radicals, his case is being closed," one document states.
On some of the documents that were made public, little remained except the word "confidential" and the number of the exemption under the Freedom of Information Act the bureau was invoking to justify withholding the material.
One document recounted his remarks on the "Mike Douglas Show" in February 1972.
Others are merely photocopies of news reports of Lennon's political activities and reviews of his concert appearances, including an appearance in Ann Arbor, Mich., in December 1971
An F.B.I. informer attended that concert and transcribed the lyrics of a song Lennon had written for the occasion.
The words were classified as "confidential" for the next 10 years even though 15,000 people heard them that night and they were later printed on the cover of one of Lennon's record albums.
Many of the documents obtained by Mr.
Wiener are written in the almost cataclysmic tone of antidrug tracts like the film "Reefer Madness." One memorandum is entitled "JOHN WINSTON LENNON. SECURITY MATTER DASH REVOLUTIONARY." Another contains the legend "All Extremists Should Be Considered Dangerous."
There is an ample array of the bureau's jawbreaking jargon and exotic acronyms, as well as numerous reminders of just how alien Lennon's world was to the people investigating him.
The memorandum to Mr.
Haldeman, for instance, referred to Lennon as "a British citizen and former member of the Beatles singing group."  Judge's Ruling Overruled
In February 1988, after reviewing the disputed documents privately, Federal District Judge Robert M. Takasugi, in Los Angeles, threw out Mr.
Wiener's lawsuit.
The bureau's explanations, he ruled, were sufficient.
But in July a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, unanimously overruled Judge Takasugi.
The panel of Judges James R. Browning, Mary M. Schroeder and Warren J. Ferguson ruled that simply citing the relevant exemptions under the Freedom of Informaiton Act, without furnishing further information, afforded Mr.
Wiener no genuine chance to rebut those claims.
Mr.
Wiener said Lennon would have stood squarely behind his inquiry.
"First of all, he was a fighter," he said.
"He stood up to Nixon and won his green card, and I wouldn't be surprised if he also would have fought to have found out what was in his F.B.I. file. Ane he was a great wit. He would have appreciated the ironies and absurdities, both in the content of the files and F.B.I.'s immense efforts to withhold them."


Micro General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Royal Visit to a New York Legend


C-Cor Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


British Leader Strives to Assure Hong Kong on Life After '97
Prime Minister John Major of Britain concluded a two-day tour of Hong Kong today, looking relaxed and confident as he sought to demonstrate Britain's commitment to the colony it will hand back to China in 1997.
Mr.
Major delivered his message of reassurance to the anxious colony again and again as he shook hands with delighted crowds at a public housing project and spoke to business and civic leaders.


Crowley, Milner &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Senator Who Brings Home the Bacon
Two years after Senator Robert C. Byrd was named chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, he declared that he intended to become a "billion-dollar industry."
What he planned to do, he explained in June 1990, was use his new power to funnel a billion dollars' worth of Federal projects and agencies into his impoverished state.


Quotation of the Day
"We realize now in the face of this horrible accident that we have to set new priorities that are geared specifically toward keeping the system safe. We can no longer afford to rely on human operation as much as we have in the past, and these steps that we are taking will help to reduce that reliance." -- Thomas Prendergast of the Transit Authority.  [ B4:4. ]


He Said He Did It. Finally, Police Agreed.
Daniel Valencia walked into the station house on West 10th Street at 4 A.M. yesterday with a question for the desk sergeant: To whom should he speak about the knapsack full of diamonds, rubies and emeralds he had stolen from a Maryland jewelry store?
The Greenwich Village precinct gets its share of colorful oddballs, and officers there are understandably inured to tales of fancy heists and confessions of guilt.
Detective James Six, who was sitting in the desk sergeant's chair, was as skeptical of Mr.
Valencia as any of his fellow officers would have been.


U.S. Takes Neutral Attitude on de Klerk Plan for Universal Suffrage
The Bush Administration took a neutral public stance today toward South Africa's conditional offer of universal suffrage to the black majority, saying the offer was but the opening bid in talks with the African National Congress and other black groups over the shape of a new and more equitable system of government.
But a senior Administration official called President F. W. de Klerk's proposal "a good negotiating document" which, despite flaws, appeared a sincere attempt to extend the scope of democratic rule.


Corrections
A picture in some copies yesterday showing a man without a jacket, with an article about the Presidential aspirations of Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, was published in error.
The man pictured was Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts.


The Spoken Word
WALKING TOURS AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Streets Where We Lived" walking tour, Sunday at noon; "Hua Fu" Chinese heritage walking tour, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "House of Heritage" lecture, Sunday at 2 P.M.; walking tour fees, $12 each ($11 for students and the elderly); lecture: $7 ($6 for the elderly, $5 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
"American Life in American Art," by Leslie Heiner, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari," by Ms.
Heiner, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.; free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.
"Reforming Landscape," by Kitty Glantz, today at noon; "Color Prints From France," by Wendy Belser, today at 1 P.M.; "Looking at Modern Art: Abstract Expressionism," by Gail Stavitsky, today at 3 P.M.; "Matisse," by Ms.
Stavitsky, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "Primitivism in Modern Art," by Ms.
Stavitsky, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; "Lee Friedlander Nudes," by Susan Cooke, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "The Sculpture Garden," by Ms.
Cooke, Sunday at 3 P.M.; free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.
LECTURES AND GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
All free with museum admission of $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 535-7710.


CHRONICLE
MARILYN QUAYLE has been appointed by JAVIER PEREZ DE CUELLAR, the United Nations Secretary General, to a new council that will try to reduce the loss of life, property damage and social and economic disruption caused by natural disasters around the world.


Restaurants
When Eldorado Petit opened on West 55th Street in Manhattan last year, it promised to introduce the distinctive and little-known seafood-based cuisine of Catalonia.
It certainly had an impressive family lineage: Eldorado Petit in Barcelona, one of the city's most distinguished restaurants, and its namesake in nearby San Feliu de Guixols, are run by the second and third generations of the Cruanyas family.
Looking to the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona and the hoopla over the anniversary of Columbus's epochal first voyage, the Cruanyas family decided the time was ripe to expand its empire to the New World.
My early visits to the restaurant found the setting to be smashing; the undistinguished Continental fare, though, generated little excitement.
Eldorado Petit seemed to be taking the condescending and potentially disastrous attitude that ethnic food must be tempered for American tastes.
Then two months ago, just as I was about to give up on the place, things turned around dramatically, and for the better.
The highly capable chef, Antonio Buendia, formerly of the now-defunct Internacionale, steered the menu back to undiluted Catalan.


Reviews/Film; A Family and a Movie, Both in Need of Therapy
If ever an entire film deserved therapeutic attention, it is "Crooked Hearts," the story of the dysfunctional Warrens and their raft of unsolvable, uninteresting family problems.
Everything about the Warrens is indicative of trouble, especially the pained, halting manner in which their story is presented.
One family member falls asleep at strange moments.
Another carries around a list of personal guidelines (one such rule: wear white at night).
A third winds up setting fire to the family homestead, which in another context might be seen as a crime.
Here, it's one more cry for help.
Masking all this torment is a veneer of forced gaiety, since Edward Warren (Peter Coyote), the patriarch, traditionally welcomes each new family failure in ceremonial fashion.
For instance, there are lights, streamers, a cake and a conga line to herald the news that the middle son (Pete Berg) has dropped out of college.
At this particular party, there is even a banner with a fortune-cookie slogan ("You must know home to be a traveler").
To give "Crooked Hearts" the benefit of the doubt, it's at least possible that such moments worked better in Robert Boswell's 1987 novel than they could on screen.


Bush Acts to Quiet Storm Over TV Ad on Thomas
The White House today tried to put out a political brushfire over the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, announcing that John H. Sununu, the President's chief of staff, had appealed to two conservative groups to cancel a commercial that makes harsh attacks on three Democratic Senators.
But the two organizations spurned the appeal, and interest groups on both sides announced plans to heat up the public relations battle over Judge Thomas's nomination, which will go before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday.


Most Types Of Crime Fall; Homicides Up
The number of reported robberies and assaults in New York City declined in the first six months of this year, but homicide figures continued to rise and threatened to break the record set last year, police officials said yesterday.
Statistics released by the police yesterday show that the number of robberies declined nine-tenths of 1 percent, compared with the first six months of last year, a significant trend because robbery is generally considered a barometer of violent street crime.
Assault decreased 5 percent during the same period.


CHRONICLE
COOPER BRADFORD HEFNER, weighing 8 pounds 1 ounce, was born at 10:22 A.M. on Wednesday in Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, and was tucked in at home in Holmby Hills with his mother and father at 7 P.M. that evening.
His mother is KIMBERLEY CONRAD, 28, the Playboy magazine Playmate of 1989.
His 65-year-old father, HUGH HEFNER, the founder of Playboy, said by telephone, "My wife really comes from frontier stock."


Macland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Prices of Treasury Issues Weaken
Optimistic comments about the economy by two Federal Reserve officials outweighed actual data released yesterday showing that conditions remained weak in August, and credit market participants sold Treasury notes and bonds, pushing prices down and interest rates up.
As has been true all week, trading activity remained extremely light.
Most dealers, and their retail accounts, were unwilling to establish new positions before August employment data are released this morning.


Review/City Opera; Bride Arrives, Without Her Fidelity
If one can begin to accept a playful love duet between a waitress from a greasy-spoon diner and an Italian immigrant vintner who has one arm in a sling, a leg in a cast, and sings words in dialect like "Omma feel fine," one has come a long way toward the suspension of disbelief required before taking unalloyed pleasure in Frank Loesser's "Most Happy Fella."
But nothing was unalloyed about the premiere of the new New York City Opera production of the 1956 musical on Wednesday night.
Admiration and involvement mixed with dismay and bemusement, sometimes in the same scene.
At one moment one could be carried along with the Puccinian passion of "My Heart Is So Full of You," and at another be groaning at the formulaic jesting of a goofy hired hand who finally learns to "make a fist" and win his true love.
At one moment one admired the verismo treatment of love mixed with anguish, and at another was bewildered by the absurd entrances of crowds or the rattling of the plot or the cliches of an aging genre.
In other words, one felt a bit like a mail-order bride, arriving to meet her groom only to find -- as Rosabella does when she meets an aging, pot-bellied Tony as her intended -- that the result is a mixture of the appealing and the disappointing, the high and the low, the genuine and the fake, the energetic and the world-weary.
Some of this, no doubt, was caused by the curious way in which the work itself is torn between genres and styles.
Loesser worked for four years on the score, studying Italian vocal and compositional techniques, reshaping the libretto from an already creaking 1924 play by Sidney Howard and writing, as he put it, "a musical with a lotta music" and almost no straight dialogue, a folksy Singspiel heading toward opera.
This paradoxical mixture of high ambition and show-biz savvy, now that both are in short supply, is one reason the work is getting new life, not only at the City Opera but also on the Broadway stage next February with the arrival of a well-received production first presented at the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam, Conn., last spring.
But some of the evening's schizophrenic character was also due to unevenness in Arthur Allan Seidelman's production.
About the trappings one could have little complaint.
The sets were evocative enough, first of the Golden Gate Diner (suggestively called Il Trovatore in Howard's play), then of the Napa Valley countryside with rows of grapevines heading toward the backdrop of the mountains.
Chris Nance's conducting was supple and spirited.
And the enthusiastic Italian chefs singing and dancing their way across the stage even included among their number Arthur Rubin, the veteran producer and vice president of the Nederlander Organization, showing a seemingly irrepressible love of theatrical display and vocal spirit in a role he created 35 years ago.
But the characters were as torn betweeen pop and verismo as the composer, and not only because the electronic amplification occasionally swelled into obviousness, turning voices into disembodied dubbings.
Elizabeth Walsh's Rosabella, for example, almost seemed a typical Broadway ingenue, the innocent abroad, a mail-order bride confused about her male.
Her flexible soprano was pert and accurate but lacked character.
Burke Moses' Joe was also an amorphous cipher, looking as if he had just walked out of a Calvin Klein advertisement, possessing neither the empathy required for the caressing lines of "Don't Cry" nor the technique to turn musical phrases seductive.
Elaine Bonazzi, as Tony's jealous sister, Marie, also was often approximate in her pitches, blunting her conniving threats.
In contrast, Karen Ziemba, as Cleo, the Dallas-born tough-talking waitress showed how important vocal character is for this genre: her voice had swagger, grainy brashness and brassy energy, undistracted by higher ambitions.
And Louis Quilico's Tony, at the center of the production, skillfully and often touchingly maneuvered his way through a role that spans high drama and low sentimentality.
His accent was unaffected and convincing; he was able to give "Happy to Make Your Acquaintance" an infectious charm, and use his focused baritone to suggest an ecstatic anticipation of pleasure that the plot always went out of its way to frustrate.
The production's most dramatic moments, in fact, involved Tony's shocked reaction to Rosabella's confession of betrayal, a scene of confusion, pain and fury.
It was also one of the work's few nonmusical scenes, as if Loesser, in his silence, were recognizing his limitations: he wrote enticing genre songs, suggestive melodies, modulating and melancholic evocations, but mostly underlined sentiment with music, without using it to reveal unexpected nuance or power.
There were pleasures to be had in this production, which at least did not strain so hard at operatic pretense that it left its origins behind.
It tempted one into a mail-order tryst, not a long-term commitment; one forgave its pot belly, its gimmickry, its panting, somewhat split-level aspirations.
"Happy Fella's" ambitions, after all, were the ambitions of many Broadway musicals, ambitions indistinguishable from the hopes of their Porgys and Sky Mastersons and Tonys: to find through perseverence and passion and common sense a way into the American promised land.
The Most Happy Fella
Musical based on Sidney Howard's "They Knew What They Wanted." Book, music and lyrics by Frank Loesser; orchestration by Don Walker; conductor, Chris Nance; director, Arthur Allan Seidelman; choreographer, Dan Siretta; set by, Michael Anania; costumes, Beba Shamash; lighting, Mark W. Stanley.
Performed by the New York City Opera.
At the New York State Theater.
Cashier and Postman . . .
William Ledbetter Cleo . . .
Karen Ziemba Rosabella . . .
Elizabeth Walsh Tony . . .
Louis Quilico Marie . . .
Elaine Bonazzi Max . . .
Ron Hilley Herman . . .
Lara Teeter Clem . . .
Gregory Moore Jake . . .
David Frye Al . . .
Jonathan Guss Joe . . .
Burke Moses Giuseppe . . .
Arthur Rubin Pasquale . . .
Richard Byrne Ciccio . . .
John Lankston Doctor . . .
Peter Blanchet Priest . . .
Don Yule Tessie . . .
Alice Roberts Gussie . . .
Zachary London Artie . . .
Jonathan Zwi WITH: Lee Bellaver, Harris Davis, Esperanza Galan, Stephanie Godino, Michael Langlois, Rita Metzger, Louis Perry, James Russell, Phillip Sneed, William Ward and Edward Zimmerman


Supermarkets General Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Shearson Suspends Officials For Stock Trade Violations
Shearson Lehman Brothers announced yesterday that it had suspended two executives in its equities trading group because of trading violations in connection with a Conagra Inc. stock offering last November.
Peter DaPuzzo, a senior executive vice president and co-head of Shearson's Worldwide Equities division, and Manny Geronimos, an executive vice president in the same group, were suspended.
Jack Rivkin, co-head of the equities group, will have sole responsibility for the division.


Europa Cruises Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Windmere Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ewing Is Working Out and Playing Coy
While Patrick Ewing is diligently preparing for next season, he is still not prepared to discuss his immediate future.
Once again, Ewing refused to comment in detail today when asked if he wanted to be traded, nor would he explain his reasons for turning down the six-year, $33 million contract the Knicks offered him this summer.


Filling Void at the Top Of Clayton &amp; Dubilier
As he tells it, Joseph L. Rice 3d was smitten by the leveraged buyout business back in 1966, when he was a young Harvard-trained lawyer working for Sullivan &amp; Cromwell.
One of his clients, Laird &amp; Company, had purchased the Automatic Sprinkler Corporation of America, now known as Figgie International, in one of the first leveraged buyouts ever.
Mr.
Rice was so enchanted with the concept that he quit law to join Laird in 1966.


High Plains Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sounds Around Town
Little-Known Territory
Julie Wilson, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, Manhattan, (212) 632-5000.
The singer Julie Wilson, whose ageless glamour is more than matched by her interpretive bravura, is performing a new show that features the lyrics of Dorothy Fields, Stephen Sondheim and Noel Coward, among others.
Much of the material is little known.
It includes two obscure but witty songs, "What Do We Do, We Fly?" and "We're Gonna Be All Right," from the Rodgers-Sondheim show "Do I Hear a Waltz?," and an even rarer oddity, "Do Be a Darling," by Cy Coleman and Dorothy Fields from a show called "Eleanor." Their brittle wit is balanced by devastatingly dramatic renditions of "More Than You Know" and Coward's signature song, "If Love Were All." Shows are at 9 and 11 tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $35 cover charge, and reservations are required.


Information International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


In Grenada, Justice Hasn't Been Done Yet
To the Editor:
"Grenada, Spared" (Topics of The Times, Aug. 18) and news reports of July 31 and Aug. 15 on the commutation of death sentences for 14 people convicted of the murder of Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and at least 10 others in 1983, events preceding the United States invasion of that tiny Caribbean island, contain inaccuracies.
As the only American reporter consistently to cover both the Grenada murder trial and appeal, I submit the following:


Craftmatic/Contour Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Consolidated Brinco reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Exiled Russian Writers, Free to Return, Find Visiting Is Enough
When Aleksandr Buravsky, a Russian playwright living here, sees Soviet politicians asking each other accusingly where they were during the failed coup last month, he feels like standing up and announcing to them, "I was in Beverly Hills."
Like other Russian writers abroad -- including the novelist Vasily Aksyonov, who said, using a Russian phrase, that he was biting his elbows in frustration -- Mr.
Buravsky has watched the sudden convulsion of his country's history with a fresh stab of the pain of absence.


Rio Journal; There's Cooing in the Palace, Clucking in the Press
After a month of tears, snubs and missing wedding rings, Brazil's turbulent presidential soap opera of Fernando and Rosane is now entering a reconciliatory phase of public kisses and an African safari.
With the presidential couple now holding hands for photographers, fascination may fade over the stormy marital relations between President Fernando Collor de Mello, 42 years old, and his wife, Rosane Malta Collor, 26.


Samson Energy Co. L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Miami Prosecutor's Stormy Passage
The Senate has twice declined to act on his nomination to be the United States attorney here.
But when Miami's most notorious case, the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, began today, Dexter W. Lehtinen was still at the helm of the biggest Federal prosecutor's office outside Washington.
Since June 1988, when he was appointed interim United States Attorney by former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, Mr.
Lehtinen has been surrounded by disputes.
His friends describe him as brilliant; his foes call him erratic.
But all agree that his tenure has been an exceptionally stormy one, marked as much by bitter public conflicts as by high-profile successes.


The Day's Highlights
Victory and Surrender
Congress Yields Power: The Soviet Congress bowed to an ultimatum from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and voted to invest power in a new government mainly controlled by the republics.
Mr.
Gorbachev and republic leaders gained sweeping emergency powers.
Page A1.
A Master Of Survival: In prodding Soviet lawmakers to approve a new emergency law, President Gorbachev once again showed his talent for improvisation.
No one in the Congress could match his talent for leaping from old to new, or for molding a consensus from chaos.
Page A1.
Minister Affirms Old 'New Thinking': The new Soviet Foreign Minister, Boris D. Pankin, said he did not plan an immediate purge of diplomats but that he would examine how various embassies performed during the failed coup.
He said the "principles of new thinking" in Soviet foreign policy would remain in force.
Page A11.
Rumbling Across the Nation
Thousands Protest In Georgia: Flag-waving demonstrators marched on the Government House in Tbilisi for the fourth straight day to demand a shake-up in the Georgian republic's government.
Angry opposition leaders demanded the resignation of the Georgian President, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, and new legislative elections, arguing that the republic was still governed by a dictatorship.
Page A13.
Fretting About The Fields: The main evening news program in Moscow reported that just 3 percent of the potatoes necessary for the winter had been harvested from state farms.
But many Muscovites are volunteering to gather the crop -- not just because they are paid 25 rubles a day, but because they are apprehensive about food shortages as they look toward the winter.
Page A11.
Hints of Frustration Abroad
U.S.
Pressures Lithuania: Reeling from Lithuania's exoneration of convicted Nazi war criminals, the Bush Administration suggested that the newly recognized state try to observe its own laws.
Page A13.
Pangs Of Exiled Writers: Many Russian writers living abroad say the convulsions in the Soviet Union underscore a disturbing truth -- that they have crossed a bridge into exile and may never completely return.
Page A13.


Market Place; Alarm Is Set Off By Liz Claiborne
AFTER Samuel M. Miller, senior vice president for finance at Liz Claiborne Inc., cautioned on July 22 that the apparel manufacturer expected to grow slightly less vigorously in the second half of this year than in the first, the company's stock made a nose dive of 14.9 percent that day.
Never mind that the company simultaneously announced a record 13 percent increase in second-quarter earnings, that its return on equity has consistently hovered above 30 percent for the last six years and that it has successfully introduced two or three product lines a year.


Environmental Agency Moves to End Most Uses of Deadly Agricultural Pesticide
After a decades-long debate over the deadly pesticide that has been linked to more than 70 deaths and thousands of illnesses among farm workers, the Environmental Protection Agency and the maker of ethyl parathion agreed today to eliminate its use on all but nine crops by the end of this year.
The agency said it would then bring regulatory action to ban it altogether within another 18 months.


Baltimore Bancorp Shareholders' Vote
A group of dissident shareholders of Baltimore Bancorp, the fourth-largest banking company in Maryland, said a preliminary report from inspectors of a recent shareholder ballot showed approval for a proposal to increase the company's board by 10 members, to 28.
The vote would clear the way for the 10 representatives of the group to be seated.
Combined with the six respresentatives elected earlier this year, the group led by Edwin Hale, a Baltimore executive, would control 16 seats.
Officials at the Baltimore banking company were unavailable for comment.


Economic Scene; Encouraging Clue Points to Recovery
CHANGES in the spread between short-term and long-term interest rates may be the best means of forecasting business-cycle turning points.
When short rates are lower than long -- as they are now -- the economy tends to grow.
But when long rates drop below short, recession looms.
Over the last 25 years, movements in te "term structure" of interest rates, or yield curve, have correctly predicted all the major peaks and troughs in the United States business cycle, according to Prof.
Campbell R. Harvey of Duke University's Fuqua School of Business.


Connors Continues His Joyride Into Semifinals
The defending champion fell, but the defending guardian of the tennis theater of the absurd and a beacon for all past-their-prime-time players used mirrors, night magic and his incredibly mean two-handed backhand to cut a defiant swath into the semifinals of the United States Open last night.
Jimmy Connors, winner of the Open five times who last advancedto the Open semifinals in 1987, made the trip again, for the 14th time, with a flourish of his neon green racquet.
And by the third set, Connors, whose vision and motivation are difficult to interpret but a delight to observe, said he was seeing the tennis ball "like a basketball." It was, he said, that simple an exercise once he got beyond the opening set.


John Hilly, 77, a Former Leader In New York Waterfront Industry
John C. Hilly, a former president of the Bush Terminal Company in Brooklyn and a leading figure in New York City's waterfront industry for more than two decades, died on Aug. 23 in Lantana, Fla.
He was 77 years old.
A definitive cause of death was not given but Mr.
Hilly was thought to have had a stroke, said a son, Joseph Hilly.


Bethlehem Plans Sale Of Its Coal Subsidiary
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation said yesterday that it intended to sell the coal operations of its subsidiary Beth Energy Mines.
The sale of the coal operations by Bethlehem, a leading producer of coal, is another move in the company's efforts to narrow its focus almost exclusively to steel.
Bethlehem is the nation's second-largest steel producer after the steel operations of the USX Corporation.


Jury Selection Begins in Noriega Trial


U.S. Expects Lithuania Not to Erase War Crimes
The Bush Administration said today that it expected the newly independent Government of Lithuania to comply with its own law by excluding war criminals from its program of judicial exoneration for citizens condemned earlier as Nazi collaborators by Soviet authorities.
"I'm sure we'll be following this up with them to find out more about the actions that are being taken now," Richard A. Boucher, the spokesman, said at the State Department's regular press briefing.
A department official said Mr.
Boucher's remarks were authorized by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.


VS Services Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Gottschalks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


U.S. Raises Cost Estimates Of Weapons Sites Cleanup
The Department of Energy today sharply raised its estimate of the cost of cleaning up pollution at nuclear weapons plants, and strongly suggested that it did not expect to receive enough money to do the job on schedule.
The department issued a report that showed a gap of nearly $12 billion over the next five years between the $40.3 billion it said was necessary and the $28.6 billion it was likely to receive.
The department stopped short of explicitly retreating from its commitments to state agencies and to the Environmental Protection Agency to clean up 30 years of waste and comply with laws on the polluting of soil and water.
But it seemed to be establishing a rationale for doing less, or at least for letting the cleanup schedule slip substantially.


Getty Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Concierges: Baedekers In the Flesh
TO hear John Neary describe his job as concierge at the Carlyle Hotel, you would think he was reciting the Boy Scout motto.
A good concierge, he says, is a trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous and kind professional.
He "asks, tries, denies, replies, demands, begs, borrows, searches, explores, tests, calls, looks for, adds up, tastes, runs, mends, advises, consults and warns" on behalf of his clients in such matters as transportation, theater tickets, tour itineraries, amenities, shopping and dining, including "restaurants with great wine lists, restaurants close to the hotel, French restaurants, California grill restaurants and restaurants without purple in them."


Accounts
*
Cellular One, the McCaw Communications cellular telephone company, to Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, for several markets in California and Nevada.
The agency said billings totaled $3 million. *
Waterstone's, a British bookstore chain, to Rossin Greenberg Seronick, Boston, to advertise the fall opening of its United States flagship store in Boston.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Gulf Host Resorts, Tarpon Springs, Fla., to Brunstad &amp; Partners, Westport, Conn., for its Innisbrook and Tamarron resorts, respectively, in Tarpon Springs and Durango, Colo.
The agency said the account, which has billings of about $1 million, was previously handled by Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine, Orlando, Fla.


Searle Buys Japan Stake
G.
D.
Searle &amp; Company, the pharmaceutical subsidiary of the Monsanto Company, said yesterday that it had bought a stake in a large Japanese pharmaceutical company for about $106 million.
Searle's 12.2 percent stake in the Hokuriku Seiyaku Company makes it the largest single shareholder in the Tokyo- based prescription drug maker.
Hokuriku earned about $12 million, on revenue of $118 million, in the year that ended on March 31, 1990.
Searle had revenue of $1.4 billion that year.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 559 money market mutual funds decreased by $4.57 billion, to $458.63 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 206 institutional funds decreased by $2.93 billion, to $135.54 billion.
The assets of the 260 general-purpose funds were down by $279.2 million, to $175.89 billion.
The 93 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.37 billion, to $147.21 billion, the institute said.


1 Irish Player Is Charged
Rick Mirer and Demetrius DuBose, the Notre Dame football players who were arrested last Friday at an off-campus party, will not be charged with disorderly conduct and public intoxication.
But DuBose, who will not turn 21 until next March, will be charged with possession of alcohol by a minor, a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500 and 60 days in prison.


Topics of The Times; After Tragedy, Teamwork
New York City's transit workers pulled off a magnificent feat in quickly getting subway trains rolling after last week's tragic accident.
Six days after the Union Square derailment that killed five passengers and injured more than 200, the IRT Lexington Avenue line was back in service.
Thanks are due to 200 employees of the Transit Authority and Metro-North who worked round the clock in 12-hour shifts in a remarkable display of teamwork.
They labored in oppressive heat and under great tension, trying to finish a difficult task they knew should never have been necessary.


IRAN SAYS ISRAEL MUST FREE ARABS
The Iranian President, Hashemi Rafsanjani, has told a visiting delegation of the Lebanese Party of God that freedom for 10 Western hostages in Lebanon is linked solely to the release of Arab prisoners in Israel.
The Party of God, which speaks for the groups holding the Western hostages, has been meeting with officials in Iran on an array of topics, including fighting Israel in southern Lebanon, the Middle East peace conference and the hostage issue.


Books of The Times; Small-Town Life After a Huge Calamity
The Sweet Hereafter
By Russell Banks
257 pages. HarperCollins. $20.


Auctions
African Collection
African artworks -- offbeat objects ranging from simply carved to robust sculptures -- are to be auctioned on Nov. 20 from the collection of Helen and Robert Kuhn of Los Angeles at Sotheby's in New York.
The Kuhns' holdings of 145 wood and clay figures and artifacts are expected by the auction house to total $2.5 million to $3.9 million.
In announcing the sale this week, Bernard de Grunne, who heads Sotheby's tribal art sales, said the Kuhns' wide-ranging collection was one of the most important and personal to be presented at Sotheby's in recent seasons.
Represented are items made between the 13th and 19th centuries, carved in western, central and southern Africa.
The Kuhns began collecting African objects in 1972 after they had formed a collection of Pre-Columbian works, a major change esthetically.
"Pre-Columbian art was pure sculpture and tomb works," Mrs.
Kuhn said this week by telephone from her Los Angeles home.
"But African art was pulsing and alive. Our interest in African art became very focused very quickly. Six of the first 10 objects we bought were musical instruments, a side passion that continued to grow."
The Kuhns are selling only a few of their 120 musical instruments, including two sanzas, or thumb pianos, uncommon examples carved in the shape of human figures.
One is expected to bring $8,000 to $12,000 and the other, $6,000 to $9,000.
A slit gong or drum in the shape of a lemon wedge with four figures poised on top is expected to sell for $20,000 to $30,000.
The Kuhns donated the rest of their musical instruments to the Fowler Museum of Cultural History at the University of California at Los Angeles.
They are to be exhibited in the new museum, which is scheduled to open next March.
"Each artwork had to speak to me," Mrs.
Kuhn said.
"There had to be something in the carved line or the content, preferably something magical."
One of the rarest objects in the sale is a two-foot-tall horse and rider, a 17th- or 18th-century work by a Dogon west African artisan from an area now known as Mali.
Mr. de Grunne said the equestrian sculpture was one of about 12 surviving examples of this subject, size and state of preservation, carved in that period and region.
"It is very architectural and has a warm brown patina that covers every inch: the teeny head, the long legs and the chubby body," he said.
The auction house's presale estimate is $150,000 to $200,000.
A higher price -- $250,000 to $350,000 -- is expected by Sotheby's for a zoomorphic figure in terra cotta.
The ramlike animal, standing 31 inches high, has a small head and large legs.
It was modeled possibly as early as the 13th century, but no later than the 15th century.
"The area was flooded and it was buried for about 500 years, which probably accounts for the weathered, crackled surface," Mr. de Grunne said.
"Why they made such near-life-size representations, no one knows."
One of Mrs.
Kuhn's favorite pieces is a Fang figure, carved in central Africa in an area now called Gabon, to decorate the top of a reliquary box for ancestor bones, a box long separated from the figure.
The Kuhns kept the 17-inch-tall Fang carving on the coffee table in their living room, she said.
Sotheby's presale estimate is $150,000 to $200,000.
Another major work is a Luba stool, with a base of a kneeling female figure, carved before 1860 in the area now known as Zaire.
The presale estimate is $250,000 to $350,000.
The stool was cited by Susan Vogel, director of the Center for African Art in Manhattan, in speaking this week about the Kuhns' African art.
"It's a strong collection," she said.
"They bought a lot of things nobody else was paying attention to. When a large group of Himba, also called Luba, pieces came on the market, the ones they chose were different from what others chose. Their Luba stool is one of those pieces, different from other ones selected and made by a very singular hand. That's been true in a lot of their buying."
Mrs.
Kuhn is a founder of the Ethnic Arts Council in Los Angeles, which finances research and exhibitions of ethnic art, and is a member of the acquisitions committee of the Smithsonian's National Museum of African Art in Washington.
She said she and her husband, a physician, decided to sell their African holdings when he retired last December.
"We are changing our life style," she said.
"We have a vacation home in Utah and wish to be freer of possessions." They continue to collect Japanese scrolls, masks and Ikebana baskets.
New Job for Curator
Clement E. Conger -- former curator of the White House and the outgoing curator of the Diplomatic Reception Rooms at the State Department -- is to join Christie's in November as a senior consultant on American decorative arts.
The 78-year-old Mr.
Conger brings to Christie's 30 years' experience as curator of the State Department.
During his tenure, he assembled through gifts and loans one of the most important collections of 18th- and 19th-century American antiques in this country.
Among collectors and dealers, he is known as "the grand acquisitor" and "the great persuader." The collection of 4,500 objects is valued at more than $60 million.
When asked this week what he would do at Christie's, Mr.
Conger said by telephone from his vacation home in Rehoboth, Del., "I'll mix with collectors and that sort of thing."
At the White House, where he was curator from 1970 to 1986, he refurbished 27 rooms, expanding and refining the house's collection of early 19th-century American antiques.


But First, the Peace Conference
Congressional leaders gave a powerful signal yesterday that Washington takes the gathering peace process in the Middle East with utmost seriousness.
Responding to a plea from Secretary of State Baker, they now appear likely to defer action for four months on Israel's request for U.S. guarantees on $10 billion in bank loans.
The loans are to be used to resettle hundreds of thousands of newly arrived Soviet Jews.
Neither the Administration nor the legislators slight Israel's real and urgent need to finance this dramatic Jewish homecoming.
But they rightly give higher priority to the rare chance of securing a just and stable peace for all Israelis, and their Arab neighbors.


Henry Goldberg, Oldest Member Of Stock Exchange, Is Dead at 92
Henry L. Goldberg, who began trading stocks on a street corner in 1913 and retired from active trading at the New York Stock Exchange just three years ago when he sold his brokerage firm, died on Tuesday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 92 years old -- the oldest member of the exchange.
A native New Yorker, Mr.
Goldberg opened his 75-year run on Broad Street as a poor boy.
He left school at the age of 14 to support himself and his mother and became a junior trader on the Curb Market, an exchange that moved indoors in 1921 and eventually became the American Stock Exchange.


Grand Jury Doesn't Indict Driver In Death of Boy in Crown Heights
A Brooklyn grand jury decided yesterday against bringing criminal charges in the death of a black child hit by a car driven by a Hasidic man in Crown Heights last month.
The fatal incident set off four nights of violence and racially charged demands for the driver's prosecution.
Fearful that the lack of an indictment could bring further violence, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn and Mayor David N. Dinkins immediately took the extraordinary step of going to court to unseal the normally secret grand jury testimony in hopes of defusing tension.
A judge is to rule on the request today.


CXR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Scientific Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Iran-Contra Charge Expected for Ex-C.I.A. Official
Iran-contra prosecutors expect to seek the indictment of Clair E. George, the former No. 3 official at the Central Intelligence Agency, as early as Friday, lawyers close to the case said tonight.
The jury has been hearing evidence in the case for months, and the indictment is expected to accuse Mr.
George, the retired head of the agency's covert operations, of lying to Congress about his knowledge of the secret effort to arm the Nicaraguan rebels.


Trash-Transfer Plan Stirs Up Queens
When Al Greenstein glances to the right of his office-supply store in Long Island City, he sees the 50-story Citicorp office tower rising a block away, like a bizarrely transplanted piece of midtown Manhattan.
He and many others in Long Island City hope that the tower will be followed by similar additions.
But when he looks two blocks to the left, he sees something that not only typifies the Long Island City neighborhood, with its low-lying factories, warehouses and small houses, but something that he and some neighbors also insist threatens their vision of the Queens neighborhood's future.
It is a freight yard where the Long Island Rail Road plans to permit the loading of garbage into boxcars for shipment to the Middle West.


Iacocca Sets the Date: He'll Quit at End of '92
Lee A. Iacocca, who led the Chrysler Corporation back from the brink of disaster more than a decade ago and became America's best-known businessman, has agreed to retire from the company at the end of 1992.
Mr.
Iacocca has faced growing pressure from Chrysler's directors and Wall Street to end speculation about his future as chairman and chief executive, in light of the company's own difficulties in maintaining financial stability.


3 Latin Nations Agree to Ban Chemical Weapons
South America's three dominant military powers, Argentina, Brazil and Chile, signed a declaration today banning the development, manufacture and use of chemical weapons.
The signing by the Foreign Ministers of the three nations in the Argentine city of Mendoza was the latest in a series of steps taken in the region toward demilitarization and a scaling down of tensions that in the past have brought them to the brink of war.
Another aim is to increase their international standing.


Omni Films International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Lottery Game to Aid Children in New York City
New York City officials yesterday introduced the first of a series of "scratch off" lottery games established to raise money for children as part of Mayor David N. Dinkins's anti-crime plan.
At a City Hall news conference, Mr.
Dinkins said the game, called "Invest in Kids," would finance an array of programs including after-school recreation, books at library branches and guidance counselor programs.


Paramount Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Hynes's Request to Release Jury Data Is Highly Unusual
In asking a judge to release the minutes of the Brooklyn grand jury's investigation into the traffic accident that sparked racial violence in Crown Heights, District Attoney Charles J. Hynes is taking an extremely rare step.
Grand juries are sometimes asked by prosecutors to issue public reports on politically sensitive cases to put to rest charges of a cover-up.
Such a report was issued in the Tawana Brawley case, for instance.
But grand juries are almost never asked to release their minutes, especially when they decide not to indict.


U.S. Tells Poultry Processor Its Plant in Georgia Poses Risks
The company that owns a North Carolina chicken-processing plant where 25 people died has been told by Federal safety inspectors that its plant here poses an "imminent danger" to its workers because there is no automatic fire extinquisher above the cooker.
Even though the Occupational Safety and Health Administration posted the notice just before midnight Wednesday at the Cumming plant of Imperial Food Products, local fire officials said the plant complied with state fire codes.


TV Weekend; The Pitfalls of Political Correctness
At 9 tonight, Channel 13 carries a "Firing Line" debate on the proposition "Freedom of Thought Is Dangerous on American Campuses." To put it less ambiguously, the issue is whether freedom of thought is being endangered these days by advocates of political correctness and multi-cultural education.
It makes for a spirited if slightly dispiriting two hours.
Taking the affirmative (which means being negative about pressures from feminists and minority groups) are: William F. Buckley Jr., the veteran marksman of "Firing Line," who came to public attention decades ago with "God and Man at Yale," a putdown of his alma mater for indulging in the wrong kind of ideological conformity; John Silber, president of Boston University and sometime Democratic candidate for the governorship of Massachusetts; Prof.
Glenn C. Loury, also of Boston University, who is generally classified among black conservatives, and Dinesh D'Souza, whose book "Illiberal Education: The Politics of Race and Sex on Campus," sets the terms of the debate.


Castle Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wickes Companies reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Traffic Alert
Bloomingdale Area Street Fair: The west side of Broadway between 96th and 100th Streets will be closed Saturday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Third Avenue Festival: Third Avenue between 14th and 34th Streets will be closed on Sunday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended on Monday and Tuesday in New York City.
Other regulations remain in effect.


A First for U.S.G.A.
For the first time, a black has been nominated to serve on the executive committee of the United States Golf Association.


Yvonne Luter, Editor, 63
Yvonne Luter, the American editor of the German illustrated weekly Der Stern from 1951 to 1987, died on Aug. 28 at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 63 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Ms.
Luter, a native of Hamburg, came to the United States in 1941.
She became the magazine's first American editor under its founding editor in chief, Henri Nannen, and helped Stern to gain international recognition.
She was a member of the Council on Foreign Affairs.


Abrams Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Going on Their Own, Irish Hold to Tradition
The first game in NBC's new package of Notre Dame football kicks off tomorrow afternoon in South Bend, Ind., against Indiana, 40 years after the Fighting Irish's last network deal also opened against the Hoosiers on the DuMont Broadcasting Network.
Notre Dame won, 48-6.
Notre Dame's $38 million deal, struck last year with NBC, startled college football because it amounted to a defection from the College Football Association's new deal with ABC and ESPN by the C.F.A.'s most popular star.
The university's $55,000 deal with DuMont was also shocking.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association was fearful that television exposure would hurt attendance.
Notre Dame came in for a rash of reproof in 1951 for going its own way, not much different in tone from the criticism the Irish suffered for making the NBC deal for 1991.
But in 1951, some schools threatened to boycott Notre Dame games.
"We thought the fear of TV was misplaced," said the Rev.
Edmund Joyce, the former executive vice president of Notre Dame.
"The N.C.A.A. scared people with its argument that there would be a lot of empty stadiums."
Whether the real issue was the fear of empty stadiums or the N.C.A.A.'s loss of central control over TV may never be known.
In 1952, after one season of the national Notre Dame deal, the N.C.A.A. agreed to a $1.1 million TV deal with NBC, an arrangement that precluded individual schools like Notre Dame from setting up their own deals and ended Notre Dame's relationship with DuMont.
The N.C.A.A. had achieved complete dominion over televised college football.
Said Joyce: "The N.C.A.A. policy caused us to lose millions of dollars."
Why does Joyce think the N.C.A.A. moved into television?
"They were feeling pressure from TV stations and the public," he said.
"To ban TV totally would have caused an uproar. So they did it, but they doled games out in small doses."
By 1954, TV ratings were high and attendance was soaring, a concurrence of events that happened in part because no school appeared more than once nationally, according to the N.C.A.A.'s official history.
The N.C.A.A.'s success jibed with Notre Dame's view that TV would not kill attendance.
But the Irish had to wait until 1984, when the Supreme Court declared the N.C.A.A's TV plan illegal to feel vindication for its belief that the collegiate ruling body's policies were too restrictive.
That ruling paved the way for the first television deal with the College Football Association, whose rules were less restrictive than those of the N.C.A.A.
When Notre Dame didn't see eye-to-eye with the new C.F.A.
TV plan early last year, the Irish ran into the embrace of the NBC peacock.
"The N.C.A.A. plan so irritated our alumni and fans and was so unfair," said Joyce, "that we're happy to have all our home games shown nationally and at the same time" -- except one, on Nov. 2, when NBC airs the Breeders' Cup.
Play-by-play of NBC's six Notre Dame games will be handled by Dick Enberg.
As a doctoral candidate in health science at Indiana University, Enberg earned extra cash ($35 a game) by broadcasting Hoosier football for the school's sports network.
Enberg called the Sept. 27, 1958 Notre Dame-Indiana game -- the last time the two schools met.
"Indiana had a chance," he said.
"It was 6-0 going into the fourth quarter. They played tough defense, but then the Irish scored twice." The Hoosiers had six turnovers that day, and Notre Dame won, 18-0.
"The memories are kind of hazy of that day, mixed in with hundreds of other games since," he said.
Enberg said that despite NBC's major investment in Notre Dame, he and analyst Bill Walsh would not be cheerleaders.
"There will be an expectation of those tuning in who don't like Notre Dame to find us one way, and they'll think we're pro-Notre Dame," he said, "and Notre Dame people will say we're pro-Indiana. We're ready for the mail." Yanks and Mets Slide
Not surprisingly, Yankees and Mets local Nielsen TV ratings are headed downward.
The last five Yankees telecasts on WPIX have rated 3.3, 4.3, 3.6, 3.0 and 2.3.
The season average of 4.7, down from a season high of 4.9 in late July, is still above the 4.5 at this time last year.
The Mets' average rating on WWOR has fallen from 7.4 on July 21, to 6.9, down from 7.5 at this time in 1990.
A slide of the times: a Mets-Pirates prime-time game on Aug. 6 rated 10.8, but 11 days later, another Mets-Pirates prime-time game rated 3.9.
The Sept. 1 afternoon game against the Reds scored a season-low 3.3.
In the New York market a ratings point represents 70,437 households.


Unisys to Pay Big Fine
Unisys, one of the nation's largest military contractors, has agreed to pay a record $190 million to settle charges stemming from the Pentagon's investigation into procurement fraud and bid-rigging, Government and industry officials said.
The settlement is to be announced today.
Business Day, page D1.


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Stanley Interiors reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Saatchi Reports Loss For First Half of Year
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. posted a loss yesterday for the first half of 1991, reflecting the recession in the advertising industry.
The loss had been expected by analysts.
The London-based company said it had lost $:4.2 million before taxes in the first six months, or about $6.8 million at the prevailing exchange rate at the end of the period.
In contrast, it posted a pretax profit of $:13.5 million in the first half of 1990.


For Dinkins, It's a Retreat; Fiscal Realities Lead Mayor to Backtrack
Faced with New York City's harsh fiscal realities and daunting complexities, Mayor David N. Dinkins has moved to retreat from major policies that helped carry him into City Hall on the hopes of a liberal coalition.
On two disparate, intractable problems -- housing the homeless and disposing of garbage -- the Mayor has found himself this week pleading the limits of his ability to solve them in quite the ambitious ways he pledged, or seemed to be pledging, in his mayoral campaign two years ago.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF U.S. Takes Lead in Walker Cup
Phil Mickelson led American amateurs to an 8-4 lead over Britain and Ireland on the first day of the Walker Cup competition yesterday and was accused of being arrogant.
Mickelson, the former United States Amateur champion who won the Tucson Open in January, was one of four Americans to win in foursomes and singles on the opening day at Portmarnock, Ireland.
Andrew Coltart of Scotland, who was beaten by Mickelson, 4 and 3, did not like the American's reaction when he was asked to sink an 18-inch putt to halve the ninth hole.
Mickelson held his putter horizontally just off the ground to indicate to the large gallery how close the hole was.
He made it clear he did not think he should have to putt.


Free-Market Ideas Take Root Amid Anxiety About Harvest
"I'm very happy about this harvest," said Yekaterina P. Slovodanyuk, grinning proudly over a scattered pile of dirt-covered pink potatoes she had just dug out of her private plot.
"It's our first, but just look at them."
Not everyone in this country is so optimistic about the potato harvest this fall.
The main evening news program "Television News Service" reported tonight that just three percent of the potatoes necessary for the winter have been harvested from state farms.
On Sept. 10 last year, the Government said 17 percent of the potato harvest had been gathered.


Vehicle Sales Fell In August
In a sign of continuing sluggishness, sales of American-made cars and trucks fell 11.6 percent in late August from a year earlier, auto makers reported today.
The degree of weakness was surprising, said Harvey Heinbach, an analyst with Merrill Lynch, but he said it was premature to say whether the market was in an overall down trend.
"We may see some renewed pickup in September and October," he said.


People
*
Jack Rooney has been named senior vice president and group management supervisor at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco.
He was previously vice president and management supervisor at DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago. *
Bob Tabor, 45, senior vice president, has been promoted to creative director at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, from associate creative director. *
Arnold Blum, 48, has been named senior vice president and associate creative director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.
He was previously executive vice president and creative director at Trahan, Burden &amp; Charles, Baltimore. *
Patricia Haegele, 40, has been named publisher of Travel Holiday, New York, a Reader's Digest Association magazine.
Ms.
Haegele, who had previously been senior vice president of the Gannettwork ad sales division of the Gannett Co., succeeds John Hillock, 50, who left. *
Nancy Ross has been named senior vice president and creative placement manager at the Judy Wald Agency, New York, an executive recruiting firm.
She was previously a vice president at Clio Awards Inc.


Even Last Budget Details Aren't Easily Won in Hartford
The General Assembly moved to clean up the last details of Connecticut's 1991 budget today, but failed again in another demonstration of what legislating is reduced to when a state runs out of money.
Since the adoption of a $7.67 billion budget on Aug. 22, the issue facing the State House and Senate has been $87 million in fee increases to balance that budget.


7-Year Debentures From Fannie Mae
The Federal National Mortgage Association, a Government-chartered organization that provides funds for home mortgages by purchasing or securitizing mortgages made by lenders, priced $650 million in seven-year debentures yesterday through various securities dealers.
The association, known as Fannie Mae, said the issue, which is noncallable, has a final maturity date of Sept. 10, 1998.
The first interest payment will be made on March 10, 1992.


A Letdown? In Week 2? Giants Vow It Won't Happen Against Rams
Of all the teams the Giants will play this season, only the San Francisco 49ers (14-2) had a better record than New York last year.
Only the Cleveland Browns (3-13) had a poorer record than the Los Angeles Rams (5-11), whom the Giants will play Sunday.
In addition, the Rams lost their season opener last Sunday to the Phoenix Cardinals, 24-14, because of seven turnovers.
On Monday night, the Giants beat the 49ers, 16-14, on a field goal with five seconds left.


Israel Rebuffs Bush
Digging in its heels against Bush Administration pressure, Israel today rejected any American attempt to link its request for $10 billion in loan guarantees to the planned Middle East peace conference or to its expansion of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
Government officials also signaled their irritation with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d for asking Congress on Wednesday to postpone debate on the Israeli request at least until after the peace conference, which the United States would like to begin next month.
Their comments were made before Congressional leaders said they would accede to the Administration's request to delay the debate.


Stocks Drag; Dow Closes Unchanged
The stock market ended the day exactly where it began -- at 3,008.50 points for the Dow Jones industrial average.
The market traded in a narrow range and volume was about the same as the day before, reflecting an uncertainty that has kept many investors on the sidelines.
Much of the sluggishness shows a wait-and-see attitude by many investors in advance of August employment statistics due today from the Labor Department.
The statistics could provide a clue as to the current state of the economy, which many analysts see as teetering between recovery and recession.


Corrections
A map on Aug. 29 with an article about a proposed hydroelectric plant in Canada misidentified an island off the east coast of Canada.
It is the island of Newfoundland, not Prince Edward Island.


Sounds Around Town
Whispers and Squeaks
Front 242, the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, (212) 956-3731.
As with most industrial noise dance bands, Front 242's music is usually better live than on record.
The band's music, produced by samplers and sequencers, can sound great coming through a huge sound system, filled with whispers and squeeks amid the roar.
Voices mumble in the background, and everything is ominous and vaguely antiauthoritarian.
It's a teen-ager's view of an alienating, authority-filled world.
The show tomorrow night starts at 9; tickets are $19.50.
Styles in Collision


Bush Acts to Quiet Storm Over TV Ad on Thomas
The White House today tried to put out a political brushfire over the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, announcing that John H. Sununu, the President's chief of staff, had appealed to two conservative groups to cancel a commercial that makes harsh attacks on three Democratic Senators.
But the two organizations spurned the appeal, and interest groups on both sides announced plans to heat up the public relations battle over Judge Thomas's nomination, which will go before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday.


Water Warning On Bacteria Levels
Residents of City Island should boil water for consumption until Sunday and perhaps longer because bacteria levels are exceeding state health limits, New York City's Environmental Protection Department said yesterday.
A routine water sample taken five days ago found E. coli bacteria, which appear in the presence of animal and human feces, said Sanford Evans, a department spokesman.
The city will be increasing chlorination and opening fire hydrants on City Island in an attempt to flush the contaminated water from the system, he said.


America Interviews 2 Soviet Leaders
In an extraordinary televised conversation with Americans from nearly a dozen cities, the Soviet Union's two leading political figures early this morning discussed the security of their nation's nuclear weapons, its military forces in Cuba and even their personal religious beliefs.
The questions reflected concerns not only with the grandest diplomatic matters, but also with the personal concerns of the American guests.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian federated republic condemned anti-Semitism and discrimination against women, and Mr.
Gorbachev reassured a woman in San Francisco about the health of his wife, Raisa, who was reported to have become ill during the abortive coup last month.


Designs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Reviews/Film; In Budapest or Los Angeles, 'Where' Mostly Asks Why
Gabor Szabo's "Where," opening today at the Village East Cinemas, is an intense but completely inarticulate film about erotic love and platonic friendship, shot in the film maker's native Hungary and in Los Angeles, where he now lives.
In the first half of the film, which seems to be set in Budapest, a skinny young man, never named, relentlessly pursues a buxom young woman, who is also unidentified.
He forces her to have sex with him in a forest, on a train, at her apartment, at his apartment, on a street corner and in an elevator.


Defendant Denies Guilt In Catskills Slayings
A man discharged from the Army after serving in the campaign in Saudi Arabia pleaded not guilty yesterday to a 22-count indictment charging him with the bludgeoning deaths of an elderly couple in their Catskill Mountain vacation cottage.
The indictment charged the veteran, Anthony Valentino Burton, 24 years old, with nine counts of murder, including the most serious slaying charge in New York State, second-degree murder.


Matrix Service reports earnings for Year to May 31


No Reason to Relax Dioxin Standards
To the Editor:
Re "Downgrading Dioxin" (editorial, Aug. 16): The studies of workers exposed to dioxin definitively show that the chemical is a carcinogen in humans.
As chairman of a House of Representatives subcommittee that has conducted investigations into dioxin for more than three years, I would like to set the record straight.


Sports of The Times; Old Jimbo 'Out There By Himself'
HE stuck his glow-in-the-dark lime-green racquet in the air and produced four desperation lobs.
His opponent could not put him away, not with a smash, maybe not even with a stake through his gigantic heart.
Jimmy Connors lives, and lives and lives.
He celebrated his escape, his 5-5 tie in the second set, with a giant shimmy of his scrawny 39-year-old physique directly in front of the paying customers.


America West's Plans Approved
America West Airlines said a Federal bankruptcy court had approved a $155 million financing package and a joint marekting alliance with Northwest Airlines.
The finacing includes $35 million in debtor-in-possession financing from the GPA Group, an aircraft leasing company; $20 million in similar financing from Northwest and about $100 millon in deferred payments until the end of this year from aircraft leasing concerns.
The airline, based in Phoenix, filed for protection for creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code in June.


BRIEFS
*
BASF A.G., Ludwigshafen, Germany, a chemicals and magnetic recording company, said it was negotiating with Siemens A.G., Munich, the electronics company, to buy the 33.5 percent stake it does not already own in Comparax Informationssystems G.m.b.H., their computer marketing joint venture. *
Bayer A.G., Leverkusen, Germany, the chemicals company, will invest $60 million in Miles Inc., its United States subsidiary, to expand operations in Elkhart, Ind.
The project is to start early next year. *
Continental A.G., Hanover, Germany, a tire, technology and rubber goods company, will establish a joint venture with Barum Holding A.G., Otrokovice, Czechoslovakia, to make tires in Czechoslovakia. *
Colorocs Inc.
Norcross, Ga., a copier maker, filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, saying it did not believe it would be able to continue operation. *
Dominion Textile Inc., Montreal, sold its Mirafi Inc. geotextiles subsidiary to Nicolon Corp., Atlanta, a producer of geosynthetics, for $11 million. *
Equitable Resources Inc., Pittsburgh, a gas and oil company, will buy almost all of the Rocky Mountain oil and natural gas properties of Maxus Exploration Co., a unit of Maxus Energy Corp., Dallas, for $64 million. *
Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc., Fond du Lac, Wis., a maker of machine tools, received Justice Department approval for its proposed acquisition of Cross &amp; Trecker Corp., a machine tools and computing equipment company. *
Graphic Scanning Corp., Englewood, N.J., a telecommunications company, said its shareholders had approved the acquisition of BellSouth Enterprises Inc. *
Marriott Management Services Inc., a subsidiary of Marriott Corp., Bethesda, Md., and Taco Bell Corp., a unit of Pepsico Inc., Purchase, N.Y., signed an agreement under which Marriott will prepare and serve Taco Bell products in many of its food service operations. *
National Starch and Chemical Co., a subsidiary of Unilever, the Dutch-British consumer goods company, purchased the remaining 50 percent interest in its joint venture Lorenz-National Industrial Ltd., from its partner, Companhia Lorenz. *
Quaker Oats Co., Chicago, said it would be the exclusive supplier of oat bran for Leanmaker, a new product designed to reduce the fat in ground beef and pork.


All Refugees Should Be Treated Like Cubans
To the Editor:
"The Stick Congress Gave Castro" (editorial, Aug. 15) goes too far in calling for repeal of the Cuban Adjustment Act, which grants arriving Cubans permanent resident status.


Xyvision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Our Towns
Some people like airplanes.
Some people love them.
Larry Bay lives them.
He grew up in the Bronx dreaming about airplanes.
He spent a lifetime tending them at La Guardia and less friendly climes.
Now, he's spending his retirement restoring them.
And a good thing, too, for the little-known struggle to preserve Long Island's long heritage of aviation.
Here in two vintage aircraft hangars, two days a week, more than 100 vintage men and women volunteers lavish hours of careful restoration on 10 vintage aircraft at Nassau County's Cradle of Aviation Museum.


Hospital Bonds Yield Up to 7.1%
The Industrial Development Authority of Augusta County, Va., tentatively priced $55 million in hospital-revenue bonds yesterday through Wheat First Securities with a maximum yield of 7.1 percent for an issue due in 2021.
For shorter-maturity bonds in serial form, yields range from 5.25 percent in 1994, 5.65 percent in 1996 and 6.4 percent in 2002.
Also offered is a longer maturity that is due in 2015 and priced to yield 6.806 percent.


Intellicorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


All Refugees Should Be Treated Like Cubans; The Revolution's Cost
To the Editor:
In "17 Hours Across Rural Cuba: The Revolution Lives" (front page, Aug. 18), you question whether or not progress of the Cuban peasant-class farmer would have been quicker under a non-Communist government, yet you compare Cuba's countryside favorably with Haiti, the Dominican Republic and Jamaica, lagging behind Puerto Rico (all non-Communist governments).


Healthplex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thackeray Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Claire's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Rykoff-Sexton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Remaking the Pistons
The remaking of the Detroit Pistons continued when they traded two second-round draft choices to obtain guard DARRELL WALKER, a former Knick, from the Washington Bullets.


Jetronic Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Doctor Who Told of Sexism Rejoins Stanford
A prominent female neurosurgeon who quit her post at the Stanford Medical School has decided to rejoin the faculty, explaining that she was encouraged by positive steps taken by the school to combat sexism and persuaded that further changes were "more apt to happen if I'm around than if I'm not."
The neurosurgeon, Dr.
Frances K. Conley, announced her resignation in June, charging that she had been subjected to 25 years of subtle sexism in her male-dominated specialty.
Her resignation prompted widespread discussion at Stanford and elsewhere about how women could be demeaned or ignored in the hierarchical world of academic medicine.


Rohr Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Shhh! Seahawks Look Vulnerable to the Jets
No Jets defensive player will say it, but the Seahawks, the Jets' opponent this Sunday in Seattle, are vulnerable.
Starting quarterback Dave Krieg broke his right thumb in the season opener last week and is out for eight games.
Backup Jeff Kemp will be making his first start in more than two years.
Last year he was the holder for kicker Norm Johnson in 15 games.
That was the only time that he went onto the field.


Cucos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about an explosion in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, misidentified a spokeswoman for Lutheran Medical Center.
She is Maryteresa McKenna.
The article also misstated the number of explosion victims admitted to the hospital.
It was three, not four.


Fiscal Cuts Forcing Layoffs, Chief Judge Says
Warning of "profound and lasting" consequences for New York state's justice system, the state's Chief Judge, Sol Wachtler, said today that budget cuts had forced him to send layoff notices to 495 court employees.
The Chief Judge said that the layoffs would be made in the civil courts to prevent even more damaging dislocations in the state's criminal courts.
He predicted that the layoffs, which are effective at the end of the month, would lead to lengthy delays in civil court trials.


New York City Plans Sweeping Changes For Subway Safety
Spurred by the fatal crash of a subway train last week, New York City transit officials yesterday announced broad changes in safety procedures, ranging from closer monitoring of the performance of conductors and motormen to new automatic braking systems intended to stop trains that are traveling too fast near dangerous curves.
Most of the changes -- which also include putting speedometers and "black boxes" like those on airliners in the city's 600 subway trains -- will begin within a few months and be completed over the next year, transit officials said.


Connors the Killer Is Really Just a Child
SIXTEEN years ago, in a motel room in Orlando, I tried to watch a telecast of George Foreman fighting five opponents in a row, but I never got to see more than a minute at a time because Angelo Dundee, the great boxing trainer, kept switching the channel.
He wanted to watch Jimmy Connors fight John Newcombe.
"Connors is a killer," said Angelo.
"He's got timing, guts, he knows just when to come in and dig. Would've made a helluva fighter."


Dollar Trading Is Sluggish In Advance of Job Figures
The dollar rose against most currencies yesterday in quiet foreign exchange dealings, as traders waited for the release of the United States employment data for August.
Gold prices fell.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery was quoted at $347.00 an ounce, down $1.50.
New York's Republic National Bank quoted a late bid of $346.70, down $2.15.


Mets Look for a Silver Lining. But Where Is It?
From the front office to the clubhouse, the Mets have, over the last half a decade, operated with an arrogance arguably out of proportion to their accomplishments.
That air of superiority, though, was badly punctured by the team's sad stumbling through the 1991 season.
And it has now given way to an atmosphere of crisis in the aftermath of Wednesday's announcement that Dwight Gooden is facing the possibility of major shoulder surgery and that Sid Fernandez will definitely undergo knee surgery Saturday.


Disney Is Trying New Field With Purchase of Discover
Expanding again into another media field, the Walt Disney Company announced yesterday that it had agreed to buy the operating assets of Discover, one of seven magazines that ended publication when Family Media Inc. closed last month.
Terms of the deal, which had been expected in the magazine industry, were not disclosed.


Six B.C.C.I. Officials Are Indicted
The Justice Department today unsealed the indictment of six officials of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and a reputed leader of the Medellin drug cartel on charges that they had used the bank for six years to launder millions of dollars of cocaine profits.
Officials at the Justice Department have been widely criticized for not moving quickly against the bank, and today's indictment was viewed by some as an effort to seize the offensive.


Miscellany
*
Hakuhodo Inc., Tokyo, in a further expansion of its partnership with TBWA, was the sole participant in a preference stock issue for TBWA International, New York, valued at about $15 million.
Hakuhado has the right to convert the issue into 11.36 percent of TBWA common stock.
The two agencies last year established a joint venture in Europe.
The transaction is part of a broader expansion of TBWA, which plans to open an office in Seoul, South Korea, and acquire equity in other agencies in Europe. *
Actmedia Inc., Norwalk, Conn., has signed an agreement with Klever Kart Inc., Salt Lake City, to develop and market shopping carts with video screens attached.
Another company, Videocart Inc., Chicago, recently completed tests of a similar product.


Concierges: Baedekers In the Flesh; How to Get in Touch With the Highly Recommended
Here are the addresses and telephone numbers for the museums, attractions, churches and restaurants mentioned by the concierges.
ANTIQUES
PLACE DES ANTIQUAIRES, 125 East 57th Street, Manhattan; (212) 758-2900.
Open Mondays through Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Closed Sundays.
MANHATTAN ART AND ANTIQUES CENTER, 1050 Second Avenue, between 55th and 56th Streets, Manhattan; (212) 355-4400.
Open Mondays through Saturdays 10:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sundays noon to 6 P.M.
CHRISTIE'S, 502 Park Avenue, at 59th Street, Manhattan; (212) 546-1000.
Open Mondays through Fridays 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Saturdays 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays 1 to 5 P.M.
CHURCHES
ABYSSINIAN BAPTIST CHURCH, 132 Odell Clark Place (formerly West 138th Street), Manhattan; (212) 862-7474.
CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE, Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street; (212) 316-7540.
MUSEUMS
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY, Central Park West at 79th Street, Manhattan; (212) 769-5000.
Open daily at 10 A.M., closes at 5:45 P.M. daily except Fridays and Saturdays, when it closes at 8:45 P.M.
Admission: $5;$2.50 for children.
A.T.&amp;T.
INFOQUEST, 550 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street; (212) 605-5555.
Open Tuesdays 10 A.M. to 9 P.M., Wednesdays through Sundays 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
CHILDREN'S MUSEUM OF MANHATTAN, 212 West 83d Street; (212) 721-1234.
Open Tuesdays through Sundays 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4 children and adults; under 2, free.
THE CLOISTERS, Fort Tryon Park, Manhattan, (212) 923-3700.
Open Tuesdays through Sundays 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for students, children under 12 and the elderly.
FRICK COLLECTION, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan; (212) 288-0700.
Open Tuesdays through Saturdays 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., Sundays 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: adults $3; $1.50 for students and the elderly; those 10 to 16 must be accompanied by an adult; children under 10 not admitted.
GUINNESS WORLD OF RECORDS, 350 Fifth Avenue, at 34th Street; (212) 947-2335.
Open daily 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Admission: adults $5.50; $3.50 for children three to 11 years old, under 5 free.
INTREPID SEA-AIR-SPACE MUSEUM, Pier 86 (46th Street and the Hudson River), Manhattan; (212) 245-2533; open Wednesdays through Sundays 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: adults $7; $4 children 6 to 11 years old, under 6 free.
METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street, Manhattan; (212) 879-5500.
Open Tuesdays through Thursdays and Sundays from 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M., Fridays and Saturdays 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
Admission $6; $3 students and the elderly.
The Annenberg Collection is on exhibit until Oct. 13.
NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY, Fifth Avenue at 42d Street, Manhattan; (212) 930-0757.
"The Legend of King Arthur" opens Oct. 19 and continues through Feb. 22.
Admission is free.
ATTRACTIONS
BRONX ZOO, Bronx Park, 185th Street and Southern Boulevard; (212) 220-5100.
Open daily 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., weekends and holidays until 5:30 P.M.
Admission: $5.75 adults; children under 12 and the elderly $2; under 2, free.
Admission is free on Wednesdays.
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, Central Park, Fifth Avenue and 64th Street entrance, Manhattan; (212) 861-6030.
Open Mondays through Fridays 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; weekends and holidays 11 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Admission: $2.50 for adults; $1.25 for the elderly; 50 cents for children 3 to 12, under 3 free.
NEW YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (212) 220-8700.
Open Tuesdays through Fridays 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; weekends 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: a donation is mandatory; parking costs $4.
ELLIS ISLAND IMMIGRATION MUSEUM, (212) 269-5755.
Open daily from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Ferries leave Battery Park, at the southern end of Manhattan, daily at 9:15, 9:45 and 10 A.M. and then every half-hour to 4 P.M.
The last ferry from the island departs at 5:15 P.M.
Round-trip fares are $6 for adults, $5 for the elderly and $3 for ages 3 to 17.
Admission to the island and museum is free.
TOURS
HARLEM SPIRITUALS, Room 900, 1697 Broadway, at 53d Street, Manhattan; (212) 757-0425.
Gospel tours Sunday are $27 a person; evening soul food and jazz tours $65.
SEAPORT LINE, Pier 16, South Street Seaport, Manhattan; (212) 385-0791.
Ninety-minute tours depart Mondays through Fridays, 11 A.M., 1, 3, 4 and 5 P.M. and Saturdays and Sundays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. through Oct. 4; after Oct. 4, at 11 A.M., 1, 3, 4 and 5 P.M.
Tickets are $12 ; $6 for those two to 12; $11 for the elderly and $10 for students. .
STARDOM TOURS, 23 Shore Road, Edgewater, N.J.; (212) 222-7827.
Two-and-a-half-hour tour, leaving from Manhattan hotels, $35 a person; one-hour, $20.
WORLD YACHT, Pier 62 (23d Street and Hudson River), (212) 929-7090.
Three-hour dinner cruises Sundays through Thursdays $59 a person, Fridays and Saturdays $64.50; lunch cruises $24.75; Sunday brunch $37.50.
Reservations needed.
YACHT OWNERS ASSOCIATION OF NEW YORK, 225 West 34th Street, Manhattan; (212) 736-1010.
Represents more than 400 owners of yachts accommodating 2 to 600 people, with or without catering.
For example, a private catered dinner cruise of four hours with two people is about $600, with crew of three (captain, first mate and server).
RESTAURANTS
AUREOLE, 34 East 61st Street, Manhattan; (212) 319-1660.
BAROLO, 398 West Broadway, near Broome Street), SoHo; (212) 226-1102.
BICE, 7 East 54th Street, Manhattan; (212) 688-1999.
BOULEY, 165 Duane Street, TriBeCa; (212) 608-3852.
CAFE DES ARTISTES, 1 West 67th Street, Manhattan; (212) 877-3500.
CAFE UN DEUX TROIS, 123 West 44th Street, Manhattan; (212) 354-4148.
CHANTERELLE, 2 Harrison Street, at Hudson Street, TriBeCa; (212) 966-6960.
COCO PAZZO, 23 East 74th Street, Manhattan; (212) 794-0205.
CHART HOUSE, Foot of High Street, Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.; (914) 693-4130.
E.A.T., 1064 Madison Avenue, at 80th Street, Manhattan; (212) 772-0022.
FU'S, 1395 Second Avenue, near 73d Street, Manhattan; (212) 517-9670.
FERRIER, 29 East 65th Street, Manhattan; (212) 772-9000.
THE FOUR SEASONS, 99 East 52d Street, Manhattan; (212) 754-9494.
GIORGIO, 47 East 57th Street, Manhattan; (212) 319-5660.
HARD ROCK CAFE, 221 West 57th Street, Manhattan; (212) 245-9030.
INDOCHINE, 430 Lafayette Street, Manhattan; (212) 505-5111.
JOUR ET NUIT, 337 West Broadway, at Grand Street, SoHo; (212) 925-5971.
JUANITA'S RESTAURANT, 1309 Third Avenue, near 74th Street), Manhattan; (212) 517-3800.
LA COTE BASQUE, 5 East 55th Street, Manhattan; (212) 688-6525.
LA GOULUE, 28 East 70th Street, Manhattan; (212) 988-8169.
LA GRENOUILLE, 3 East 52d Street, Manhattan; (212) 752-1495.
LE CIRQUE, 58 East 65th Street, Manhattan; (212) 794-9292.
LE COMPTOIR, 227 East 67th Street, Manhattan; (212) 794-4950.
LE REFUGE, 166 East 82d Street, Manhattan; (212) 861-4505.
LOEB BOATHOUSE RESTAURANT, Central Park, 72d Street and Fifth Avenue entrance; (212) 517-3623.
LOLA, 30 West 22d Street, Manhattan; (212) 675-6700.
The gospel brunch, served Sunday at noon and 2:30 P.M., costs about $25 a person.
MICKEY MANTLE'S, 42 Central Park South, Manhattan; (212) 688-7777.
PARAMOUNT HOTEL, 235 West 46th Street, Manhattan; (212) 764-5500.
PETER LUGER STEAKHOUSE, 178 Broadway (between Driggs and Bedford Avenues), Williamsburg, Brooklyn; (718) 387-7400.
PETROSSIAN, 182 West 58th Street, Manhattan; (212) 245-2214.
PIPELINE, 225 Liberty Street, Manhattan; (212) 945-2755.
PLANET HOLLYWOOD (opening mid-October), 140 West 57th Street, Manhattan; (212) 333-7827.
RAINBOW ROOM, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, Manhattan; (212) 632-5000.
REMI, 145 West 53d Street, Manhattan; (212) 581-4242.
RIVER CAFE, 1 Water Street, Brooklyn; (718) 522-5200.
RUMPELMAYER'S, 50 Central Park South, in St. Moritz Hotel, Manhattan; (212) 755-5800.
RUSSIAN TEA ROOM, 150 West 57th Street, Manhattan; (212) 265-0947.
SERENDIPITY 3, 225 East 60th Street, Manhattan; (212) 838-3531.
SFUZZI, 58 West 65th Street, Manhattan; (212) 873-3700.
SIGN OF THE DOVE, 1110 Third Avenue, at 65th Street, Manhattan; (212) 861-8080.
SHUN LEE PALACE EAST, 155 East 55th Street, Manhattan; (212) 371-8844.
TAVERN ON THE GREEN, Central Park West and 67th Street, Manhattan; (212) 873-3200.
TERRACE, 400 West 119th Street, Manhattan; (212) 666-9490
TRIBECA GRILL, 375 Greenwich Street, TriBeCa; (212) 941-3900.
UNCLE CHARLIE'S, 56 Greenwich Avenue (between Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue), Manhattan; (212) 255-8787.
WATER CLUB, East River at 30th Street, Manhattan; (212) 683-3333.
WINDOWS ON THE WORLD, 1 World Trade Center (107th Floor), Manhattan; (212) 938-1111.
MANHATTAN CLUBS
AU BAR, 41 East 58th Street; (212) 308-9455.
BLUE NOTE, 131 West Third Street; (212) 475-8592.
THE BUILDING, 51 West 26th Street; (212) 576-1890.
CHINA CLUB, 2130 Broadway, near 74th Street); (212) 877-1166.
CONDON'S, 117 East 15th Street; (212) 254-0960.
DIVA, 306 East 81st Street; (212) 650-1928.
LE BAR BAT, 311 West 57th Street; (212) 307-7228.
TATOU, 151 East 50th Street; (212) 753-1144.


Gesco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Pacific Gas's Canada Sale
The Pacific Gas and Electric Company said today that it had agreed to sell its Pacific Gas Transmission Company unit to TransCanada Pipelines Ltd. of Calgary, Alberta.
The deal includes Pacific Gas Transmission's 49 percent stake in the Alberta Natural Gas Company Ltd., and is valued at $290 million to $350 million, depending on various contingencies.


SFM Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Interpublic to Acquire North Carolina Agency
The Interpublic Group of Companies said yesterday that it would acquire Long, Haymes &amp; Carr, Winston-Salem, N.C., one of the largest advertising agencies in the Southeast.
Long, Hames, which will retain its name, will become a part of the Lintas Americas unit of Lintas Worldwide, an Interpublic subsidiary.
The move will enable Interpublic to expand its relationship with current clients like RJR Nabisco Inc. and the Sara Lee Corporation.
Long, Haymes, which has billings of about $119 million, creates campaigns for several RJR Nabisco cigarette brands and for Sara Lee hosiery and knitted products.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.


SOVIET TURMOIL: Master of Improvisation; Gorbachev, Fully Back From His Captivity, Bends the Balking Legislators to His Will
The future of the Soviet nation under the new emergency law upending central Soviet power may be open to doubt, but Mikhail S. Gorbachev's resiliency as national leader is not.
He has once again displayed his talent in a crisis for adapting to the inevitable and making it seem like some personal inspiration.
He remains the master of dire improvisation, the national champion of the Soviet art of free fall.


Baltic Border Checkpoint


Aceto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bethlehem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Joe Bartelme, 61, Dies; Ex-NBC News Official
Joe Bartelme, a former vice president of NBC News and a pioneer in television's local news operations, died on Saturday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 61 years old.
He died of lung cancer, said a spokesman for the family.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Farm Credit Banks is offering $85 million in 7.52 percent notes due in 1996 at 99.98 to yield 7.525 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue is noncallable for one year. *
Geneva Steel, Vineyard, Utah, privately sold $50 million in 10.55 percent unsecured senior notes due in 1999 to institutional investors.
Common Stock  *
Jenny Craig Inc., Del Mar, Calif., a weight-loss company, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an initial public offering of up to 5 million common shares at an estimated $19 a share through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.


Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jane Ellsworth, 80, Founder of Charity On a Nerve Disorder
Jane Dewey Ellsworth, founder of the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation, died last Friday at her home in Westlake Village, Calif., near Los Angeles.
She was 80 years old.
Her family said the cause of death was emphysema.


Chrysler Offers Trust Certificates
The Chrysler Corporation is offering $624 million in senior asset-backed certificates with the Select Auto Receivables Trust 1991-3.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company was lead manager of the underwriting group.
The securities have a 7 percent coupon and are priced at 99 27/32 to yield 7.187 percent, or about 88 basis points more than Treasury securities with similar maturities.


'Le Nozze di Figaro'
The season premiere of the New York City Opera's production of Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro" is to take place tomorrow afternoon at 2 at the New York State Theater.
Dean Peterson is to appear in the title role, and Elizabeth Hynes is to sing the role of the Countess.
Others in the cast are to include Maureen O'Flynn as Susanna, Kathryn Gamberoni as Cherubino and William Stone as Count Almaviva.
Scott Bergeson is to conduct.
Tickets are $8 to $62.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


All Refugees Should Be Treated Like Cubans; Lift the Restrictions
To the Editor:
Although "The Stick Congress Gave Castro" (editorial, Aug. 15) addresses only the problem of Cuban immigration, that problem can best be viewed within the overall folly that characterizes our Cuban policy.
Over the years, the United States has sought to undermine and sabotage the Cuban economy.
The justifications for such an unneighborly policy have varied, but they seem mainly to reflect our rage in the face of Fidel Castro's refusal to accept our Monroe Doctrine, his unwillingness to accede to any United States hegemony over his little country merely because geography placed it in our front yard.


Joy of Pizza Is Celebrated By Domino's
DOMINO'S PIZZA INC. is forgoing the long-running fixation on fast delivery in its advertising as it introduces a significant campaign that focuses instead on what might be called the joy of pizza.
The campaign, to begin nationally a week from today, presents a new theme, "Nobody knows like Domino's," followed by the words "How you like pizza at home." Gone are slogans like "It's time for Domino's Pizza" and "The sooner, the better," emphasizing the Domino's pledge to deliver to customers' homes in 30 minutes or less.


Anthony Bliss Fought Nazism on Home Front
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 12 obituary of Anthony A. Bliss mentions his contribution to the cultural life of New York City and the United States through his generous support of opera and ballet.
You do not, however, mention the contribution he made to the cause of freedom in this country.


Critic's Choice/Revue; World of Kander and Ebb Goes 'Round in a Show
The songs of John Kander and Fred Ebb, which form the heart of "And the World Goes 'Round," at the Westside Theater, belong to a brassy, bustling tradition of Broadway tunefulness that is an increasingly endangered species of popular music nowadays.
But if that tradition is down, it is certainly far from out, as is evidenced by the enthusiastic performances of the Off Broadway show's five youngish performers, Joel Blum, Terry Burrell, Bob Cuccioli, Karen Mason and Karen Ziemba.
The show's success has as much to do with staging as with the songs themselves.
Scott Ellis and Susan Stroman, the directorial and choreographic team who co-conceived the evening with David Thompson, have turned 30 Kander and Ebb songs into a buoyant sequence of whimsical set pieces acrobatically performed on a witty set stenciled with dictionary definitions of things having to do with songwriting.


Good Times Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GWIL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sergeant Not Indicted In Killing of Suspect
A Middlesex County grand jury yesterday decided not to indict a New Brunswick police sergeant in the death of a suspect shot during a foot chase in June.
The police say that the gun belonging to the officer, Sgt.
Zane Grey, accidentally discharged after he fell through a rotting wooden ramp while pursuing the suspect, 25-year-old Shaun Potts.


Abroad at Home; E Pluribus Unum?
As we watch the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the attempt to cobble together a new system based on the separate republics, we wonder whether such a hybrid can work.
How can a mosaic of states have an effective national economy?
A foreign or defense policy?
One answer is that it has been tried before with some success: here in the United States.
Our circumstances in 1787 were of course entirely different, the joining of independent states in a federation rather than an attempt to rescue some central power from the explosion of a centralized tyranny.
But American history does provide some lessons in the workability of federalism -- of state governments functioning within a national system.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
More than two years ago, the Justice Department acquired tape recordings pouring out details of how the Bank of Credit and Commerce International used front men to acquire U.S. banks illegally.
But the Justice officials kept the tapes secret and, as they now acknowledge, deceived bank examiners and other investigators about the tapes' existence.  [ Page A1. ]  The Justice Department unsealed the indictment of six officials of B.C.C.I. and a reputed leader of the Medellin drug cartel.  [ D1. ]
A British court indefinitely extended a freeze on assets granted to the Panama Government as part of its effort to recover $23 million reportedly stolen by Manuel Antonio Noriega.  [ D5. ]
Earnings of private savings institutions slipped in the April-June quarter despite favorable interest-rate conditions.  [ D1. ]
Sales of American-made cars and trucks fell 11.6 percent in late August from a year earlier.  [ D1. ]  The nation's largest retailers reported weak August sales.  [ D2. ]
The number of Americans filing new unemployment claims remained at 421,000 in late August.  [ D2. ]  American businesses have cut back expansion plans to the slowest pace in five years.  [ D2. ] Markets
Salomon will pay no compensation, severance or future legal expenses stemming from the Treasury market scandal to executives who resigned, including John Gutfreund.  [ A1. ]  The Salomon scandal is putting a harsh spotlight on money managers and investment partnerships that control billions of dollars in capital.  [ D6. ]
Shearson said it had suspended two top executives in its equities trading group because of violations in connection with a Conagra stock offering.  [ D1. ]
The Dow Jones industrial average ended the day exactly where it began -- at 3,008.50 points.  [ D6. ]
Credit market participants sold Treasury notes and bonds, pushing prices down.  [ D13. ]
Corn and soybean prices moved lower, while cattle prices soared.  [ D14. ]  The dollar rose in quiet trading.  [ D14. ] Companies
Unisys has agreed to pay a record $190 million to settle charges stemming from an investigation into procurement fraud and bid-rigging, Government and industry officials said.  [ D1. ]
Procter &amp; Gamble made an embarrassing error in judgment when it had police trace hundreds of thousands of telephone calls in an effort to identify a reporter's sources, its chairman said.  [ A18. ]
Lee A. Iacocca has agreed to retire from Chrysler at the end of 1992.
The announcement halts for the moment the speculation over the company's executive succession that began when Mr.
Iacocca decided to stay past the normal retirement age.  [ D1. ]
Disney will buy the operating assets of Discover, which ended publication when Family Media closed.  [ D15. ]  Warner Brothers said Mark Canton, an executive vice president, would leave the company by mutual agreement.  [ D15. ]
Bethlehem Steel said it intended to sell the coal operations of its Beth Energy Mines subsidiary.  [ D4. ] International
Japanese brokerages engaged in many more bogus transactions than previously acknowledged and also rigged trades involving U.S.
Treasury bonds.  [ D5. ] Today's Columns
Changes in the spread between short-term and long-term interest rates may be the best means of forecasting business-cycle turning points.
Leonard Silk: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
When Liz Claiborne said it expected slightly less growth in the second half of this year, investors took to the hills and have yet to come back, despite analysts' rosy projections.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
Domino's Pizza is celebrating the joys of pizza in its new ad campaign.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D15. ]


SOVIET CONGRESS YIELDS RULE TO REPUBLICS TO AVOID POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC COLLAPSE
Bowing to the reality of a collapsing union and an ultimatum from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the all-Soviet Congress voted today to surrender power to a new government largely controlled by the republics.
The action served largely to confirm the collapse of central authority over the 15 constituent republics in the 16 days since the aborted right-wing coup and the increasingly urgent need to restore at least a modicum of order before the centrifugal forces turned uncontrollable.


Handleman Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


International Aluminum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


More Broker Abuses Found in Japan
The brokerage houses involved in Japan's widening financial scandal engaged in many more bogus securities transactions than previously acknowledged and also rigged trades involving United States Treasury bonds, according to a newspaper report that was confirmed by the Finance Ministry today.
The disclosure, made Wednesday by Mainichi Shimbun, was the first indication that trading in securities listed on exchanges and in foreign securities was used by the brokerages to make improper payments to favored clients.


President of a French Group Taking No. 2 Post at Perrier
Thierry Chereau, the president of the French food and oil group Beghin-Say S.A., has been named to fill the No. 2 position at Groupe Perrier, the bottled water company, with the expectation that he will soon succeed Jacques Vincent as chairman.
Mr.
Vincent said Mr.
Chereau, who has an M.B.A. from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, would become chairman "within two to three years." Until then, Mr.
Chereau, 44, will have the title of vice chairman, assuming operational responsibilities within the parent company and in selected Perrier units.
Mr.
Vincent, who is also chairman of Exor, S.A., a diversified French holding company that is Perrier's largest shareholder, said he had been looking for more than a year for the right candidate to become Perrier's chairman.
"I had hoped to find one earlier," Mr.
Vincent said, according to Reuters.
"That's what led me to take the chairmanship of Perrier, when in fact I had no intention of doing so." In June 1990, Mr.
Vincent succeeded Gustave Leven, who was chairman of Perrier for 42 years and was responsible for making the small green bottles world famous.


Atlantic County Issue Is Priced
A $63.7 million issue of Atlantic County, N.J., certificates of participation was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc. as senior manager.
The certificates in serial order are offered at prices to yield from 4.5 percent in 1992, 5.7 percent in 1996, 6.3 percent in 2001, 6.6 percent in 2006, 6.7 percent in 2010 through 2012, and 6.6 percent from 2013 to 2015.


Poultry Plant Fire Churns Emotions Over Job Both Hated and Appreciated
When Loretta Goodwin first walked through the heavy metal doors of the Imperial Food Products plant here two years ago, she had few illusions about the kind of job she was about to begin.
As a child she saw her father work for $18 a day as a railroad laborer, and in her teens, she learned about harsh working conditions and the need for fast hands while picking cotton, tobacco and peaches in the fields of surrounding Richmond County.
"They paid 25 cents for each bucket you filled, and I picked fast," she said.


CONGRESS BACKING ISRAEL AID DELAY
Congress is likely to heed the Bush Administration's plea to postpone consideration of an Israeli request for $10 billion in housing loan guarantees until late this year or early next, Congressional leaders said today.
Lawmakers said the delay would accommodate a request made Wednesday by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3rd to postpone consideration until after a Middle East peace conference planned for October.
The Administration's eagerness to put off consideration of the measure despite Israel's desire for immediate action was based on fears that processing the loan guarantee request could complicate planning for the conference.


Electrohome Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Diner's Journal
New Name, New Food
Aurora, the elegant and expensive French restaurant that was toppled this year by the winds of the new austerity, is to reopen on Monday with new owners, a new name and lower prices.
And the cuisine?
What else, Italian.
Called Dolce, a branch of a restaurant in Stamford, Conn., the new venture is described as an "East Coast tribute to Wolfgang Puck," which means the owners have hired a chef who has worked with Mr.
Puck and plan to mimic his style.
Mr.
Puck's California-accented Italian cooking, featuring inventive pizzas, pastas and grilled foods, is a resouding success in California.
Michael Berend, the new chef at Dolce, also has worked at the Stamford restaurant.
The owners are Don Karas, the former publisher of Restaurant Business magazine; Jon Karas, a lawyer, and Carlos Asencio, the former general manager of Sfuzzi in Manhattan.
Dolce, 60 East 49th Street, Manhattan, plans to serve lunch Monday to Friday, and dinner on Saturday.
Information: (212) 692-9292.
Poems and Lemon Grass
If you have a hunger for Thai food and a thirst for poetry, you might consider the Poetry in Motion series held monthly at Tommy Tang's restaurant, 323 Greenwich Street, Manhattan.
Professional and amateur poets present their work and discuss it with the audience.
The poetry readings often attract professonal actors and actresses who write poetry on the side.
Among those expected to attend the next session, on Tuesday at 10:30 P.M., are Justine Bateman, Sally Kirkland, Ally Sheedy and Michael O'Keefe.
Reservations are suggested and there is a cover charge of $5.
Information: (212) 334-9190.
Woks at Waldorf
Chinatown is coming to midtown Manhattan with a new restaurant in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel called the Royal Unicorn.
The investors behind the new operation include the owners of 20 Mott Street in Chinatown.
Per Hellman, the hotel's managing director, said the 90-seat restaurant, with an entrance on East 49th Street, was expected to open by March.
Aside from its Continental restaurant, Peacock Alley, the Waldorf-Astoria already has a Japanese tempura bar called Inagiku.


SALOMON CUTS OFF FORMER MANAGERS
In a stunning break with its past management, Salomon Brothers Inc. announced yesterday that it would pay no compensation, severance or future legal expenses stemming from the Treasury markets scandal to the four senior executives who have resigned, including John H. Gutfreund, the former chairman who built Salomon into a bond-trading giant.
The decision, reached at an early morning meeting yesterday by the firm's board, would also end compensation and payment of legal expenses to Thomas W. Strauss, the former president; John W. Meriwether, a former vice chairman, and Donald M. Feuerstein, the former general counsel.
The men, or lawyers for them, all declined to comment.


EXECUTIVES
*
American Express Information Services Inc., Englewood, Colo., an American Express Co. unit, named Eula L. Adams executive vice president, finance and administration. *
Citizens First National Bank of New Jersey, Glen Rock, N.J., a subsidiary of Citizens First Bancorp Inc., appointed John C. Annello, previously a senior national bank examiner at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to the position of senior vice president in charge of its control group division. *
Claire's Stores Inc., Pembroke Pines, Fla., a women's fashion accessories retail chain, named Allen A. Steinberg to the newly created position of executive vice president of its Claire's Boutiques subsidiary. *
Dime Savings Bank of New York has named Arthur C. Bennett chief human resources officer and a member of the bank's senior management committee.


Twins' Starter of Note
JACK MORRIS has the history and SCOTT ERICKSON has the current cachet, but according to Minnesota pitching coach DICK SUCH, the Twin starter of note is KEVIN TAPANI.


CHRONICLE
"Our Town," Thornton Wilder's classic drama about life in turn-of-the-century New Hampshire, may seem the quintessential American play, but to ALAN ALDA, star of a production that opened in London last night, "It is universal."


Rebuilding, Berlin Synagogue Marks a Milestone


Datamark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On Stage, and Off
Although the appointment of JoAnne Akalaitis to succeed Joseph Papp as the artistic director of the New York Shakespeare Festival has received a lukewarm response from the theater community -- so far, at least -- one of its most prominent members is handing her a check.
Jujamcyn Theaters, the Broadway theater owner and producer, will give its annual $50,000 cash award to the festival in a ceremony scheduled for Oct. 14.
Rocco Landesman, president of Jujamcyn, says the award is also intended as a tribute to Mr.
Papp, who recently stepped down.
Mr.
Landesman says: "Joe has always insisted on productions that challenge, disturb and provoke. And his independence has been almost pathological. No board, no critic, no audience consensus could keep him from doing a play that interested him. But to confound everyone, he's also managed to produce the most successful Broadway musical of all time."
As for Ms.
Akalaitis, Mr.
Landesman says: "JoAnne is, like Joe, an enemy of comfort and complacency in the theater. Her tenure promises to continue the tradition of breaking traditions." On a High Horse About 'La Mancha'
Dale Wasserman, who wrote the book of the hit musical "Man of La Mancha," the story of Don Quixote, has been tilting at some windmills of his own.
He has spent the last week telling anyone who will listen that he may sue the producer Mitch Leigh, who is also the show's composer, to stop a 25th-anniversary production of "La Mancha" starring Raul Julia and Sheena Easton.
The issue is one of control.
Mr.
Wasserman, who holds the copyrights to the musical's book and the teleplay on which it is based, says he objects to mounting the same production with the same designs and the same director, Albert Marre, who's been overseeing companies of "La Mancha" since 1965.
"I do not consider Mitch a producer," Mr.
Wasserman says.
"He's a re-producer." Mr.
Leigh, on the other hand, says he is of the "if it ain't broke, don't fix it" school of thought.
A Broadway producer, who insisted on anonymity, says, "Dale wants to maintain the integrity of the original production by exploring new design and directing ideas, not just hanging up the name of a star and putting out all the old scenery."
"He wants a flop, is what he wants," says Arthur Rubin, executive vice president of the Nederlander Organization, which has booked "La Mancha" into its Gershwin Theater on Broadway, and also into its theaters in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Chicago.
"Take a good show and change it and you've got a flop. Why an author who could make so much money would fight it is beyond my comprehension. It's crazy time."
Mr.
Wasserman says he makes plenty of money writing for television, and has already returned a "very large check" that Mr.
Leigh sent him.
"He thinks that if you pay people, they will shut up," Mr.
Wasserman maintains.
"If I were that practical a man, I wouldn't have written 'Man of La Mancha' to begin with."
Mr.
Leigh is unmoved.
"Dale Wasserman behaves like he invented Cervantes," he says. 'Brady Bunch,' and It's Not a Rerun
If you're under 35, chances are that "The Brady Bunch" baby-sat for you more often than your mom.
You probably know all the words to its theme song by heart. (Admit it. You just started singing it.) Well, the Bradys aren't just for television anymore.
Starting on Sept. 26 at the Village Gate is "The Real Live Brady Bunch," a theatrical re-creation by adult actors of the original television scripts.
For the last year, this event has been the toughest ticket in Chicago, where it has played at the Annoyance Theater, sometimes turning away as many as 100 people a night.
The producer and promoter Ron Delsener is bringing the show and its Chicago cast to New York, where it is scheduled to run through Dec. 8.
There are 26 "Brady" scripts that are performed in rotation for two weeks apiece, so repeat visits are possible, especially if the show extends.
But the Bradys are only the second half of the evening.
"The Real Live Game Show," an audience-participation takeoff on "The Price Is Right," precedes it, using the same actors.
Both shows break for commercials as they do on television, and local merchants can pay $25 per spot to have the actors perform their ad.
Mr.
Delsener says this is "ancillary box-office income" and since there are about eight commercials a night during the two shows, that means $1,400 a week.
And if you hit it on the right night, who knows what could happen?
In Chicago, Eve Plumb, the actress who originated Jan, the middle daughter, on television, made a surprise guest appearance.
Can Florence Henderson be far behind?
Let's Hear It From the Dentists
The good news for the Manhattan Theater Club is that Terrence McNally's "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" is selling out at City Center and has been extended indefinitely. (Dentists love it so much that many have sent in their own pointers on the "lips together, teeth apart" method, which helps people stop grinding their teeth while they sleep).
The bad news is that as a result the theater's first show of the season, Shirley Lauro's "Piece of My Heart," a drama about six women who served in Vietnam, finds itself homeless.
The solution, the artistic director Lynne Meadow has decided, is to move Ms.
Lauro's play to the Union Square Theater on 17th Street, formerly home to the Roundabout.
Previews are to begin on Oct. 15.
Ticket information: (212) 645-5590.
Making a Cake and Then Eating It
A piece of the cake is what you'll get on Sept. 25 at the opening of "Bon Appetit" and "The Italian Lesson" at CSC Repertory.
Chocolate cake, to be exact, also known as Julia Child's Gateau au Chocolat l'Eminence Brune, which is apt, since Jean Stapleton, who stars in both one-act plays, portrays Ms.
Child in "Bon Appetit." The play, which is sung, is a lesson in making the cake, and the staff of Bon Appetit magazine will provide the real thing after the show.
They will be joined by the chefs of Le Cirque, Union Square Cafe, Mondrian and Felidia, among others, who will bring their own chocolate creations, accompanied by Cognac and coffee.
The magazine will also hold a drawing for six dinners at one of the restaurants, and at every performance, from Sept. 16 through Nov. 3, Bon Appetit will give away one free subscription.
Tickets: (212) 677-4210.


Consilium Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Xytronyx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Children
Children's Radio Program  Bank Street College Radio WNYE-FM (91.5) 610 West 112th Street Manhattan (212) 222-6700, extensions 271 and 583 Recommended ages: 4 and up
Based on his theory that everyone has one good funny story to tell, Irwin Gonshak, the producer of Bank Street College Radio, wants to hear children tell theirs -- on radio.
"Children can use make-believe animals as characters, for example, and transform them into real people," he explained.
Mr.
Gonshak is seeking children who are old enough to talk and relay a narrative coherently and their families, if they want, to come into the radio's studio, stand up at a microphone and become aspiring junior Orson Welleses, though Mr.
Gonshak prefers funny stories for this program.
Mr.
Gonshak tells his own children's stories about "Tough Cat," a private-eye feline who, in one case, responds to a call that the "itsy-bitsy spider" is missing.
Tough Cat sets out to find it with some difficulty; the spider's four nicknames stymie the gumshoe a bit.
The radio stories should be about five minutes long and be geared to an audience of 5-to-8-year-olds; the stories can also be on paper or cassette and sent in, if your children are mike-shy.
Participants should call ahead to reserve a time to record from noon to 3 P.M.
Tuesday, Thursday or Friday.
The stories are to be broadcast starting the week of Sept. 29 every Tuesday and Thursday at 9:45 and 10 A.M.
Some of the better tales will be offered to the Intercollegiate Broadcasting System, a nationwide syndicate.
Children's Harvest Fair  Brooklyn Botanic Garden 1000 Washington Avenue Crown Heights (718) 622-4433 Recommended for all ages Tomorrow
One of the least painful ways to say adios to summer is to reap its bounty, by picking herbs, flowers and vegetables.
After all, dahlias are just blooming, basil is still tinging gardens with its smell, and overabundant zucchinis are being thrown to the woodchucks.
At this harvest fair, however, every summer artifact is being put to full use.
Children who worked in the Children's Garden all summer will be selling herb vinegars, homemade pickles and pressed-flower notecards.
Bunches of dried flowers and wreaths (baby's breath, statice, gomphrena), as well as fresh mint, parsley and chives, will also be sold at low prices.
For children, there will be face painting, seed-collage making, flower arranging and cooking demonstrations for things like pesto (you have to wash a lot of basil leaves), couscous with vegetables, and stir-fried leeks.
Before and after the cooking demonstrations will be a bean-bag toss, a doughnut-eating contest, bobbing for apples and an obstacle course for the wiry-legged.
Edifying displays on how gardens grow will send children back to school brimming with horticultural facts.
And there will be a gaggle of award-winning sunflowers.
Admittance to the fair, which is from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M., is free, though some activities are 25 to 50 cents.
If it's raining, the fair will be moved indoors.  'King Theo'  Wings Theater Company Archive Building 154 Christopher Street Manhattan (212) 627-2961 Recommended ages: 4 to 8 Through Sept. 22
"King Theo" is an original play by Cynthia MacGregor, a Floridian.
Its daft and wry humor -- at one point the king wears unstylishly short, bell-bottomed red polyester pants -- is an appropriate counterpoint to the theater's sophisticated ambiance.
The velvet wine-colored seats make youngsters feel royal and respected, especially since many children's theater companies have awkward and uncomfortable bleachers, benches or floor mats.
As for the play, King Theo is a bit bonkers, though everyone likes him anyway, not just because he's the king but also because he likes jokes.
He needs to hire a court jester, and the candidate has to be a master jokester.
After interviewing 387 people, King Theo Rooly Rollicker Pollicker Bumblebee Schnitzel IV is about to give up.
Then Josie, a girl whose malapropisms make the king guffaw, shows up not seeking a job but happy to have one nevertheless.
The king, played by Peter K. Hirsch, and Lady Larkspur, played by Kimberly Topper, are dashingly snooty and absurd.
And Lady Larkspur, who talks like Zsa Zsa Gabor, eventually gets her comeuppance, which pleases the king indeed.
The 35-minute play has no intermission and ends so abruptly that you have to pay close attention.
The theater, in the newly renovated and immaculate Archive Building, is down a flight of stairs.
Tickets are $5; performances are Saturdays and Sundays at 1 P.M.  'The Movies: Fantasies'
152 Wooster Street Ground Floor, North Space SoHo Recommended ages: 4 and up Through Sunday
In 1985, Joyce Kozloff, a SoHo artist, was commissioned to create an artwork for the Los Angeles Metro's Seventh and Flower Streets underground station, which is opening this month.
The first phase of Ms.
Kozloff's work, a hand-painted tile frieze, is about to be shipped to the West Coast.
New Yorkers have the chance to view this 110-foot-long "unfolding film strip" in a gallery space at 152 Wooster Street for the next few days.
What a film strip it is, too, with what seems like every character and image ever created for Hollywood's silent and contemporary science-fiction movies wrapped around the gallery's walls.
For children, there are plenty of faces, bodies and objects that they'll be charmed to see.
For example, the first group of tiles (they are categorized) is centered on flying creatures.
Next are sea monsters, giant reptiles -- Godzillas with gaping, teeth-rimmed mouths -- creatures with big brains (E.T., the Alien), apes, werewolves, strange plants and insects, ghosts and spooks, robots, famous figures (Tin Man and Frankenstein) and spaceships.
Even though the tiles are hanging at adult eye-level, young children (who might have to be picked up) and older ones will probably insist on lingering at each tile, just to see if they can identify the creature.
Only some of the lifelike images are ominous -- Cyclops's eye seems so unforgiving -- but there are also the Cowardly Lion, harmless robots and friendly human faces from "2001: A Space Odyssey." Even the werewolves don't seem too voracious -- they don't move or speak; they're more like pages from a vivid children's book.
Which is how some children might prefer them: seen but not heard.
The gallery is open daily from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is free.
KEEP IN MIND
NEW YORK RENAISSANCE FESTIVAL, with glass blowing, leather carving, jousting and chain-mail-linking demonstrations; brass rubbings, face paintings, hair braidings and palm readings, and archery, old English games, pony rides, medieval-style food, marionette shows, Robin Hood vignettes, jugglers, a giant maze and a petting zoo.
Tomorrow and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. at Sterling Forest, Tuxedo, N.Y.
Admission, $12.75 for adults and $5 for children (6 years old and under, free); includes free parking.
Information: (212) 645-1630.
"WISEACRE FARM," a new children's play about life on the farm, with audience participation.
Tomorrow and Sunday at 1 P.M. at the 13th Street Theater, 50 West 13th Street, Manhattan.
Admission, $4.
Information: (212) 675-6677.
CHILDREN'S BOOK READING, of "King Arthur: The Sword in the Stone," the new, first volume of the tales of King Arthur, the boy king who unified a country and its people.
Written and illustrated by Hudson Talbot, who will read from the book.
Tomorrow from noon to 2 P.M. at Books of Wonder, 132 Seventh Avenue, at 18th Street, Manhattan.
Admission, free.
Information: (212) 989-3270.
"PLANTS, MYTHS AND MAGIC," a workshop for children ages 4 to 12 and their parents, where they will "unearth the secrets of Medieval plants" such as rosemary and lady's mantle.
At the Cloisters, Fort Tryon Park, Main Hall, at 1 P.M. tomorrow.
Admission, $6 for adults; children under 12 are free. (Materials provided free.) Information: (212) 923-3700.
"CHILDREN'S FESTIVAL," an open house where aspiring young dancers, musicians and actors can sample free classes in those fields, including lessons in playing the congas; in learning the steps of capoiera, a Brazilian dance and martial-arts form, and in acting in a comedy.
Clowns, games and refreshments are also part of the program.
Tomorrow at the Harbor Performing Arts Center, 1 East 104th Street, Manhattan, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Admission, free.
Information: (212) 427-2244.
"FESTIVAL AND FEATHERS," a workshop led by Onnie Millar, a Brooklyn artist, where children will be able to create their own colorful headdresses out of paper plates, feathers, sparkles and sequins.
Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Admission, $2.50 for adults and $1 for children under 12, plus a $1 workshop fee.
Reservations: (718) 624-0890.


Cattle Prices Post Big Gains Despite Sufficient Supplies
For the third day in a row, the cattle futures market ignored the ample supply of animals ready for slaughter and posted sizable price gains yesterday at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Analysts said the cattle market appeared to be looking ahead to leaner supplies toward the end of the year, while benefiting from a self-perpetuating rally at the same time.


Francis A. Turner, 95, Teacher; Oversaw Desegregation Program
Francis A. Turner, an educator who in the 1950's became the first black assistant superintendent in the New York City public school system, where he helped run the system's desegregation efforts, died on Tuesday.
He was 95 years old.
Mr.
Turner died of cardiac arrest at his summer home in Martha's Vineyard, said his nephew, Ernest Hill.


Man's Corpse Is Discovered Inside Cardboard Box Outside a Bank on Park Avenue
The body of a man whose neighbors knew him only as a drug dealer was found in a box on a Park Avenue corner yesterday, discovered by a bank employee as the morning midtown rush was beginning.
A crowd of several hundred gathered as the police scrutinized the sidewalk outside the headquarters of Manufacturers Hanover Trust at 48th Street before removing a television box that contained a bag that contained the body of an unidentified man.


Continental Air Cutting Jobs
Continental Airlines said yesterday that it would eliminate 890 jobs to cut its costs as it entered the winter season, when traffic falls.
The airline, which filed for bankruptcy in December, said that it had reduced its operating costs by $117 million for the rest of the year and that it had cut about $43 million in annual labor expenses.


Lute Music at Library
Richard Stone will play 18th-century German music for the lute in a recital at the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center on Wednesday at 3 P.M.
The program will include works by Bach, Sylvius Leopold Weiss, B. J. Hagen and Richard Straube.
Admission is free.


Dr. Philip Knapp, 75, Noted Eye Specialist
Dr.
Philip Knapp, professor emeritus of ophthalmology at Columbia University, died on Sunday at Dunroven Nursing Home in Cresskill, N.J.
He was 75 years old and lived in Tenafly, N.J.
Colleagues said he died of prostate cancer.


Schult Homes Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


International Colin reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Canal Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The jobless rate remained at 6.8 percent in August, but factory payrolls rose for the second straight month, countering job shrinkage elsewhere.
It was the first broad- gauge assessment of the economy's per formance for the month and showed no clear trend.
Nevertheless, bond traders, conclud ing it left the Federal Reserve room to ease credit conditions, pushed interest rates down, and Democratic politicians, express ing doubts that recovery is under way yet, assailed the Bush Administration.  [ Page 35. ]


American Film Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SOVIET TURMOIL: TV Critic's Notebook; Soviet Odd Couple Makes U.S. Debut
As coups go, it was a lot more successful than the last one that involved Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin.
ABC scored by getting the two Presidents together, more or less, with people in America's biggest cities plus Brighton Beach, for what was billed as "A National Town Meeting."
Wearing blue suits and red neckties, the allied rivals sat, freshly shaved cheek by newly powdered jowl, under glittering chandeliers in St.
George's Hall in the Kremlin -- some town hall -- and answered questions from just folks and Peter Jennings, television protocol requiring that heads of state be received by anchors if at all possible.


Chicken for French
Kentucky Fried Chicken, a unit of Pepsico Inc., said it would open its first restaurant in France on Sept. 28 in Villiers-en-Biere, southeast of Paris.
The restaurant represents an investment of 15 million francs, or about $2.5 million -- one of the largest the chain has ever made for a single restaurant.
In 1992, it will open a restaurant in Paris and by 1996 125 outlets will be throughout France, the chain said.
Kentucky Fried Chicken said it expected to increase the number of restaurants in Europe from 328 currently to more than 1,000 in 1996, and to invest $125 million over five years.
Other restaurants will be opened in Britain, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Portugal and Spain.


And Now It's Courier, And the Other Match
Next up: Jimbo versus Jimco.
Actually, Jim Courier, the ground-stroking wall between Jimmy Connors and the United States Open final, doesn't have a nickname and he doesn't want one either.
He merely wishes to be a face under the baseball cap, "a tennis player, not a salesman."


A Suspension Bar to Smooth the Cyclists' Road
Serious bicyclists who would like to reduce road shock can turn to a new product that replaces the traditional seat post.
This suspension bar, one of several new shock-absorbing systems introduced within the last year, is produced by Allsop, a bike manufacturer in Bellingham, Wash.
Unlike other systems, the Allsop Soft Ride Suspension attaches to but is not part of the frame.
Mitch Rydholm, the marketing services director for Allsop, said the Soft Ride system suspends the rider, not the bicycle.
Neither the basic design of the bike nor the the way it is pedaled is changed, he said.
Allsop asserts that the S.R.S.
"isolates the rider from the bone-jarring effects of both road shock and off-road conditions."


SOVIETS RECOGNIZE BALTIC INDEPENDENCE, ENDING 51-YEAR OCCUPATION OF 3 NATIONS
The Soviet Union's new ruling council recognized the independence of the three Baltic states, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, today at its first meeting.
The move formally freed the three small republics, which were incorporated forcibly into the Soviet Union in 1940 but renewed their drive for independence in the era of glasnost.
Their campaign was bitterly resisted by Moscow until last month, when central controls unraveled in the wake of the failed coup and a procession of foreign governments granted the Baltics diplomatic recognition.


Dairy Mart Convenience Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Oneida Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Comarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4


Oppenheimer Capital L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Breaking the Scroll Cartel
The team of scholars charged with publishing the Dead Sea Scrolls has sown bitterness the world over with the way it has managed the 2,000-year-old scrolls, which it took control of in the early 1950's, not long after the first of them were discovered in caves along the Dead Sea's western shore.
Clannish and slow, the team dribbled out its findings, rebuffing inquiries from scholars who feared they would finish their careers without seeing the most important biblical discovery of their lifetime -- and what it might reveal about the origins of Christianity and Rabbinic Judaism.


Europeans Pursue Talks on Yugoslavia
The Foreign Ministers of the European Community decided today to go ahead with their peace conference for Yugoslavia on Saturday in The Hague, despite the continuing ferocious fighting between Serbs and Croats.
Hans van den Broek, the Dutch Foreign Minister, who holds the presidency of the community's decision-making body for the last half of 1991, said that he and his European colleagues felt it was important to establish the framework for peace even though the signs in Yugoslavia pointed to war.


Panama Cooperates To Fight Drug Trade
To the Editor:
"Cocaine Is Again Surging Out of Panama" (front page, Aug. 13) affects the image of the Republic of Panama.


Overtime Pay: $6.3 Million
The racial unrest in Crown Heights has cost the Police Department $6.3 million in overtime, officials said yesterday.
The figure covers the period from Aug. 20 to Sept. 2, when the neighborhood in Brooklyn was flooded with uniformed officers in riot gear.


Israel, Ignoring Bush, Presses for Loan Guarantees
A bitter political fight took shape today in Washington as Israel and some of its Congressional supporters ignored President Bush's appeal to delay a request for $10 billion in loan guarantees to help settle Soviet Jews and made clear that they would push for quick Congressional approval.
Hours before the Israeli Ambassador, Zalman Shoval, delivered the Israeli request to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, President Bush took the unusual step of summoning reporters into the Oval Office to announce that he would ask Congress not to act on the Israeli appeal for 120 days so that it would only be dealt with after the opening of a proposed Arab-Israeli peace conference scheduled for October.
Senate Committee Divided
"It is in the best interest of the peace process and of peace itself that consideration of this absorption aid question for Israel be deferred for simply 120 days," Mr.
Bush told reporters.
"And I think the American people will strongly support me in this. I'm going to fight for it because I think this is what the American people want, and I'm going to do absolutely everything I can to back those members of the United States Congress who are forward-looking in their desire to see peace."


BRIEFS
*
Amdura Corp., Denver, a manufacturing and retail company, said a Federal bankruptcy court had confirmed its reorganization plan. *
Dial Corp., Phoenix, a maker of personal health-care products, has acquired Crystal Holidays, a British specialty tours and travel operator.
Terms were not disclosed.


New York Misses on Restaurant Health Code
To the Editor:
"For New York Restaurants, New Rules, New Inspectors" (front page, Aug. 7) focuses on the city's rejuvenated effort at eliminating graft and corruption within the Department of Health's food-service inspection program.
While the city is to be commended for its intentions, the plan falls deplorably short of an optimal scheme that will guarantee hygienic competency.
Despite perfunctory attempts by the city to tighten regulations, few substantive changes actually appear on the books.
This is exemplified by the city's shift in emphasis from close vigilance for "rat holes and dirty floors" toward stricter watchfulness for "cracked eggs" and "improper temperatures."


Delta Woodside Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Triangle Home Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about the new Ford Taurus misidentified the car that was America's best seller before being surpassed by the Honda Accord two years ago.
It was the Ford Escort, not the Taurus.


Graphic Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Tapani, Twins and Good Night, Yanks
The Twins dropped two infield pops and had hits in only three innings tonight.
Hardly flawless, but it hardly mattered.
There was no need to be perfect because Kevin Tapani was pitching and Minnesota was playing the Yankees.
The combination proved to be enough to keep the Twins rolling toward a division title and keep the Yankees sinking toward the cellar.
Tapani (14-7) continued as the hottest pitcher in the majors by limiting the Yankees to seven hits in eight innings and powering the Twins to a 3-1 victory at the Metrodome.
The former Mets farmhand has won 9 straight games, 12 of his last 13 and has not lost since June 27.
Another old Met, Rick Aguilera, pitched a clean ninth to earn his major league-best 38th save.


Status of the Main Iran-Contra Cases
PENDING CASES Clair E. George: The former head of covert operations at the Central Intelligence Agency was indicted yesterday on 10 counts of obstructing Congressional and Federal investigations of the Iran-contra affair.
Oliver L. North: The former Marine lieutenant colonel who served as a staff member of the National Security Council was indicted on March 16, 1988, on 16 counts.
Four counts were dropped.
He was convicted May 4, 1989, of three felony counts: aiding and abetting construction of Congress, destroying National Security Council documents and accepting an illegal gift.
He was acquitted of nine counts.
He was sentenced July 5, 1989, to two years' probation and 1,200 hours of community service and fined $150,000 On July 20, 1990, a Federal appeals court suspended all three felony convictions.
The court reversed the conviction on the charge of destroying classified documents.
The court also ordered the trial court to re-examine the evidence used against Mr.
North at his trial to see if the evidence used to convict him had been tainted by Congressional testimony that he gave under a grant of immunity from prosecution.
On May 27, 1998, the Unitied States Supreme Court let the appellate court decision stand.
A hearing is scheduled next week that could force the judge in the case to throw out the guilty verdicts.
Thomas G. Clines: The former C.I.A. agent was a business partner of Richard V.Secord, a retired Air Force major general, and Albert A. Hakim, an Iranian-born businessman, in supplying arms to Iran.
He was convticed Sept. 18, 1990, on four felony counts involving the underreporting of his earnings to the Internal Revenue Service in 1986 and 1987 and falsely telling the Government that he had no foreign bank accounts.
He was sentenced Dec. 13, 1990, to 16 months in prision and fined $40,000.
He has appealed.
John M. Poindexter: President Ronald Reagan's national security adviser from December 1985 to November 1986 was indicted March 16, 1988, on seven counts.
Two counts, wire fraud and theft of Government porperty, were dropped and a charge of conspiracy to defraud the Government was narrowed to conspiracy to obstruct Congress.
He was convicted April 7, 1990, on five counts involving charges that he obstructed, conspired to obstruct and made false statements to Congresss.
He was sentenced June 11, 1990, to six months in prison.
He has appealed his conviction.
COOMPLETED CASES Mr.
Hakim, Robert C. McFarlane, Mr.
Secord, Carl (Spitz) Channell and Richard R. Millwer all pleaded guilty to assorted charges arising from their roles in the Iran-contra dealings.
They were all sentenced to probation with some also required to pay fines or perform comunity service.
Alan D. Fiers pleaded guilty on July 9, 1991, to withholding information from Congress.
Mr.
Fiers, the former head of the Central Intelligence Agency's Central American Task Force, had worked for Mr.
George.
The case against Joseph F. Fernandez was dismissed after the Government refused a defense request for classified documents.


Newmark &amp; Lewis Cites Closing Costs
Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc., the consumer electronics and appliance retail chain that filed for bankruptcy protection last week, said it would cost about $13 million to close 29 stores.
The company said that its operating losses have increased since it filed for creditor protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The company blamed reduced consumer spending and the severe Northeast recession for its financial straits.
But Newmark said it expected its revenues to increase with the restructuring that would reduce the chain to 25 stores from 54 and as consumers begin shopping for the holidays.


Roanoke Electric Steel reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Edison Brothers Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


U.S. Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Former No. 3 Official With C.I.A. Is Indicted in Iran-Contra Affair
A Federal grand jury today indicted Clair E. George, the former third-ranking official at the Central Intelligence Agency, on 10 felony charges of perjury, false statements and obstruction of inquiries into the Iran-contra affair.
The indictment of Mr.
George has been expected since July when Alan D. Fiers Jr., who formerly headed the agency's Central America task force, pleaded guilty to withholding information from Congress and implicated Mr.
George in efforts to conceal the agency's knowledge of the affair from Congress.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the oldest member of the New York Stock Exchange misidentified him in some copies.
He was Henry L. Goldberg, not Harry Goldberg.


Lotus Offers Benefits For Homosexual Pairs
The Lotus Development Corporation has begun allowing employees who have long-term homosexual partners to sign contracts to qualify them for the same benefits offered to employees' spouses.
"Fundamentally, we believe it's fair and equitable," said Russ Campanello, vice president of human resources for the maker of computer programming.
He also said that the new policy was intended to help recruit talented workers.


Geotek Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sharks Snag a Star
The San Jose Sharks acquired DOUG WILSON, a six-time All-Star defenseman, from the Chicago Blackhawks yesterday.
The 14-year veteran, who set Blackhawks records for goals (225), assists (554) and points (779), found his relationship with MIKE KEENAN, Chicago's coach and general manager, had deteriorated to a point where a change was needed.
"The relationship I had with Mike Keenan I don't think was conducive for me being happy or playing good hockey," Wilson said.


Berkshire Realty Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sanderson Farms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Kasler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Brady (W.H.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Warily, Crown Heights Is Awaiting Holy Days
Scholom Raskin lifted his eight-inch cleaver and, with a loud clunk, chopped the head off another fish.
Among Orthodox Jews, it is customary to eat fish heads on the Jewish New Year -- "May you be a head and not a tail," they exclaim to one another on Rosh ha-Shanah -- and Mr.
Raskin, who owns a fish store on Kingston Avenue in Crown Heights, was ready.
He stood before an ice table laden with carp, pike, halibut and salmon.
There was only one problem: Customers were few.


Panel Says Nation Has Ability to Adapt to Global Warming
If global warming caused by human activity makes the world significantly hotter, the United States should still be able to adapt at a reasonable cost, a panel of the National Academy of Sciences said today.
The committee said the effects of warming weather on nature would be hard to control, but it was optimistic about the ability of American industry and farming to adapt to the climate change, known as the greenhouse effect because of the way pollutants trap heat in the atmosphere.


Bank of Nova Scotia reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Opera; Seeking Symmetry Between Palestinians and Jews
All through Thursday night's New York premiere of the much-awaited "Death of Klinghoffer," one knew exactly what the creators wanted a listener to think:
Setting the story of the 1985 Palestinian hijacking of a luxury cruise ship and the killing of a wheelchair-bound American Jew not on an ocean liner but in an Erector Set of scaffolding and ramps would treat yesterday's newspaper reports as mythic, ritualistic repetitions of timeless struggles.


Jeanette Leentvaar Dancer, 41
Jeanette Leentvaar, a Dutch dancer, teacher and choreographer, died on Monday at a friend's home in Caracas, Venezuela, after a long illness.
She was 41 years old.
She died of cancer, said Elaine Shipman, a friend and colleague.


Williams-Sonoma reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4


INSIDE
Jobless Rate Unchanged


Sports of The Times; It Was Like Old Times For Martina
This whole thing about age at the United States Open is getting tiresome.
So it was heartening when Martina Navratilova, in the news conference after her semifinal victory over Steffi Graf yesterday, made the perfect, zinging response to the first question asked of her: "Is this the year of the spring chicken and the old codgers?"
"Which old codgers?" she asked.


Contractor, Barred by One Agency, Works For Another
Last November, the agency that builds New York City public schools disqualified a Queens company from doing any construction work for the agency because of the company's suspected ties to the reputed Mafia boss, John Gotti, and other organized-crime figures.
But in May, the city's Sanitation Department, unaware of the ban, awarded the company, Hi-Tech Mechanical Inc., an $884,000 contract.
The company is expected to finish the work, a motor-vehicle repair shop, this fall.


Money Gives an Unknown an Introduction
Buses rumbling through the rundown streets of the Lower East Side have carried bright new advertisements in the last two weeks, urging people to elect Philip K. Howard, who until recently was well known only in a few corporate boardrooms and among the upper-crust civic-minded set who fought big developments uptown.
The bus advertisements are testament to the power of money to create a viable candidate out of a relative unknown in this year's City Council election, in which political strategists say they believe a few hundred votes could swing a race.


Witness Says Kennedy Spoke With Nephew About Rape Allegation
A witness's statement made public today said that Senator Edward M. Kennedy discussed a rape allegation with his nephew William K. Smith on Easter Sunday, a day before the Senator told the police that he knew nothing about the accusation.
In the statement, made available by prosecutors who are charging Mr.
Smith with rape, the witness, Steven M. Scott, said that he overheard the Senator while at a Palm Beach restaurant and bar.
Mr.
Scott told investigators that he was standing near Mr.
Kennedy and Mr.
Smith in Chuck and Harold's when he heard the Senator say, "And she will say it is rape."


Text of Rights Adopted by the Soviet Congress
Following is the text of the Declaration of Human Rights and Freedoms, adopted Thursday at the Congress of People's Deputies and distributed in translation by Tass, the official Soviet press agency.
The declaration is intended to act as an assurance on such matters until a new constitution comes into effect.
The freedom of the individual, his or her honor and dignity are of supreme value in our society.
Everyone is guaranteed the realization of his or her aptitude for work and creative potential, active participation in public and state affairs.
No group, party or state interests may be placed above the interests of the individual.


Prices of Treasury Issues Up Sharply
Prices of Treasury securities rose sharply, and both long-term and short-term interest rates moved lower yesterday after the Labor Department reported that employers expanded their payrolls by a very modest amount last month.
The 34,000 increase in non-farm payroll employment was within the 30,000 to 50,000 rise most Wall Street economists had expected.
A revision in the employment figure for July did surprise traders and analysts.
The Labor Department said payrolls shrank by 73,000 in July, not 51,000 as originally reported.


Lower the Barriers to Bank Competition
To the Editor:
Donald J. Colen and Kenneth A. Guenther both address important public-policy issues in "Save Bankers From Themselves by Regulation" (letters, Aug. 4), and so does Representative Charles E. Schumer in his July 19 Op-Ed article.
Mr.
Colen warns that "deregulation, however diligent, is not the answer to lower risk; it's better bankers." Maybe so.
But even our best bankers find it difficult to cope with a protectionist system of financial-services regulation from the 1930's.
Designed to limit the risk of insolvency by preventing geographic and product competition among financial-service providers, this monopoly approach long worked well.


Duplex Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Prussians Aren't Slavs
To the Editor:
Pierre Ferrand, while correct in objecting to the use of Frederick the Great of Prussia as a peace symbol for Germany, repeats a common mistake in identifying the original Prussians as a Slavic tribe (letter, Aug. 23).
They were a Baltic tribe, akin to the modern Lithuanians and Latvians.
CHARLES E. TOWNSEND Princeton, N.J., Aug. 29, 1991 The writer is professor of Slavic languages, Princeton University.


Verdix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


John Belknap Marries Catherine M. Caldwell
Catherine Mary Caldwell and John Rogers Belknap were married yesterday in Liverpool, England.
Canon William O'Sullivan performed the ceremony at Holy Rosary Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 27 years old, is the design director of New Woman magazine in New York.
She is a graduate of St.
Martin's School of Art in London.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Caldwell of Aintree, Lancashire, England.


Parlex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Fighting Reported on Liberia's Border
Fighting has broken out anew in Liberia and along the Sierra Leone border involving troops from three West African nations and rival guerrilla groups, according to reports today.
President Joseph Momoh of Sierra Leone told the British Broadcasting Corporation that a joint force from his country, Nigeria and Guinea recaptured a key border bridge from fighters of the Liberian rebel leader Charles Taylor.
Mr.
Momoh denied his Government was arming a new faction of exiled Liberians who crossed the Mano River Bridge and attacked Tienneh, a town 70 miles northwest of Monrovia, the capital.


A.T.&amp; T. Sets Merger Terms
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it had determined an important element in its $7.5 billion acquisition of the NCR Corporation, the huge computer company.
A.T.&amp; T. plans to exchange 2.839 shares of its stock for each NCR share.
The exact number had been awaited by NCR shareholders to determine the size of their anticipated A.T.&amp; T. holdings.


Issue of Citizenship For Ethnic Russians Is Dividing Latvians
With Latvia now recognized by Moscow as an independent state, people here are engaged in an active debate over who among them should qualify for citizenship.
It is a complex question fraught with political, historical and even philosophical tension.


Big Beasts, Big East: It's a Full Schedule
Three titans -- Michigan, Notre Dame and Washington -- will open their college football seasons today and just about everyone else will be playing, too.
The Atlantic Coast Conference has a pivotal match between Maryland and Virginia, two Big East teams -- Boston College and Temple -- are likely to suffer indignities and a third Big East member, Syracuse, will introduce a new head coach not many people know about.


Neutrogena Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


St. Petersburg Quietly Faxed Back Into Use
It was St.
Petersburg for the Czars, Petrograd for a nation at war with the Germans, and Leningrad for the heirs of the Bolshevik revolution, who in 1924 made this city by the sea their leader's greatest monument.
Today, by official decree of the Russian federated republic's Parliament, the city that Peter the Great brought forth from the swamp of the Neva River reclaimed the name of the Czar's patron saint.
Simultaneously, Leningrad, the name that had lasted a lifetime, officially disaapeared from the map of the country that was the Soviet Union.


Rhode Island Bank Inquiry
The state should demand the repayment of $3.7 million from 14 banking insiders who withdrew money as Rhode Island's privately insured banking system stumbled toward ruin, the commission investigating the crisis has concluded.
The commission recommended civil lawsuits if the insiders, including Mayor Salvatore Mancini of North Providence, State Senator John F. Correia and State Representative Robert V. Bianchini, do not repay the money.


Hondo Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Heavy Work Load Suits Meggett Just Fine
On Monday night, with only three practices under his belt, Dave Meggett accounted for 37.5 percent of the Giants' total yardage against the San Francisco 49ers.
On Sunday, he faces another heavy-duty game, and he is happy with the opportunity.
The 5-foot-7-inch Meggett is the Giants' punt and kickoff returner, third-down back and occasional tailback, wingback and wide receiver.
After long contract negotiations, he signed last Thursday.


Witness Says Kennedy Spoke With Nephew About Rape Allegation
A witness's statement made public today said that Senator Edward M. Kennedy discussed a rape allegation with his nephew William K. Smith on Easter Sunday, a day before the Senator told the police that he knew nothing about the accusation.
In the statement, made available by prosecutors who are charging Mr.
Smith with rape, the witness, Steven M. Scott, said that he overheard the Senator while at a Palm Beach restaurant and bar.
Mr.
Scott told investigators that he was standing near Mr.
Kennedy and Mr.
Smith in Chuck and Harold's when he heard the Senator say, "And she will say it is rape."


Helmick Welcomes Chance To Discuss His Outside Work
Robert Helmick, the president of the United States Olympic Committee, said yesterday he welcomed the opportunity to discuss questions with his fellow officers relating to work he has done as a paid consultant for groups indirectly involved in the Olympics.
His opportunity will come today in Chicago at a scheduled meeting of the U.S.O.C. executive committee.


The Nanny Says Yes, But F.D.A. Says No
Driven to distraction by a howling infant?
Some nannies from other countries suggest giving the babies an alcoholic drink to quiet them, much to the dismay of American pediatricians.
An over-the-counter potion that contains about 5 percent alcohol and claims to relieve "minor tummy upsets" in infants is being sold illegally in grocery stores in parts of New York City and around the nation.
Its alcohol content is about equal to that of a beer.


Leningrad Reinstates a Name So Familiar and, Well, Czarist
By decreeing that Leningrad should immediately reassume its original name, St.
Petersburg, the Supreme Soviet of the Russian republic yesterday played down the founder of the Soviet state while evoking the memory of Czar Peter I, who founded the city in 1703 and named it for his patron saint.
The czar, known as Peter the Great, was a modernizer and Westernizer who strove to make his backward realm more up to date during his rule from 1682 to 1725.
As part of that struggle he ordered wooden piles driven into swampy ground near an arm of the Baltic Sea.
They were the underpinnings of the city, which became his capital a decade later and the site of his death in 1725.


'Le Temple de la Gloire,' A Rameau Opera-Ballet
"Le Temple de la Gloire," an 18th-century opera-ballet by Jean-Philippe Rameau, will be presented for the first time in the United States on Sept. 19 to 22 at Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street.
It will be performed by the New York Baroque Dance Company and the Concert Royal, under the sponsorship of the French Institute-Alliance Francaise.
The work, with a libretto by Voltaire, had its premiere in Versailles, France, in 1745.
Its theme is the search for an enlightened King who deserves to dwell in the Temple of Glory.


Steve's Homemade Ice Cream reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Advanced Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lithuania Criticizes Report on Treatment Of War Criminals
President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania yesterday criticized a report that his country was rehabilitating Nazi war criminals as it offered pardons to people convicted of collaboration by Soviet tribunals.
In a letter to the World Jewish Congress replying to questions raised by its president, Edgar Bronfman, and released in New York by the organization, Mr.
Landsbergis said he could "not agree with the insinuations that there are thousands of Holocaust suspects living here, who are being legally absolved as patriots of Lithuania."


Bikes for 2: Romantic, Now Rugged
The bicycle built for two is coming back in style.
Tandems, as they are known by the cycling savvy, never really went away.
But the last few years have seen a spurt of growth, thanks in large part to family-oriented fitness enthusiasts, graying baby boomers and some new technology borrowed from mountain bikes.


2 School Security Officers Arrested on Drug Charges
Two school security officers were arrested yesterday on charges of selling cocaine to undercover police officers.
The two school officers are Joseph Hope, a safety officer for three years, and Lucy Burns, who was dismissed last month from the Board of Education's Division of School Safety for unrelated charges of insubordination after 3 1/2 years on the job.


Cuomo Seeking Bill to Restrain Insurance Costs
The Cuomo administration will push for legislation to slow down the sharply rising cost of health insurance to small businesses before it rules on the steep rate increases requested by the state's largest insurer, the New York State Superintendent of Insurance said yesterday.
More than 140 groups and individuals lined up at an insurance department hearing in Town Hall in midtown yesterday to criticize the increases, which were requested in July by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.


Review/Television; MTV Aims to Startle At Its Awards, and Does
The awards are almost beside the point on the MTV Video Music Awards, the 3-hour 15-minute special shown on Thursday night by the cable network and broadcast to more than 140 countries.
The Video Music Awards show is a skewed analogue of the Academy Awards and Emmy presentations.
It even had a preshow interview program, on which MTV News's anchor, Kurt Loder, interviewed stars like the rapper Ice-T and the rock band R.E.M., the night's big award winner.
Unlike the movie stars Barbara Walters interviews before the Oscars, no one cried.


100 Are Killed as Two Trains Crash in Congo
Two trains crashed head on overnight.
The Transport Minister said today that more than 100 people had been killed.
"This toll is still provisional," the minister, Demba Thelo, told reporters at the accident scene near Dolisie, more than 250 miles from here.
Fifty of the 66 people hospitalized after the accident were said to be in critical condition.


Toronto-Dominion Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.43
5.67
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.34
7.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.38
7.34
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.56
7.65
8.67
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.01
8.09
8.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.10
9.10
9.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.97
6.97
7.61
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Down, Down Into Subway Go Dracula and His Kind
Finally, the creatures of the subterranean universe have found a home where they truly belong: the subway.
Now heading underground, literally, are Dracula, Frankenstein, King Kong, the Thing, the Blob, Darth Vader, the Phantom of the Opera and even the sinister Emperor Ming.
Today and tomorrow, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., an artistic celebration of all these demons, as well as vampires, werewolves, robots, aliens and various assorted swamp things, is on view at 152 Wooster Street in Manhattan.
They are the subjects of a 110-foot-long, hand-painted subway frieze by the artist Joyce Kozloff that takes up the entire ground-floor gallery space with a cast of thousands of creatures from classic fantasy, science fiction, horror and monster movies.


New Latvian Newspaper Struggling to Do It Right
As the three newly independent Baltic nations grope their way toward democracy, many eyes are focused on a new Latvian newspaper that is perhaps the most rambunctious in the region.
The newspaper, called Diena, or The Day, is trying to introduce Western-style journalism here in the Latvian capital.
It has had several clashes with the Government, and has emerged victorious from all.


Giving Riis, the Forgotten Park, a Better Image
Chris Hasson says he has been a permanent fixture at the Jacob Riis Park beach for 18 years, from his first visit at 4 years old, through occasional spying trips to the nudist section of the beach as a teen-ager, to his three forays a week with his friends today.
"We're the cleanest beach around," Mr.
Hasson said, adding that Coney Island, the New Jersey Shore and Jones Beach on Long Island could not compare to this stretch of sand on the southwestern edge of the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens.


Dalma Heyn Wed To Richard Marek
Dalma Heyn and Richard Marek were married yesterday at their home in New York.
Justice E. Leo Milonas of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated.
The bride, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Heyn of New York, formerly was editor in chief of Family Health magazine and executive editor of McCall's.
She is a monthly columnist for Mademoiselle and the author of a forthcoming book on female sexuality.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
The bridegroom was a widower.


Robec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Laurentian Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Peggy Ramsay, 83, An Agent in Britain Of Top Playwrights
Margaret Ramsay, a theatrical agent who was a leading figure in the British theater, died on Wednesday in the London Clinic.
She was 83 years old.
She died of heart and circulatory problems, her assistant, Mary Carter, said.


Gorbachev-Yeltsin Session: 'Committed to Common Work'
Following are excerpts from the question-and-answer session of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic broadcast live this morning and moderated by Peter Jennings of ABC News.
The comments of Mr.
Gorbachev and Mr.
Yeltsin were translated by ABC.
JENNINGS: Here in the United States we have an invited audience here at ABC News headquarters in New York City and we also have audiences all over the country, in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Houston, Chicago, Detroit, Atlanta, Miami, Philadelphia, Brooklyn, New York, and a great many people here eager to ask you questions. . . .


Praise From Beamon
MIKE POWELL, who eclipsed BOB BEAMON'S 1968 long-jump record of 29 feet 2 1/2 inches with an astonishing leap of 29 feet 4 1/2 inches in Tokyo last week, was acclaimed in New York yesterday.
And, appropriately enough, it was Beamon who did the lionizing: "He is to the long jump," Beamon said, "what ROGER BANNISTER was to the four-minute mile." (AP)


A New Role for Beepers: Keep Families in Touch
The next time you hear the insistent tones of a beeper in a restaurant or theater, the wearer may not be a doctor or a plumber on call but an expectant father awaiting word from his wife, a mother needed by her baby sitter or someone who just needs to be in touch with a business or home.
Mark and Amy Collier of St.
Louis, who are expecting a child this month, rented a beeper last week to communicate instantly when they are apart.
Mr.
Collier is an account manager for SmithKline Beecham and Mrs.
Collier is a teacher.


Bomb Threat At Bank on Madison Avenue Turns Out to Be False Alarm


JLG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a proposed garbage transfer station in Long Island City, Queens, referred incorrectly to Annie Tsantes, who lives near the site.
She is superintendent of the building where she lives, not landlord.


Texas Mother Freed on Bond
Wanda Webb Holloway, sentenced on Wednesday to 15 years in prison for trying to hire someone to kill the mother of her daughter's cheerleading rival, was released on $75,000 bond Thursday pending the outcome of her appeal.
Under Texas law, convicted felons sentenced to 15 years or less in prison are allowed appeal bonds.


Fluor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Political Memo; Ad on Thomas Exposes A Schism in the G.O.P.
George Bush has always demonstrated a certain ambivalence toward the Republican right.
At times, he has seemed to cater to their politics, on issues like abortion and, for a time, taxes.
Yet he has also gone his own way as a moderate Republican, particularly on foreign policy.
Republican conservatives are not as ambivalent about the President.
Many do not trust him and have long considered him an inadequate heir to Ronald Reagan.


Espey Mfg &amp; Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. to Spend $22 Million on Refugee Aid
The State Department announced today that $22 million in emergency assistance had been authorized to meet the needs of refugees and other displaced people in the Horn of Africa.
A spokeswoman for the department, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said the contribution put the total disaster assistance in that region this year at $308 million.
She said the situation in the Horn had worsened as a result of the large-scale displacement of people after the ouster of governments in Somalia and Ethiopia.
She said there were two million refugees, a far greater number of displaced people and 15 million drought victims in the region.


Rarity for U.S. Executions: White Dies for Killing Black
Nearly half a century and at least 1,000 executions since it last happened in the United States, a white person was executed yesterday for killing a black.
Donald (Peewee) Gaskins was put to death in Columbia, S.C., early yesterday for the 1982 hired killing of Rudolph Tyner, a fellow inmate and a black man who had himself been convicted of murder.
The son of Mr.
Tyner's victims hired Mr.
Gaskins to kill Mr.
Tyner, which he did by giving him a bomb disguised as a radio.


Hallie Burnett, 82, Novelist, Dies; Nurtured Many Famous Writers
Hallie Burnett Zeisel, a novelist, college teacher and co-editor of Story magazine from 1942 to 1971, died on Wednesday at the Steward Health Center in Raleigh, N.C.
She was 82 years old.
She died of causes related to a stroke she suffered two years ago, said her daughter, Whitney Voss.


Oklahoma Bank
The Bancoklahoma Corporation, once the second-largest banking company in Oklahoma, said it had filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code and that it had also filed a reorganization plan.
The filing, made in Tulsa, does not affect its former subsidiary, the Bank of Oklahoma in Tulsa, which was separated from the holding company in 1986 when the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation provided $130 million in financial assistance to the bank.
Earlier this year, the F.D.I.C. sold the bank to a group of local investors.


Patents; Tiny Video Camera Used in Reading Aid
An eye surgeon and an engineer in Florida this week patented a hand-held reading aid that uses a tiny video camera to magnify letters on a page for people with severe eye problems.
Known as E-Z Reader, the device makes use of tiny cameras contained on a single computer chip that were originally developed for espionage purposes.
Enclosed in a housing about the size of a remote-control device for television, the camera peers through a pinhole lens at words typed on paper.
The user sweeps the device over a line of writing, and the words are relayed by wires to a computer monitor or an ordinary television set that displays the magnified picture.
Depending on the magnification level a person chooses, the lens will pick up between one and four words at a time.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Aug.  30 about a joint venture by McCawCellular and Pactel misstated the number of potential and actual subscribers to Pactel's cellular telephone service.
Pactel has 31 million potential subscribers (not 28 million) and 600,000 actual ones (not 750,000).


Glamis Gold reports earnings for Year to June 30


Northern Hospitality: Mets Flail, Braves Win
The Braves, losers of four of their last five games, had gained momentum in their fight for the title in the National League West even before they had earned their first run of the night.
The Braves had, after all, arrived at Shea Stadium safely.
It was only a matter of time before they would arrive at the plate that way, as well.


Rangers Explore Trade for Messier
The Rangers and the Edmonton Oilers are discussing a trade that could bring the superstar Mark Messier to New York.
"Yes, there is a possibility, but I don't think I should be talking about that now," General Manager Neil Smith of the Rangers said yesterday when asked if the trade rumors were true.


Scrutiny for Spies
The indictment today of one of the Central Intelligence Agency's most accomplished spymasters does more than press the Iran-contra inquiry forward.
It poses the sharpest challenge yet to the culture of the agency that Clair E. George personified -- a culture of secrecy that for decades has successfully resisted the efforts of Congress and the executive branch to penetrate and change it.
Senate hearings in the 1970's disclosed startling evidence of wrongdoing in the agency and led to the creation of the Congressional supervision process.
Inside the agency, there was a shake-up.
But only Richard M. Helms, who had been director of Central Intelligence, was ever publicly charged.
And Mr.
Helms was punished only with a slap on the wrist, a $2,000 fine for withholding information from Congress and a two-year suspended jail sentence.


Jobs Data Mixed Last Month
The first broad-gauge assessment of the economy's performance in August showed no clear trend, with the unemployment rate remaining at 6.8 percent and a second straight rise in factory payrolls countered by job shrinkage elsewhere, Labor Department figures showed today.
But while economists groped for meaning, bond traders pushed interest rates down and Democratic politicians seized the occasion to express doubts that recovery is under way and to assail the Bush Administration for barring payment of extended benefits for the long-term jobless.


Delicacy as a Form of Spiritual Armor
As a dancer, Kristin Jackson is impressive for her delicacy and lucidity.
But whereas she never faltered as a performer in the two works that Kristin Jackson Dance presented on Thursday night at the Dia Center for the Arts in SoHo, she proved choreographically uneven.
Ms.
Jackson was at her best in "Still Waters," a solo created last year in which, with slow, carefully controlled movements, she bent down and appeared to submerge her hands in invisible water, which she let stream across her face.
Crossing the stage with swimming motions, she suggested that the body of water in which she found herself was sometimes a pool of tears and at other times a healing spring.


Judge Won't Open Records Of Crown Heights Inquiry
The Brooklyn District Attorney's extraordinary request for the release of the deliberations of the Crown Heights grand jury was denied yesterday by a judge who said that the rights of grand jury witnesses must first be protected.
The District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, had sought the release of the transcript of the grand jury, which voted on Thursday not to file criminal charges in the death of a black boy killed by a car driven by a Hasidic man.
He argued that the records could help defuse anger among blacks and prevent a recurrence of the racial violence that followed the death of the 7-year-old, Gavin Cato, on Aug. 19.


French Sink East Europe Trade Deal
To protect its own cattle producers, the French Government tonight torpedoed a wide-ranging agreement that would have given Eastern European countries access to the rich European Community market.
The community had been working for eight months toward eventually establishing a free-trade zone with Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia, and lately had been seeking to extend the negotiations to Bulgaria and Romania.
The attempted coup in the Soviet Union had impelled the community to try to speed up the negotiations.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 7


American Woodmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


For Jeffries, A Penchant For Disputes
When Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. returned to City College for the fall semester, he got an ovation from his first class and a mixed reaction elsewhere.
The college president criticized him for making "clear expressions of bigotry," and the faculty senate scheduled a debate on the matter later this month.
Demonstrators are planning rallies for and against him.
A security guard has been posted outside his office.
It has not been a traditional start of the school year, but then, Dr.
Jeffries's career at City College has never been exactly traditional.
It began with an unusually quick promotion to chairman of the black studies department, and it has been distinguished since by political activism, little scholarly publication, intense lectures, and a penchant for controversy.


Judge Would Consider Life-at-Conception Issue
In April, a municipal court judge who was hearing a trespassing case against abortion protesters ruled that human life begins at conception and described abortions as "legal executions."
Today a Superior Court judge refused to endorse that finding.
But he said he would be willing to take up the issue under the proper circumstances -- a move that has the potential to put New Jersey at the center stage of the nation's debate over abortion.


Parking Investigator Charges Cover-Up of Bogus Ticketing
The parking tickets were certainly bogus, all 997 of them.
After all, investigators for the Department of Transportation had forced the traffic agent who made them up and stuffed them in his locker to quit.
But they looked real to the hundreds of drivers who received them when they were sent out -- real enough that about 125 of them were paid.
The New York City Council President, Andrew J. Stein, yesterday called for an investigation into the $40,000 worth of bad tickets.
He said that not only were the bogus tickets issued after investigators knew of the fraud, but the agent who wrote them was allowed to resign without facing criminal charges and the investigator who discovered the fraud was demoted.


Two Louisville Losses
Louisville Coach HOWARD SCHNELLENBERGER'S dreams of winning the unofficial national championship suffered a double blow Thursday night when Tennessee beat the Cardinals, 28-11, and the Louisville quarterback, JEFF BROHM, suffered an ankle fracture that is expected to keep him out for at least six weeks and perhaps the entire season.
Brohm, who had completed 14 of 25 passes for 133 yards and one touchdown, is being replaced by ERIC WATTS, a fifth-year senior. (AP)


Berkshire Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Witness Says Kennedy Spoke With Nephew About Rape Allegation
A witness's statement made public today said that Senator Edward M. Kennedy discussed a rape allegation with his nephew William K. Smith on Easter Sunday, a day before the Senator told the police that he knew nothing about the accusation.
In the statement, made available by prosecutors who are charging Mr.
Smith with rape, the witness, Steven M. Scott, said that he overheard the Senator while at a Palm Beach restaurant and bar.
Mr.
Scott told investigators that he was standing near Mr.
Kennedy and Mr.
Smith in Chuck and Harold's when he heard the Senator say, "And she will say it is rape."


Family Joins K.G.B. Spy in London
The wife and daughters of Oleg Gordievsky arrived today in London to be reunited with him six years after he quit the K.G.B. and defected to Britain.
Airport officials said the British Airways flight carrying Leila Gordievsky and her two daughters, Mariya, 11 years old, and Anna, 10, from Moscow touched down at London's Heathrow airport.


Smokey Ahead, and He's Packing a Laser
A high-tech game of tag is unfolding on America's highways as police officers use new devices to catch speeding motorists and producers of radar-detection equipment scramble to develop new wares to thwart them.
One new method, used by sheriff's deputies in Charleston, S.C., for a year, is a laser-based system that conventional radar detectors cannot pick up because it uses light pulses instead of the radio waves that are the basis of radar.


Judge in Noriega Trial Bars Records on Bush
The Federal district judge presiding over the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega has ruled that the deposed Panamanian dictator will not be allowed to introduce discussions he had with George Bush as evidence in an important aspect of the case.
But the judge, William M. Hoeveler, has said he will permit General Noriega's lawyers to "introduce evidence of an ongoing relationship with Fidel Castro" in which the Panamanian acted on behalf of the United States.


Girl Hit by Stray Bullet
An 8-year-old girl was struck by a stray bullet and wounded last night after an argument between a group of men on a Bronx street erupted into gunfire, the police said.
The girl was standing with her father in front of a bodega at 205 East 198th Street in the Bedford Park section at 10:15 P.M. when a bullet hit her in the lower left leg, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, said.
She underwent surgery at North Central Bronx Hospital.


Korea Detains Garment Buyer
An American businesswoman has been barred from leaving South Korea because of a dispute about a shipment of sweaters to the United States, officials said today.
The United States Embassy and lawyers for the woman, Doris Waldman, 61 years old, a garment buyer from Los Angeles, confirmed that she has been forced to stay in South Korea since last weekend.


Ranomafana Journal; Whose Forest Is It, the Peasants' or the Lemurs'?
Six years ago, Emile Rajeriarison and Loret Rasabo, who like generations of their families lived from the rain forest here, led some American researchers into the tree-canopied habitat they knew so well.
After some days of wading and walking, they spotted what they were looking for: a golden-colored lemur that the reseachers thought was probably extinct but that the men had known since childhood.


Farah Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


The Day's Highlights
Landmark for Baltic Independence
SOVIETS RECOGNIZE BALTIC STATES The Soviet Union's new ruling council held its first meeting and recognized the independence of the Baltic states, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
Page 1.


Excerpts From Iran-Contra Indictment of Former C.I.A. Official
Following are excerpts from the 10-count indictment of Clair E. George, the former Deputy Director for Operations of the Central Intelligence Agency:
1.
From on or about Oct. 9, 1986, up to an including Oct. 10, 1986, . . . the defendant, Clair E. George, did impede and endeavor to impede the investigation of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations in the following manner:


Pool Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FHP International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Don't Rush to Dismiss Evidence of M.I.A.'s
To the Editor:
Members of the New York State chapter of the National Alliance of Families for the Return of America's Missing Servicemen find your reporting on recently released photos of American prisoners of war from the Vietnam War shocking.
The headline and tone of "The M.I.A. Racket" (editorial, July 31) suggest that any evidence presented by a prisoner-of-war activist group is fraudulent.


The Numbers Squeeze Hollywood
These are hard times in Hollywood.
No sooner did eager buyers rush to Columbia Pictures and MCA, the parent of Universal Pictures -- and Time merge with Warner Communications -- than the movie business went into a slump.
And on the heels of a worse-than-expected summer, there are no signs of an imminent turnaround, industry experts say.
So far this year, the United States box office is down 3.9 percent, at $3.19 billion through August, compared with $3.32 billion for the first eight months of 1990 and $3.38 billion for 1989.
It is hard to predict how the year will end, but there is little chance that this will be a banner year for Hollywood.
Ticket sales are down this year so far from the previous two years.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  U.S. Takes Walker Cup


Religion Notes
Firehouse services
More than any other time of the year, Jews attend religious services on the High Holy Days, which begin this year at sundown tomorrow with Rosh ha-Shanah and end 10 days later with Yom Kippur.
Synagogues and temples cannot accommodate all of the worshipers, and alternative services have become common in social halls, gymnasiums, homes and even churches.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Sun, Moon, Planets listing in the weather report on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday gave incorrect times for the rising and setting of the moon.
The moon rose Sunday at 11:27 P.M., set Monday at 3:17 P.M., rose Tuesday at 12:29 A.M., set Tuesday at 4:12 P.M. and rose Wednesday at 1:40 A.M.


Chemical Bank Names Head For Its Middle-Market Unit
Frank Lourenso, a longtime executive at Chemical Bank, was named head of the middle-market banking division yesterday in preparation for the planned merger of Chemical and the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company at the start of next year.
Mr.
Lourenso's appointment is the latest in a series of top executive assignments made in anticipation of the merger.
So far, the companies have made 44 executive assignments, with 24 going to Chemical Bank officials and 20 going to people from Manufacturers Hanover.


'Black and Blue' Over Hierarchy of Color
To the Editor:
David H. Ostwald (Op-Ed, Aug. 3) and Art Shifrin (letter, Aug. 21) seem unaware that "Black and Blue" is not a song of protest against the treatment of blacks by whites.
To the contrary, it is a protest, a la Spike Lee, of the prejudice among blacks in favor of lighter-skin blacks.
Listen to the verse of Ethel Waters's recording.
She is singing of the anguish of a dark-skinned woman passed up by black men because she is dark skinned.
SANDRA W. JACOBSON New York, Aug. 21, 1991


PCA International reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4


Excerpts From Statement On Independence for Baltics
Following are excerpts from a news conference today by Boris D. Pankin, the Soviet Foreign Minister, as translated by CNN:
At the first session of the State Council, item one on the agenda was discussed under the supervision of President Gorbachev.
The item on the agenda was the independence of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
Taking into account the history of the participation of the three republics in the Soviet Union, the State Council has recognized the independence of the three republics.


Valley Forge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
What does it take to rattle a group of savvy political figures?
According to RepresentativeSTEPHEN J. SOLARZ, Democrat of Brooklyn, encountering a group of tribesmen, their spears, bows and arrows at the ready, during a rafting trip does the trick quite well.
Mr.
Solarz and his wife, NINA, were on vacation recently, rafting on the Watut River in Papua New Guinea with VICTOR KOVNER, New York City's Corporation Counsel and his wife, SARAH; RICHARD SOLOMON, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, and MARGARET TAYLOR, Ambassador to Papua New Guinea.


Public &amp; Private; The Graffiti on The Wall
On 42d Street someone had pasted a poster to a wall.
"The Real Last Supper," it said, beneath a standard rendering of Christ and his apostles seated round a table, except that all of them were black.
Down at the corner, a man in African garb was speechifying, spouting a spiel about a conspiracy between Catholics and Jews to maintain the slave trade.
He sounded like a Leonard Jeffries wannabe, talking, like the City College professor who's gotten so much press lately, about the innate superiority of black people.
One man spit out an epithet as he walked by, an epithet that suggested he might be a fan of Michael Levin, the other City College professor, the man who has written that blacks are significantly less intelligent than whites.


CHRONICLE
What's in a name, or more precisely, the spelling of a name?
A great deal, if you ask JANIS TAYLOR, a mezzo-soprano who until February was Janice Taylor.
She is about to have the spelling legally changed.
Ms.
Taylor, who will perform at Avery Fisher Hall on Oct. 25 in "Alexander Nevsky, the Movie and the Music," was asked why yesterday.
She said: "I decided to listen to inner instincts to affirm that I am totally fulfilled in the concert realm doing opera only from time to time. Changing the spelling of my name was part of that declaration of independence, rebirth and confirmation of my determination to follow the road less traveled. This symbolizes the release of old thought patterns and imprisoning limitations."
So there you have it.


Network Record Set With Connors
The United States Open quarterfinal match between Jimmy Connors and Paul Haarhuis Thursday night set a record 5.9 Nielsen rating for the USA Network's sports programming, translating to 3.4 million households watching the Connors victory.
The match's rating peaked at 7.3 at 10:30 P.M., minutes before its conclusion.
The 5.9 rating exceeded the record of 4.2 set in the 1988 Connors-Andre Agassi quarterfinal.
USA's best-ever rating for an entertainment program was 8.4 for "China Lake Murders," an original film shown last year.


Network Real Estate of Calif.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Contour Blind &amp; Shade (Canada) Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to May 31


Paul Harris Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SOVIET TURMOIL: Reporter's Notebook; From Soviet Space Station: Queries on State of the Union
The astronauts aboard the Soviet space station Mir, having journeyed weightless for the past 18 days above coup, counter-coup and constitutional crisis, beamed down an urgent question today about just how much political disintegration has been taking place below them.
"Is it true that the Russian federation plans to sell the space station Mir?" one astronaut asked the home office.
He was rocketed aloft four months ago, when the Soviet Union was really something and even included the three Baltic republics.


International Corona reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GE Aerospace to Cut Work Force by 2,000
GE Aerospace, citing tough competition in a shrinking military market, said today that it would eliminate about 2,000 jobs by the middle of next year through attrition, retirements and layoffs.
The cuts will affect workers in Camden, East Windsor and Moorestown, N.J., as well as in Philadelphia and nearby Valley Forge, Pa., where GE Aerospace is based.


Ailing Becker Out of Cup
Boris Becker has informed Germany's Davis Cup team that he will be unavailable to play against the United States in the semifinal round Sept. 20-22 in Kansas City, Mo.
Becker told Nikki Pilic, coach of the German squad, that he will be unable to play tennis for at least two weeks because of an injury to his right thigh.
Becker, top seeded at the United States Open but defeated by Paul Haarhuis in the third round, said that he suffered the injury during his first- or second-round match and that it worsened during his straight-set loss to Haarhuis.
Becker flew back to Germany after the loss and had implied he would not join the Davis Cup team here next week unless he was 100 percent fit.


Few Choices for Civil Court
Supporters of New York's current system of judicial elections who oppose a more rational policy of nonpartisan merit appointments tend to wax eloquent about democracy -- and the value of letting voters pick judges.
But that's not the way it works in reality.
The current system keeps judicial selection mostly in the hands of party politicians, who largely control the complicated petitioning process by which candidates get on the ballot and who discourage competition with bruising court fights over the validity of petition signatures.


Patents; Device Curbs TV Viewing By Children
Three inventors in North Carolina won a patent this week on an electronic device to help parents ration the amount of time their children watch television or play video games.
The new device resembles a security passcard system that restricts entry into buildings.
A child wanting to watch television would have to insert a card with his or her code into a controller, connected to the television's power cord, and the controller would contain instructions on the total amount of time allowed that child and the permissible viewing hours.


About New York
For more than 70 years they have been nurturing the dream, teaching their children Russian and sending them to Russian scout camp, filling their homes with samovars and bejeweled Easter eggs, holding Russian nobility balls where men and women once again whirl the romantic waltzes of yore.
One day, they have vowed, they would return to a Russia free of Communism, perhaps a Russia ruled by descendants of the revered murdered monarch, Czar Nicholas II.


Richard K. Van Nostrand, Businessman, 72
Richard K. Van Nostrand, the longest-serving mayor of Tenafly, N.J., died on Tuesday.
He was 72 years old.
He suffered a heart attack on his way home from a New York Giants football game.


Grow Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chemical Maker's Plan Is Rejected
The Federal Trade Commission said it had rejected a proposal by the Great Lakes Chemical Corporation to acquire the half of the Arkansas Chemical Corporation it did not own.
Great Lakes, based in West Lafayette, Ind., and the Pittsburgh-based PPG Industries each own half of Arkansas Chemical, in El Dorado, Ark.
Arkansas Chemical makes elemental bromine, a liquid used in pharmaceuticals and flame retardants.
The F.T.C. said it had denied the request because Great Lakes did not show that the move would not reduce competition in the markets served by the companies involved.
The panel also ordered Great Lakes, Arkansas Chemical and PPG to alter their joint-venture agreement to allow PPG to compete more freely in marketing elemental bromine.
The F.T.C. also ordered Great Lakes to seek approval before acquiring any other company that makes bromine.


Jets' Clifton Speaks Softly But Carries Mean Tackle
It was no surprise that middle linebacker Kyle Clifton was the Jets' leading tackler in last Sunday's season opener against Tampa Bay with five solos and three assists.
The third-round draft pick out of Texas Christian in 1984 has led the team in tackles for five of the last seven years including last season, when he had 199.
That was more than twice as many as the 95 of the second-place finisher, free safety Erik McMillan.
"I thought he was just a real good, solid player, but he's a lot more than that," Coach Bruce Coslet said, recalling his first impression when he took over the Jets last year.


Baker May Meet Head of K.G.B.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d is arranging talks with the head of the K.G.B. and the new Defense Minister when he visits the Soviet Union next week.
Mr.
Baker will also meet with Mayor Anatoly Sobchak of St.
Petersburg, formerly Leningrad, and make a stop in Kazakhstan, the second-largest Soviet republic, where he will meet with its President, Nursultan Nazarbayev.


Earle W. Brauer, Dermatologist, 72
Dr.
Earle W. Brauer, the senior vice president for medical affairs at Revlon Inc., died Thursday at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 72 years old.
He died of lung cancer, company officials said.
Dr.
Brauer, who received his medical degree from New York University in 1943, was a dermatologist in private practice when Charles Revson hired him in 1962.
He conducted research for the cosmetics company and was responsible for the safety of its brands.


Oil Spill at Pipeline in Texas
More than 40,000 gallons of oil spilled from a broken Amoco pipeline into a coastal bay here Thursday night, and crews deployed containment booms today in an attempt to prevent the oil from reaching delicate marshlands.
The pipeline broke while workers were loading a barge around midnight on East Bay, near this town 30 miles east of Galveston.


Certron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


News Summary
Soviet Turmoil 4-7
The Baltic states became indepedent during deliberations at the first meeting of the Soviet Union's new ruling council.
The act formally freed Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, which were incorporated forcibly in the Soviet Union in 1940.
Page 1


Your Taxes; Bond Exemption Is Trap for Some
Since the beginning of 1990, the law has provided that interest on the Government's series EE savings bonds can be exempt from taxes for middle-income investors who use the proceeds to pay for college costs.
But there is a trap in this highly publicized incentive to pursue higher education, and it is likely to result in hefty bills for unsuspecting taxpayers.
The accumulated interest on the bonds, perhaps 10 or 15 years' worth, must be included in income in the year the bonds are cashed in.
That alone could push a family above the strict limits on income that determine eligiblity for the tax exemption.


6 Youths Admit To Vandalism In a Graveyard
Last month, in a ghoulishly gleeful rampage through a Queens cemetery, the police said, six teen-agers toppled more than 800 tombstones.
Later, shortly after they were arrested, some of them smirked and joked as if they were still on a lark.
On Thursday, however, the smiles were gone as the six stood soberly before a judge in State Supreme Court in Queens.
Quietly, they pleaded guilty to criminal mischief and each of them agreed to compensate for their vandalism by paying $2,000 to the cemetery and working 150 hours to help clean up an adjacent rundown park.


Guidepost; Adjustable Mortgages
Adjustable-rate mortgages, down to levels not seen in many years, are currently attractive alternatives to the 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage, which is now about 8.98 percent.
A decision depends not only on rates but on how long an owner plans to stay in a home and how high interest rates might go over the life of the mortgage. (Someone who plans to move in five years, for example, may benefit more from an adjustable rate than someone who expects to stay a longer period.) In most cases the adjustables, known as ARM's, have caps, usually a maximum of two percentage points a year and six points over the life of the loan.
The table shows the monthly payments on two $100,000 ARM's with an initial average rate of 6.78 percent.
One rises a percentage point annually; the other, two percentage points.
By comparison, the monthly payment on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage on $100,000 at 8.98 percent would be $803.18; the four-year total would be $38,552.63.
*2*ARM (w/1 point rise)
*2*ARM (w/2 point rise)
Rate
Payment
Rate
Payment
Year 1
6.78%
$650.59
6.78%
$650.59
Year 2
7.78
717.13
8.78
786.10
Year 3
8.78
784.79
10.78
927.80
Year 4
9.78
853.31
12.78
1,073.97
Total
$36,069.84
$41,261.52
(Source: Bank Rate Monitor, North Palm Beach, Fla.)


Corrections
A picture caption in Weekend on Aug. 23 with an article about the Metropolitan Museum of Art misidentified a sculpture by Antonio Canova.
It is "Perseus With the Head of Medusa."


Guilty Plea Is Entered By Unisys
The Unisys Corporation pleaded guilty today to criminal charges in the Pentagon procurement fraud scandal and agreed to pay a record $190 million in fines and penalties.
The Government agreed to allow the big military contractor to spread the payments over at least six years, based partly on future profits, and to keep doing business with the Pentagon.


URS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


An Uptown 'Cosi'
Opera Ebony is to present Mozart's "Cosi Fan Tutte" at 4 P.M. tomorrowat Aaron Davis Hall, Convent Avenue at 133d Street in Manhattan.
Bonnie Bradley is to appear as Dorabella, Lawrence Craig as Gugliermo, and Samuel McKelton is to make his New York debut as Ferrando.
Others in the cast include Pamela Mann as Fiordiligi, Gregory Sheppard as Don Alfonso, and Michel Sorel as Despina.
Hope Clarke is the stage director, and the Harlem Festival Orchestra is to be conducted by Leslie Dunner.
Tickets are $12.50 and $17.50.
Information: (212) 877-2110.


Quotation of the Day
"The item on the agenda was the independence of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Taking into account the history of the participation of the three republics in the Soviet Union, the State Council has recognized the independence of the three republics." -- Boris D. Pankin, the Soviet Foreign Minister.  [ 4:1. ]


Provident American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fay's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Don't Rush to Dismiss Evidence of M.I.A.'s; Incredible Notion
To the Editor:
Upon returning to the United States from Thailand for an annual visit three weeks ago, I was taken aback to learn that the issue of servicemen missing in action has remained precisely that, an issue.


Study on Cancer Rates Splits Home of A-Bomb
Since scientists gathered here to build the world's first atomic bomb nearly 50 years ago, the Los Alamos National Laboratory has been the prime source of stability, as well as mystery, for this small, prosperous city on a mesa.
These days the mystery centers on the rate of cancer here.
Concern arose after a local man, Tyler Mercier, said he had found a "cluster of cases of brain tumors" that had developed among Los Alamos residents.
In August the New Mexico Health Department began a study to determine if Los Alamos County has an abnormally high rate of cancer.


SOVIET TURMOIL: TV Critic's Notebook; Soviet Odd Couple Makes U.S. Debut
As coups go, it was a lot more successful than the last one that involved Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin.
ABC scored by getting the two Presidents together, more or less, with people in America's biggest cities plus Brighton Beach, for what was billed as "A National Town Meeting."
Wearing blue suits and red neckties, the allied rivals sat, freshly shaved cheek by newly powdered jowl, under glittering chandeliers in St.
George's Hall in the Kremlin -- some town hall -- and answered questions from just folks and Peter Jennings, television protocol requiring that heads of state be received by anchors if at all possible.


Selden J. Hannah, 77, Ski Champion in 30's
Selden J. Hannah, a former intercollegiate and seniors ski champion who became one of the nation's most prolific ski-area architects, died on Aug. 31 at his home in Franconia, N.H.
He was 77 years old, and his family said he died in his sleep.


Brendle's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Met-Pro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Some Patients Diverted After Nurses at Bellevue Call In Sick
The emergency room at Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan was shut to all but the most critical patients yesterday after an unusually high number of nurses called in sick, apparently to protest scheduling changes and staffing shortages.
A Bellevue spokeswoman, Karen Crowe, said late last night that the hospital, at East 27th Street and First Avenue, had asked the city's Emergency Medical Service to divert patients to other hospitals beginning at 7 A.M. on Thursday.
She said that the request -- called "a total diversion" -- remained in effect through Friday and would not be lifted before today at the earliest.


Officials Trying to Find Out If Salomon Chief Misled U.S.
Federal officials are investigating whether John H. Gutfreund, the former chairman of Salomon Brothers Inc., violated a Federal criminal law by misleading a senior Treasury official in June about the firm's improper bidding practices for Treasury securities, Government officials said today.
Mr.
Gutfreund met on June 10 in Washington with Treasury Under Secretary Robert R. Glauber, the third-ranking official at the department, to discuss a May 22 auction of two-year Treasury notes.
The firm has acknowledged that its bond traders sought to corner that market.


System to License Airwaves Needs Reform, Critics Assert
As Congress moves to shift a broad swath of new radio frequencies from Government to commercial use, many experts inside and outside the Government say the system for awarding licenses has broken down.
Many of these people say that deep political divisions over how to repair the system leave a free hand to speculators and others who are expert at manipulating Federal licensing rules for television and radio stations, cellular telephones and other modes of communication.


Trak Auto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Gwynn Gets Go-Ahead To Rejoin Padre Lineup
TONY GWYNN, bothered by a sore left knee, was cleared yesterday to resume action up to his tolerance.
But team doctors said the San Diego Padres right fielder might need post-season arthroscopic surgery to clean the joint.
Gwynn, the National League's leading hitter at .325, underwent a magnetic resonance imaging test Thursday afternoon.
Results showed no problem with the medial meniscus cartilage in his left knee, Dr.
JAN FRONEK said yesterday.
Gwynn was available to pinch-hit last night against the Cardinals, and will be evaluated daily.


The Look of the Irish: A Few Pieces May Be Missing
By the end of a bizarre week, even by the standards that life in a fishbowl creates for football players at Notre Dame, there were smiles and a sense of relief that public-intoxication and disorderly-conduct charges had been dropped against quarterback Rick Mirer and linebacker Demetrius DuBose.
But the Fighting Irish will continue to respond to a number of unplanned personnel losses when they begin their season against Indiana on Saturday afternoon at Notre Dame Stadium.


Irwin Toy reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Jobless 10.6% In Canada
Canada's unemployment rate rose to 10.6 percent in August, its highest level since April 1985, the Government said today in a report that signaled the economy would recovery slowly from a recession that appeared to be ending.
The jobless rate compares with 10.5 percent in July.


Argentine Prosecutor Sees Trials of Generals Winding Down
For the last seven years, Luis Moreno Ocampo has confronted the elite of Argentina's military, accusing them of crimes against the state, torture and murder, and trying to persuade judges to lock them up for years.
His targets as the country's chief prosecutor have included members of the junta that ruled the country in the late 1970's and early 1980's, top police officials and commanders of the war against Britain in the Falklands.
Others have been middle-ranking officers who staged four rebellions in as many years.


Review/Theater; A 50-Year-Old Subject That's Always Fresh: Catastrophe
The summer of 1940 was one of the bleakest of the century.
The Germans entered Paris in June and less than a month later the Luftwaffe launched the bombing blitz that Winston Churchill called the Battle of Britain.
Londoners defied the Nazi terror by flocking to hear Shakespeare in the Strand.
In the United States, Thornton Wilder began writing a play that, when it opened on Broadway two years later, was called "The Skin of Our Teeth."
To begin its third decade, the Jean Cocteau Repertory has mounted a solid revival of Wilder's comedy on catastrophe that still finds relevance in today's headlines.
In a preface written for a 1958 edition of his "Three Plays," Wilder acknowledged that the play "mostly comes alive under conditions of crisis." If the geography of the current world crisis suggests the Moscow Art Theater might be a more suitable venue for a new production of "The Skin of Our Teeth," the Cocteau's staging is a reminder that what happens anywhere on the planet affects us all, whether it is ecological disaster or political upheaval.


FRANCE CAUTIONS LEBANON GENERAL
As Michel Aoun, the exiled Christian general who battled the Lebanese Government for two years, stepped up his calls for rebellion in Beirut, France warned him today to tone down his language to prevent French-Lebanese relations from worsening.
In an unusual statement, the French Foreign Ministry publicly warned General Aoun that his inflammatory remarks risked breaching an agreement in which the Lebanese Government allowed him to seek asylum in France on condition that he refrain from political activity.


About New York
For more than 70 years they have been nurturing the dream, teaching their children Russian and sending them to Russian scout camp, filling their homes with samovars and bejeweled Easter eggs, holding Russian nobility balls where men and women once again whirl the romantic waltzes of yore.
One day, they have vowed, they would return to a Russia free of Communism, perhaps a Russia ruled by descendants of the revered murdered monarch, Czar Nicholas II.


Jobs Data Mixed Last Month
The first broad-gauge assessment of the economy's performance in August showed no clear trend, with the unemployment rate remaining at 6.8 percent and a second straight rise in factory payrolls countered by job shrinkage elsewhere, Labor Department figures showed today.
But while economists groped for meaning, bond traders pushed interest rates down and Democratic politicians seized the occasion to express doubts that recovery is under way and to assail the Bush Administration for barring payment of extended benefits for the long-term jobless.


Traffic Alert
Bloomingdale Area Street Fair: The west side of Broadway between 96th and 100th Streets will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Third Avenue Festival: Third Avenue between 14th and 34th Streets will be closed tomorrow from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Parking Rules


Observer; Oh, What Joys Impend
Hundreds of exciting projects are coming in this space soon.
It's our way of celebrating the column's 30th anniversary, which will occur next summer amid fireworks displays and mass marketing of souvenirs: coffee mugs, lapel pins, paperweights, letter openers, beautiful reproductions of needlepoint samplers of our Ten Greatest Columns, suitable for framing over the parlor sofa.
The amazing riches to come in these columns will be the kind usually reserved for 50th anniversaries.
We had originally planned, in fact, to wait until the column's 50th anniversary, but the latest literacy forecast was too worrisome.
In the year 2012 the nation's most literate people apparently will be unable to read anything trickier than captions at the bottom of TV screens: "Irate Commuter," "Grieving Mother," "Rights Activist," "Cross-Dresser," etc.


Michaels Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4


Astrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dollar Falls as Jobless Data Move Traders Off Sidelines
The dollar fell in heavy trading yesterday and gold prices rose.
Currency dealers attributed the activity to technical selling after release of the August unemployment report.
Many currency traders had refrained from active dealing since late last week, awaiting the Labor Department's report.


A Bridgeable Gap in South Africa
It's no surprise that President F. W. de Klerk's proposals this week for a new South African constitution differ from those offered earlier by the African National Congress.
What's hopeful and striking is their measure of agreement.
Both plans call for universal suffrage, which would finally enfranchise a huge black majority.
And both envision a bicameral parliament: one house elected nationally, the other chosen on a geographical basis.


WCI Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Bush Picks 2 Professors For Council of Advisers
President Bush announced yesterday that he would nominate two economics professors, David F. Bradford of Princeton and Paul Wonnacott of the University of Maryland, to the President's Council of Economic Advisers.
Both are already on leave from their schools, working at the council in Washington as members-designate, pending their formal appointment and Senate confirmation.


Dow Up 3.13 for Day but Falls 31.97 in Week
The stock market rose slightly yesterday, with traders showing both confusion and frustration.
With bond prices up and a lukewarm employment report from the Government, the Dow Jones industrial average closed at 3,011.63, up 3.13 points but off 31.97 for the week.
The market rose initially on a report that non-farm employment had gained and unemployment was remaining steady.
But by midmorning, an aggressive sell program pushed the market down 12 points.
In the midafternoon, the market began to climb again, helped by a strengthening bond market.


Milwaukee Officers Dismissed
Chief Philip Arreola of the Milwaukee Police Department today dismissed two officers and put a third officer on a year's probation for leaving a teen-age boy with Jeffrey L. Dahmer, who later confessed to a number of killings.
The boy, Konerak Sinthasomphone, a 14-year-old Laotian immigrant, became the 13th of Mr.
Dahmer's 17 victims shortly after the police left the two alone last May, police say.
Mr.
Dahmer has been charged in 15 of the 17 deaths.


Coho Resources Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
Circumstances alter suit combinations.
If available information suggests that the normal play will not succeed, an abnormal one may be indicated.
An example is the diagramed deal, played last Sunday in the Regional Open Pair Championship in Springfield, Mass.
The deal was reported by Karen Allison of Jersey City, and played by Dale Beers of Media, Pa.
They had had a second-place finish in the Stratified Pairs a day earlier.


GTC Transcontinental reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
There is something about the witching hour that appeals to JOHN TRAVOLTA.
He became engaged to KELLY PRESTON, a film actress, at midnight last New Year's Eve and he married her Thursday, at midnight.
With only four friends on hand, they were wed at the Hotel de Crillon in Paris.
The couple are in France for the Deauville Film Festival, where Mr.
Travolta's movie, "The Tender," is to have its premiere today.
It is the first marriage for Mr.
Travolta, 37 years old, and the second for Ms.
Preston, 28.


Accounting Group in Shift
On two separate fronts, a leading accounting group inched closer yesterday toward recognizing the growing importance of consultants, computer experts and other non-accountants at many accounting firms.
The directors of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants voted unanimously to ask the institute's 250-member council to authorize a proposal that would allow non-C.P.A.'s to join certain sections of the institute for the first time.
If the proposal wins majority approval at a meeting on Oct. 26, non-C.P.A.'s who work for accounting firms could become associate members for $65 a year and up, so long as they continued education courses and abided by the institute's code of conduct.


'Black and Blue' Over Hierarchy of Color; Unsung Lyricist
To the Editor:
Art Shifrin (letter, Aug. 21) is correct in saying that Louis Armstrong was by no means the first to sing "(What Did I Do to Be So) Black and Blue." He is mistaken, however, in attributing the moving lyrics of that song to Fats Waller.
Waller was not a lyricist but a composer. (And, in the case of "Black and Blue," a co-composer with Harry Brooks.)


Penn Engineering &amp; Mfg. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Apple Verdict Is Reversed
A Federal judge reversed a jury verdict today that found the former chief executive of Apple Computer Inc. and another former executive liable for some $100 million in damages in a shareholder lawsuit.
The verdict had sent a chill through Silicon Valley, where shareholder suits are common but had never before resulted in such large damages.


Sherwood Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sybron Acquisition reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


European Inquiry On Air France Aid
The European Commission said it had started an investigation into French Government plans to inject $339 million into Air France, the ailing national carrier.
The commission, the executive body of the 12-nation European Community, said it would rule in two months whether this amounted to state aid or the normal action of a business investor.
If it is the former, the commission would then rule on whether to allow the aid.
The commission said it had received details of Air France's restructuring subsidy in recent days.
The French Government owns 99 percent of Air France and has proposed to let the state-owned Banque National de Paris buy 5 percent to 10 percent of the airline.
A European Community official said the commission, in ruling on state aid, would not make a special case for airlines because of the slump in traffic from the Persian Gulf war.


Navratilova Beats Graf; Seles Outslugs Capriati
The grand old lady pumped her fist just like the grand old man does, and then, with the world's No. 1 player reduced to a huddle of indecision across the net, Martina Navratilova kept the old-timers' campaign at the United States Open co-educational by reaching her eighth singles final.
And in the other women's semifinal, a slugfest conducted by a pair of teen-agers whose strokes defied age, gender and the legal speed limit, 17-year-old Monica Seles and 15-year-old Jennifer Capriati went the limit, a third-set tie breaker the older girl dominated with her down-the-line bullets for a 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (7-3) victory.


Justice in Crown Heights
"There was no winner in this case," Brooklyn District Attorney Charles Hynes said after announcing that a grand jury had decided not to bring charges against the Hasidic man whose car killed a black child in Crown Heights.
Mr.
Hynes was wrong.
There was a winner in this case -- the rule of law.
The public can now hope that African-American residents of Crown Heights will consider the facts, ignore the demagogues who continue to hurl baseless charges of bias and even jury-tampering against Mr.
Hynes, and heed Mayor David Dinkins's sensible words.
"The wounds our city suffered," he said, "will not be healed with anger."


Conoco Business Jet's Wreck Is Found in Borneo Jungle
Rescuers searching dense jungle today found the wreckage of a jet that carred 12 people, including American and British oil executives and their wives.
Officials said it appeared that there were no survivors.
The corporate jet, owned by Conoco Inc. of Houston, disappeared from radar screens on Wednesday afternoon as it prepared to land in Kota Kinabalu on the island of Borneo for refueling en route to Jakarta, Indonesia, from Tokyo.
The wreckage of the Grumman Gulf Stream 2 was found 30 miles south of Kota Kinabalu, or 910 miles east of Kuala Lumpur, said Stanley Harsha, a United States Embassy spokesman in the Malaysian capital.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American International Group Inc., New York, an insurance organization, named Robert J. O'Connell president and chief executive of its domestic life insurance companies. *
Campbell Soup Co., Camden, N.J., announced that John R. Scales, president of its Vlasic Foods Inc. subsidiary, had resigned.
Charles V. McCarthy, president of the Campbell Sales Co., and Raymond A. Meillier, vice president-finance of Campbell's North America division, have been named interim co-presidents of Vlasic.


Moscow Calls 6 Envoys Home
The Ambassador to Britain and five other Soviet ambassadors have been recalled because of accusations that they supported the coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, officials said today.
The shake-up in the Foreign Ministry is part of a general housecleaning throughout the Government in the aftermath of the failed coup last month by hard-liners in the Communist Party.


Crown Books Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sports Leisure; Being Out There Is Worth It for Blind Golfers
Golf is a hard game, but it's definitely harder when you can't see.
But for the 75 members the United States Blind Golfers Association, it's arguable that golf might be an even more pleasurable experience than it is for the sighted.


Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 3


Commercial Federal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FIRE VICTIMS DIED TRYING SHUT EXITS
A state official today issued a report that said most of the people who were killed or hurt in a fire that swept through a chicken processing plant here on Tuesday had tried to escape through exits that were either locked or blocked.
The findings, issued by Tim Bradley, Deputy Commissioner of the North Carolina Insurance Department, were sent to the local District Attorney for a criminal investigation.


Momentum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sequestered Jurors Ate and Slept Well
To the Editor:
In "New York, the Jury Holdout" (editorial, Aug. 26) you say that in New York, jurors "get to eat a greasy restaurant dinner and share a low-budget hotel room."
I was recently discharged from jury duty at the Bronx District Court on a criminal case.
The jury was sequestered one night at the Ramada Inn in New Rochelle.
We were transported promptly by official vehicles and were served a tasty and nutritious dinner, consisting of salad, a choice of several entrees, dessert and beverage.
Breakfast the next morning included a selection of appropriate dishes such as eggs, potatoes, cereal, toast and coffee or tea.


In the Nation; Romance About Russia
Are we Americans romanticizing recent events in Moscow?
Did a popular uprising really assert itself for democracy and against the return of a powerful autocratic government?
That's not quite the way the story was told by several aides to Boris Yeltsin, the elected President of the Russian republic; these aides traveled outside their country in the days following the failed coup and discussed what happened with numerous Westerners, including some Americans.


Propaganda Blitz
To the Editor:
Elaine Shannon claims in her review (July 28) that our new book, "Cocaine Politics: Drugs, Armies, and the CIA in Central America," is loaded with stories "too good to check," from sources, usually crooks, whose credibility we made "virtually no effort" to assess.
These charges would be devastating if true, but where are her examples?


Chess
You may be one of the greatest exponents of defense, but if you are one point behind in the last game of a quarterfinal match for prospective world championship challengers, that is not going to do you any good.
A draw lets your opponent achieve his goal: eliminating you.
That was the situation Artur Yusupov of the Soviet Union found himself in against his countryman Vasily Ivanchuk in Brussels on Aug. 22.
And he found a solution very surprising for him: Attack like a man berserk.


Smoking Permitted
ARRIVING at a crowded restaurant one evening not long after moving to London, I found my wife in animated conversation with the maitre d'hotel.
To her dismay, she had just learned the restaurant, like most in London, did not have a nonsmoking section.
The next best thing, she decided, was to try to pick out the table that seemed to be, for the moment anyhow, least fogged by cigar and cigarette fumes.
Whether the maitre d'hotel was genuinely sympathetic, or merely indulging what he probably regarded as another irrationally phobic American couple, he did his best to help.
But in the end it proved a futile exercise.
In London, like the rest of Europe -- indeed, sometimes it seems, like the rest of the world beyond North America -- it is not easy to find refuge from smokers.


South African Disunity
One of three South African track and field groups attending unity talks in Cape Town yesterday walked out in protest.
The other two said they would work together.
It was unclear how the walkout would affect next month's African Unity Games in Senegal and South Africa.
The International Amateur Athletics Federation is staging the games and has invited South Africa to attend, but said the country's racially divided track and field organizations must unify.


Soviet Notebook; An in-the-Red Scare
Some Communists are refusing to give up the red ghost.
They are putting out the word that "underground plenums" will be held, with the party gaining strength now from the need to "struggle for survival against the anti-Communist terror."
The suggestion of "terror" is a bit of hyperbole.
In the Bolshevik Revolution, enlisted men zealous with rebellion beheaded Czarist officers in the streets with impunity.
But the current changeover has more in common with a corporate buyout than a violent vendetta.


Though Selling Its Property, Y Will Stay Put
Beth Israel Medical Center is buying the 14th Street site of the Emanu-El Midtown Y and plans to build a 13-story medical center there that would accommodate the Y and probably a new and larger Jewish Repertory Theatre.
The building was put on the market by its owner, the Associated Y. M. and Y.W.H.A's of Greater New York, because of the financial difficulties of the association's 10 Y members.
The prospective sale galvanized Emanu-el members, particularly those who were older or retired.


Profiles of the New State Council: Who's Who
The highest government body in the new structure for interim rule in the Soviet Union is the State Council, which is headed by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and is to include leaders of republics choosing to take part.
When the Council had its first meeting on Friday, no announcement was made on which republics attended, and Soviet officials said the membership would be not fixed but loose, allowing republics to take part as they saw fit.
Although it was not clear who was present, after the independence resolutions for the three Baltic repulbics these leaders of 12 Soviet republics are presumably eligible for council membership.
ISLAM A. KARIMOV


Robbie Rosencrans, Ceramicist, Weds
Robbie Jo Rosencrans, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Rosencrans of Greenwich, Conn., was married at her parents' home yesterday to Kurt Louis Heidinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford F. Heidinger of New Canaan, Conn.
Ellen Gordon, a justice of the peace, officiated.
Mrs.
Heidinger, 27 years old, graduated from New York University.
She is a ceramicist and textile designer.
Her father is the president of Columbia International, a cable television company in Greenwich.
Her mother, Marjorie Rosencrans, is a partner of Petal Pushers of Greenwich, a floral design company.
Mr.
Heidinger, 28, graduated from N.Y.U. and the Mannes College of Music.
He is studying for a master's degree in American literature at the University of Connecticut.
His father is a physical therapist in Stamford, Conn.


The Bomb Chuckers of Trump Hamlet
Spending some time this summer with several of the key people working on the new Riverside South development project for the Upper West Side of Manhattan, I at first had the sense that I was watching a small group of exceptionally talented and impressive New Yorkers stretch themselves to build something lasting during an unlooked-for interval of stillness, a moment of good feeling, a suddenly opened hurricane eye at one edge of a city of perpetual storms.
Their efforts can prosper because last spring, Donald Trump, who owns the site, suddenly teamed up with an increasingly effective coalition of six local and national civic groups -- the "Six No Trump" partnership, as it's sometimes collectively (and slightly inaccurately) called -- that for six years had helped delay first Television City and later Trump City, two of Mr.
Trump's vast schemes for the property.
Now, in a post-grandiose plan that works to create both public value and private value -- the idea that you can help the city and make a profit, too -- Riverside South proposes to build a park and a neighborhood of apartments, shops, and television studios that would run for two-thirds of a mile along the Hudson River between 59th and 72d Streets.


Safety Net: 2 Top Quarterbacks
The season-ending knee injury that befell Eagles quarterback Randall Cunningham and the broken thumb that knocked out Seattle's Dave Krieg for eight games will force other National Football League teams to examine their own backup quarterback situations.
The Eagles went to Jim McMahon, a 10-year veteran with a 52-25 record as a starter in Chicago and San Diego.
Seattle turned to Jeff Kemp, a 10-year veteran who has started for the Los Angeles Rams and San Francisco.
Both emerged with victories.


Sherrill Still Masters Texas, 13-6
Rodney Stowers capped a fourth-period defensive stand with a sack of Texas quarterback Peter Gardere, assuring Mississippi State's 13-6 defeat of the 13th-ranked Longhorns today.
Texas is ranked 19th in The New York Times Top 20.
Texas drove 45 yards to a first down at the Mississippi State 19-yard line with about 3 minutes to play.
Keith Joseph and Jerome Brown combined to block a Gardere pass, another throw was batted down near the goal line, and Kevin Henry blocked another pass on third down to set the stage for Stowers's drive-ending tackle with 2 minutes 19 seconds to play.


Hollywood's Reading Habits
To the Editor:
In his review of "Topless" by D. Keith Mano (Aug. 11), Kinky Friedman asserts: "No one in Hollywood . . . has read a book in the last 40 years."
I can assure Mr.
Friedman the contrary is true.
I read a book in 1969.
I didn't like it.
PHILIP COLLINS  Hollywood


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
QUILTS AND SPREADS
More than 400 quilts, from antique to contemporary and from all over the country, will be exhibited for sale at prices ranging from $75 to $2,000 at the Stamford Historical Society's giant Quilt Show, on Friday from noon to 6 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.


POSTINGS: 2 Days of Seminars and Tours; Care and Feeding of Cast-Iron Buildings
In a workshop that is likely to attract architects, preservationists and building contractors from across the nation, the New York Landmarks Conservancy and the National Parks Service are co-sponsoring two days of seminars and tours that will focus on the maintenance and repair of cast-iron buildings.
The workshop is scheduled for next Saturday and Sunday in and around one of New York City's most distinquished examples of cast-iron architecture, the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street.


Was a Writer Shoved?
Did ERIC DICKERSON lose his cool and shove a sportswriter last week?
That's the question that National Football League officials are investigating, after reports that Dickerson, a star running back for the Indianapolis Colts, had to be restrained by cornerback EUGENE DANIEL after Dickerson shoved TOM RIETMANN of The Indianapolis News.


Fortress Cuba, Lonely Cuba
Stunned by events in Moscow, Fidel Castro now talks of a "zero option": Cuban socialism will carry on alone, even without Soviet aid.
"Whatever happens in the Soviet Union," blusters the party newspaper, "we will not move away from the path we have chosen. We will continue with our independent, Cuban, socialist line."
But who is "we"?
Not once since seizing power in 1959 has Mr.
Castro submitted his reign to electoral judgment.
Like other Communist fortresses in China, North Korea and Vietnam, Cuba has scorned democratizing reforms.
And who is the "we" responsible for Cuba's colonialist dependence on a no-longer-willing foreign partner?
Mr.
Castro.


Time for Roslyn To Look Forward
The photograph of the Roslyn duck pond totally devoid of human life is indicative of the village of Roslyn itself  [ "Quiet Roslyn Undergoing Slow Changes," Aug. 18 ] .
The Building Inspector's perception of a high-quality village belies the fact that it is in decay, a decay brought about by Dr.
Gerry and his cohorts.
One only need to venture 30 feet off the main street to find pot-holed parking lots, rotted storage tanks and unmaintained roads that are inadequate for the traffic they bear.
Old Northern Boulevard has been updated, but there are no strollers to appreciate it because there are no provisions for parking; no quaint shops, with or without signs, and no picturesque eating establishments that one associates with a historic village.
Dr.
Gerry has created a town for his sole enjoyment, and the rest of the citizenry be damned.


Dinkins's Plan to Incinerate Draws Environmentalists' Ire
Environmental groups in New York City are reacting to Mayor David N. Dinkins's decision to build trash incinerators with a sense of betrayal and a determination to fight any waste disposal plan that includes the burning of garbage, leaders for the groups say.
The groups are saying that they will do whatever they can legally and politically to block the move to incinerators.
Given their track record of holding up projects that they oppose on environmental grounds, this shift almost guarantees a continuation of the stalemate on solid waste policy that occurred during the Koch administration, which wanted to build as many as eight new incinerators.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Consumer credit, percent change
-1.83
0.5
Tuesday
Current account in billions
$10.22
0.0
Wednesday
Wholesale trade, percent change
0.0
0.3
Thursday
Producer price index, percent change
-0.2
0.1
Friday
Retail sales, in percent
0.5
0.2
Consumer price index, in percent
0.2
0.2
Monday: Second-quarter mining and manufacturing wholesale trade  Tuesday: Summary of international transactions  Thursday: World agriculture supply and demand estimates Friday: World agriculture production  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc)


Susan Laughlin, Producer, Wed
Susan Todd Laughlin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Orford Laughlin of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Scott McComb Johnson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Allen Johnson of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
The Rev.
John Ineson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Harrington Meeting House in Pemaquid, Me.
The couple, both 26 years old, graduated from Cornell University.
The bride is an associate producer at WGBH television in Boston and is working on "The Secret of Life," a science series for the Public Broadcasting Service to be broadcast early next year.
Her father is a senior manager and systems consultant for the New York brokerage of Lynch, Jones &amp; Ryan.


Learning to Dance with a Bouncy Dollar
Robert J. Prantis is neither a software wizard nor a hardware guru.
But when he loaded up his car and left Chicago two years ago to begin a new career in Silicon Valley, he was exactly what Sun Microsystems Inc., the hot young manufacturer of computer work stations, needed.
His expertise was in the arcane world of currency markets and hedging against the sudden fluctuations in the value of the dollar.
His move to Sun shows how sophisticated many American corporations have had to become at dealing with dollar volatility as they compete in the global marketplace.
Sun wooed Mr.
Prantis away from the Beatrice Corporation because, like more and more American companies, it found itself heavily dependent on sales outside the United States -- more than 50 percent of its sales are abroad and involve as many as 20 different currencies.
Sun did not want swings in the currency markets to throw its financial plans into chaos.
And in the years since Mr.
Prantis arrived, Sun has managed to minimize the impact of this volatility.


London Fitness
To the Editor: With reference to Gerald L. Posner's excellent article "Fit as a (Surprise!) Brit" (Aug. 11), I would like to remind budget-minded visitors to London of the City of Westminster's Porchester Centre on Queensway in Bayswater.
For a nonresident adult, membership fee is $:26.60 (about $46), entitling the user to a reduced price on all facilities there as well as at the Jubilee Sports Center, Caird Street, W10, in the Queens Park section, and Marshall Street Leisure Center, Soho W1.
However, you do not have to be a member just to swim at the Porchester.
Every time I visit London, for $:1.65 ($2.90) I join serious swimming Brits in the huge Olympic pool, beginning daily at 7 A.M.
FRED B. CHARATAN North Babylon, N.Y.


Miss Wetherby Is Wed in Maine
Kathleen Ellen Wetherby, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph H. Wetherby of Sebago Lake, Me., was married yesterday in North Conway, N.H., to Henry Hazard Zenzie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Zenzie of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert N. Abarno, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at Stonehurst Manor.
Mrs.
Zenzie, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Maine.
She is a biomedical engineer at Siemens Medical Electronics in Danvers, Mass.
Her father, who is retired, was a dispatcher for Northeast Petroleum in Portland, Me.


Taking a Hike To Terrace Pond
Those readers of Pete Dunne's "In the Natural State" (Aug. 4) who have decided to hike up to Terrace Pond, in Passaic County, may profit from a little additional information.
After parking in area P-7, which is on the left of Clinton Road about 20 minutes from Route 23, do not follow the advice to walk north on the road for four miles because that will lead you to the end of Clinton Road, to the Warwick Turnpike, past Upper Greenwood Lake and close to the office of Wawayanda State Park.


A Life in the Theater for Headmaster
TO theater scholars, the names of the playwright Clyde Fitch and the actor Richard Mansfield evoke the glittering life of the stage around the turn of the century.
But to Paul Firestone, a New Rochelle resident who means to transform scholarship into stage worthiness, Fitch and Mansfield and William Winter, an influential critic of that era, represent ruthlessness and the ephemeron of celebrity.


Jeanne Cardone, Auditor, Marries
Jeanne Mari Cardone, a daughter of Albert Cardone of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Jeanne Cardone, was married yesterday to Christopher Francis Bradley, a son of Frank Bradley of Simpsonville, S.C., and the late Anne Bradley.
The Rev.
J.
Peter Cullen performed the ceremony at St.
Aloysius Roman Catholic Church in New Canaan.
Mrs.
Bradley and her husband are both 28 years old and both are audit managers at the accounting firm of Deloitte &amp; Touche in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Empire Blue Cross/Blue Shield in New York.


Miss Jenkins Wed To F. J. Codey 4th
Elizabeth Bonnefond Jenkins, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Jenkins of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday at the Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Bay Head, N.J., to Frank Joseph Codey 4th, the son of Hertha C. Codey, of Tequesta, Fla., and Mr.
Codey 3d of Bay Head.
Msgr.
William Maguire officiated.
Mrs.
Codey, 24 years old, is a marketing assistant at Vector Strategic Resources, a management consulting company in New York.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father is a vice president and general counsel of Hoechst Celanese in Bridgewater, N.J.
Her mother, Dr.
Barbara Jenkins, is a psychologist in Summit.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
September


Cornell Program to Study American Indians Opens a House
The decade-old American Indian program at Cornell University last week opened what it says is the first residential house in the nation dedicated to American Indian studies.
Built in the form of an eagle, a symbol that holds a special place in Indian lore, the $2 million structure known as Akwe:kon (pronounced ah-GWAY-goh) houses 35 students, about half of whom are American Indians, plus a computer center and library.
Akwe:kon, a Mohawk word meaning "all of us," will play an important role in Cornell's "full circle" program, which began with visits to Indian reservations and the recruitment of Indians, said Ronald LaFrance, director of the American Indian program.


Gali Freedman to Wed Oz Ben-Amram
Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Freedman of West Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Grace Helen Freedman, to Oz Ben-Amram, a son of Eliahu Ben-Amram of Herzliya, Israel, and Clila Ben-Amram of Jerusalem.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Freedman, who is known as Gali and is 29 years old, is a graphics designer and illustrator in Tel Aviv.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and the Bezalel Academy of Art in Jerusalem.
Her mother, Doris Freedman, who is retired, was a reading specialist and an assistant principal in Newark.
Her father, also retired, was an advertising production schedule keeper for The New York Times.


Business School Opens With Community Work
First-year students in the University of Michigan School of Business Administration expected to attend a traditional orientation session complete with information packets, registration cards and inspirational extras.
But they were surprised last week when they were asked instead to build houses, repair junior high schools, and visit local drug and alcohol treatment centers.
By involving entering students in local community improvement projects in a two-day program, "Global Citizenship," business school administrators said they hoped to increase students' awareness of local and international needs and to instill in students a sense of responsibility to these communities.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Aug. 24  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill 1.25 million
139 East 94th Street  2-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, 2.700-sq.-ft terrace; maintenance $2,131, 30% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group-Halstead Property Co.)  Greenwich Village 800,000
309 West 12th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,950-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, fireplace, Hudson River view; common charge $855, taxes $5,400 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  South St.
Seaport Area 330,000
117 Beekman Street  (Seaport Park)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. condo in a renovated prewar building; 24-hr. dorman, common roof deck, East River view; common charge $1,055, taxes $5,220 (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay, Stribling &amp; Associates)  Upper West Side 230,000
267 West 89th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, co-op in prewar building; part-time doorman, dining room; maintenance $695, 47% tax-deductible (Broker: Nancy R. Sweetser Real Estate)  Upper West Side 530,000
180 Riverside Drive (90th St.)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,950-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, remodeled kitchen; maintenance $1,077, 44% tax-deductible (Broker: Hunt, Kennedy-Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX  Riverdale 53,000
3636 Greystone Avenue  (Richmond)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $367, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Soundview 235,000
1753 Gleason Avenue  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining area in each; 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Realty World/Gold Circle)  BROOKLYN  Carroll Gardens 132,500
492 Henry Street  (Henry Street Mews)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 880-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; part-time doorman, dining area, exercise room; common charge $210, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  Kensington 165,000
316 East 9th Street  4-family, 2-story, attached, frame house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in others; eat-in kitchen in each; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Beck Real Estate)  Park Slope 540,000
882 Carroll Street  2-family, 5-story, limestone; 6 bedrooms, 2 1/2-baths, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,400 (Broker: Joseph Berman Realty)  QUEENS  Middle Village 275,000
79-12 67th Street  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $980 (Broker: Century 21/Metalios Real Estate)  Rego Park 180,000
99-30 67th Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 16- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Princes Bay 252,000
89 Princewood Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 3/4-bath, single-family, detached, ranch; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 127- 115 irregular lot; taxes $1,810 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  West Brighton 155,000
613 Delafield Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, back porch, 1-car garage, 78-by 262-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


On the Street; Keeping the Woolens at Bay
Summer clothes no longer vanish with Labor Day.
Spectators at late-summer sporting events add sweaters, jackets and shawls to keep warm when the temperature takes a sudden plunge as it did last weekend on the final day of the Hampton Classic Horse Show in Bridgehampton, L.I.
Until the 1960's, straw hats came out on May 31 and went into storage on Labor Day.
Today women dress for the weather, not the dictates of fashion, and summery days in September are no time for fall woolens.


An Earlier Incarnation
To the Editor:
I should like to add to Barry Wells's letter about Thornton Wilder and his comedy "The Matchmaker," on which the musical "Hello, Dolly!" is based  [ "The Original Merchant of Yonkers," Aug. 25 ] .


Alethea S. Hawley Marries George W. Elkins 4th
Alethea Stewart Hawley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Jordan Hawley Jr., of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday in Center Sandwich, N.H., to George W. Elkins 4th, a son of Mrs.
Leigh Turner and Mr.
Elkins 3d, both of Wolfeboro, N.H.
The Rev.
John Woolverton, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Federated Church.
Mrs.
Elkins, 20 years old, attends the University of Richmond.
Her father is the founder and the managing partner of Saugatuck Associates, a private venture capital company in Stamford, Conn.


Monica Seles Wins Title


Chrysanthemums Add to Fall's Brilliance
CHRYSANTHEMUMS are synonymous with fall, which arrives on the morning of Sept. 23.
Yet these daisylike flowers never go by the calendar and bloom when they want to.
Some are in bloom now; others are showing promise with fat buds.
Most of the flower colors will match those of the trees' leaves in assorted shades of yellow, bronze and maroon.
One relatively new chrysanthemum caused a sensation among gardeners last year.
It is the tidy little groundcovering species Chrysanthemum pacificum with silver-edged leaves and a flat spreading habit.
Its only drawback is its habit of flowering late in the season.
The little yellow buttons are somewhat shy in appearing and often wait until early September.
Although tardy in this respect, once this mum's roots take hold, it becomes a showpiece.


A Changed Landscape For Southern Democrats
Four years ago, Southern Democrats provided the pivotal votes in the defeat of Robert H. Bork, President Reagan's nominee for the Supreme Court.
They rejected the conservative judge, political experts said at the time, in response to the growing strength of black voters in the region.
On the eve of the Senate confirmation hearings on Clarence Thomas, President Bush's nominee for the seat on the Court left vacant by Thurgood Marshall, Southern Democrats are ready once again to play a pivotal role.
But this time, the political landscape has changed.


Corrections
An essay by Simon Schama in The Times Magazine today about the writing of history misattributes the saying that a people without history remains locked into the mentality of a child.
It is from Cicero, not Horace.


Police Thought She Was Mugged. Now They Suspect Her Spouse.
A woman who has been in a coma since November, when the police found her lying on an East Harlem street and thought she was a mugging victim, was actually beaten and abandoned by her husband, the police said yesterday.
The woman's husband, John Stamatelos, 41 years old, of Floral Park, L.I., was arrested on Thursday and charged with attempted murder in the beating of Antoinette Stamatelos, 32, the Nassau County Police said.


What Went Wrong With the S.&amp;L.'s
HIGH ROLLERS
Inside the Savings and Loan Debacle.
By Martin Lowy. 321 pp.
New York.: Praeger. $24.95.


Democracy May Rule Moscow's Streets, But Privilege Prevails in Its Shops


Parker Is Released by Angels
Unable to find his stroke at age 40, Dave Parker was put on waivers today by the California Angels, a day after the team made Whitey Herzog its director of player personnel.
The Angels, who hoped to contend in the American League West this season but are in last place, got Parker in March from Milwaukee in a trade for outfielder Dante Bichette and pitcher Brandy Vann.
Parker spent last year with the Brewers, batting .289 with 21 home runs and 92 runs batted in.
Part of Shake-Up
But Parker, a seven-time All-Star, was batting only .232 with 11 home runs and 56 r.b.i. in 119 games this season.
He got the 2,700th base hit of his 19-year career on Sept. 3 against Boston with a run-scoring double, and it was the last game he played for California.


Dorinda Danforth Is Wed
Dorinda Ashley Danforth and David Geoffrey Underwood were married yesterday at the Tabernacle, a nondenominational community building in Craigville, Mass.
The Rev.
William J. Dowd, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Underwood, 28 years old, graduated from Wheaton College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Danforth of Barrington, R.I.
Mr.
Underwood, 29, graduated from Amherst College and is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Northwestern University.
He is a son of Barbara Underwood of Sugar Hill, N.H., and Dr.
David G. Underwood, of Concord, N.H.


Confessions of a Money Addict
INSIDE OUT
An Insider's Account of Wall Street.
By Dennis B. Levine with William Hoffer.
Illustrated. 431 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


United States: On the Cheap
To the Editor:
Thanks to Thomas S. Hines for exposing the sorry bungle of participation by the United States in Spain's celebration of Columbus's discovery of the New World  [ "For the Seville Fair, the Old Geodesic Dome Trick," Aug. 25 ] .
The villains of the piece have been, from early on, the chairmen of the Senate and House Appropriations subcommittees, Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina and Representative Neal E. Smith of Iowa.
I recall my initial disbelief at Rep.
Smith's remark, quoted in Mr.
Hines's article: "I don't have anything against world's fairs, but I don't think the Federal Government should be paying for them."


New York Primaries Test Charter's Effect On Machine Politics
The very reforms that were supposed to encourage ethnic and racial diversity may help the ailing Democratic organization retain its political grip on the New York City Council this year.
In many districts, public campaign financing and easier access to the ballot inspired more challengers and divided the opposition in Thursday's primary elections, so the expected low voter turnout could make any organization pivotal.


Little Rock Schools Insure Drug Treatment
School and city officials in Little Rock, Ark., are providing full insurance for treatment of drug and alcohol abuse to all the district's 26,000 students, a program that the officials say is the first by a public school system.
The coverage pays up to 100 percent of the cost of treating students referred by the school district to 10 local psychiatric hospitals and counseling centers, which have agreed to reduce rates for students in the program.


Often-Neglected Attics Need Yearly Inspection
MOST attics get little attention, but they should be inspected at least once a year.
Spring is the best time to do this, because any repairs that may require working on the roof are easily done during warm weather and there is little pressure to hurry the work before winter arrives.
If your attic has gone without a spring inspection, it is a good idea to check it in the fall.
This averts possible problems, the majority of which are most likely to occur during the winter.


From Behind Bars, Ayala Sounds A Warning Aimed Right at Tyson
One night over dinner soon after he won the heavyweight title in 1986, Mike Tyson was recounting for an acquaintance his impressions of a junior middleweight named Tony Ayala.
His memories had been formed a few years earlier, when Tyson was an amateur not long removed from a juvenile-detention center in upstate New York and Ayala appeared headed for a shot at the world title.
As Tyson conjured up the fighter Ayala had been, his eyes grew wide and his voice took on a childlike awe.


Corrections
A headline last Sunday about New York laws governing fatal traffic accidents referred incorrectly to the prospects for drivers in such cases.
Although experts say criminal charges are rare in such cases, charges are more likely in New York than in other states.


Managing; What Art Can Teach Business
For its 1988 annual report, the Progressive Corporation, a Cleveland-based auto insurance company, commissioned seven artists to illustrate individuality, personal growth, flexibity and other values it deems important in business.
The next year's report featured art depicting the horrors of drunken driving.
After each report came out, Progressive invited several of the artists to discuss the creative process with employees.
"Interacting with art and artists challenges the natural inclination to remain inflexible," said Toby Devan Lewis, Progressive's art curator.


This Week: Keep Watering
Keep newly planted seed beds moist to insure healthy seedlings and give lawns and gardens an inch of water a week.
Continue to cut annual flowers and deadhead spent blossoms to encourage bloom until frost.
Fertilize once this month.
Plant or transplant evergreens, spring-blooming shrubs, new perennials and ground covers.
Cooler temperatures encourage root growth, so plants in the ground now will be established by the winter freeze and get a head start next spring.


Style Makers; Sal Fodera, Hair Stylist
Any man who has ever wanted to know how it feels to be one of those suave, wealthy characters Cary Grant played in the 1940's should stop by Salon Fodera at the newly refurbished St.
Regis Hotel, which reopens this week.
It is the kind of barber shop, full of leather, brass and marble, that existed in the bygone days when men wore gray felt hats and women wore white gloves.
"I want men to feel like a million bucks again," said Sal Fodera, 46 years old, who has won many international awards for men's haircutting.
"I've waited my whole life to have a beautiful salon where men feel they are being pampered in a masculine way."


Soviet Society Yearns, Above All, for Order; True Communism
To the Editor:
Your pages have proclaimed Communism's death as a political force.
In describing the political and economic system in the Soviet Union, China and North Korea and those that existed in Eastern Europe as Communism, you participate in the same campaign of misinformation about the philosophy of Communism as their brutal dictators have done for so many years.


Sunday Outing; The Pick of the Orchard, By the Bushel or Pound
Because of a warm spring and a hot summer, the harvesting of apples and other fruit is at its peak in the Hudson Valley 10 days to two weeks earlier than usual.
From now until the end of October, or until the first heavy frost, a variety of apples are available at dozens of pick-it-yourself orchards along both banks of the Hudson River.
A few orchards also offer pick-it-yourself table grapes, raspberries, pears and pumpkins.


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
The arresting story of Lincoln Swados's tragic life and death raises darker questions about the family and child-raising and about the causes of schizophrenia.
It seems that brother and sister were thrown together from the earliest years to form a tortuous, co-dependent bond.
It is clear that money is always available for various bail-outs or to "throw at the problem." But little conversation between the parents and children is recorded.
Parental panic and denial prevail.
Elizabeth's present freedom seems hard won.


Traffic Alert
Third Avenue Festival: Third Avenue bewteen 14th and 34th Streets will be closed today from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended tomorrow and on Tuesday in New York City.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Girl Taken From Site Of Roach Infestation
A 3-year-old girl was taken from her apartment after a police officer saw cockroaches crawling over her naked body, the police said.
The officer was investigating a domestic disturbance at the apartment Thursday morning when he noticed the youngster lying naked on a living room sofa, the police said.
Roaches were crawling over the girl's buttocks and genitals and on her head, the officer said.


State Furloughs Criticized as Hard to Get
A NEW Florio administration program that was intended to save taxpayer dollars by allowing state employees to take time off without pay is drawing criticism from some state workers and their union representatives.
The workers say they are unfairly being denied the right to take unpaid leaves despite the fact that by doing so they would be contributing to the overall savings envisioned in the program.


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
Swados uses her literary gifts to describe the anguish of losing a brother to schizophrenia.
This illness can be terrifying and sometimes resistant to treatment, as families stumble through the maze of mental health care systems.
Your readers should know, however, that state-of-the-art medications and psychosocial treatments are available now.
As in a cancer diagnosis, different outcomes are possible -- some offering new hope for patients and their families.
SUE MATORIN Director, Department of Social Work, Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic
New York, N.Y.


Political Talk
Like Bill, Like Chris
Republicans in Connecticut are hoping that United States Senator Christopher Dodd will become the next Bill Bradley.


ART
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
September


From Behind Bars, Ayala Sounds A Warning Aimed Right at Tyson
One night over dinner soon after he won the heavyweight title in 1986, Mike Tyson was recounting for an acquaintance his impressions of a junior middleweight named Tony Ayala.
His memories had been formed a few years earlier, when Tyson was an amateur not long removed from a juvenile-detention center in upstate New York and Ayala appeared headed for a shot at the world title.
As Tyson conjured up the fighter Ayala had been, his eyes grew wide and his voice took on a childlike awe.


No Noise Is Good Noise If Jets Succeed in Seattle
While preparing for his first road game of his second season, against the Seattle Seahawks today, Coach Bruce Coslet of the Jets had a very detailed checklist.
Check off quarterback Dave Krieg, out with a broken thumb from last week's season opener at New Orleans.
Check in Jeff Kemp, the somewhat rusty 11-year veteran who replaced him and almost pulled out the victory, but hasn't started since 1988.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recession Spurs Connecticut Tax Sales
AT 10 A.M. on Aug. 22, Virgilio's, a defunct restaurant on Highland Avenue, was auctioned by the Town of Cheshire to satisfy a delinquent tax bill of $45,900.
About 15 people showed up on the steps of Town Hall, but no one bid.
So the town has, in essence, bought the property for back taxes, but it cannot take title for a year.
In that time, the owner, a consortium of Bridgeport businessmen called Coastal Associates, or the mortgage lender, may redeem it by paying the taxes plus 1 1/2 percent interest a month, or 18 percent a year, mandated by state law.


Patty Hartigan Weds D. P. Malmquist
Patricia Elizabeth Hartigan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Hartigan of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Derek Phillip Malmquist, a son of Dr.
Carl P. Malmquist of Minneapolis and the late Arlyn Malmquist.
The Rev.
Thomas M. Foye, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Malmquist, who is 30 years old and known as Patty, graduated from Boston College and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
She is an account executive with the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency in San Francisco.
Her father is a deputy chief in the New York City Police Department.


Sunday Menu; Slightly Nutty, Slightly Bitter, All Chicken
A careful reading of this recipe will uncover the fact that it is just a variation on the classic raw tomato sauce on hot pasta.
But the grilled chicken adds some body as well as a little protein, and the arugula provides an appealing slightly nutty, slightly bitter flavor.
Italian Chicken and Pasta
3 quarts water  2 teaspoons olive oil  1 small clove garlic, pressed  8 ounces skinless, boneless chicken breasts, cut in narrow strips  1/4 teaspoon dried oregano  1/4 teaspoon dried thyme  Freshly ground black pepper to taste  6 ripe plum tomatoes, quartered  6 large fresh basil leaves  1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar  8 ounces fresh fettuccine  1 small bunch arugula, thoroughly washed  4 tablespoons freshly grated Parmigiano Reggiano.
1. Bring 3 quarts of water to a boil in a covered pot for pasta.
2. If using broiler, preheat.
3. Combine the oil and garlic in small bowl.
4.
Wash and dry the chicken and rub pieces with a little of the oil and garlic.
Sprinkle with the oregano, thyme and pepper on both sides.
5.
Combine the remaining oil-garlic mixture, the tomatoes, basil and vinegar in a food processor and process to chop tomatoes coarsely.
6.
If using a stovetop grill, prepare.
Broil or grill chicken just a couple of minutes on each side.
7. Cook fettuccine.
8.
Arrange greens on dinner plates; top with drained pasta.
Top with chicken and tomato sauce.
9. Sprinkle with cheese and serve.
Yield: 2 servings.


Jennifer Goldsmith to Wed in December
Mr. and Mrs.
Sanford L. Goldsmith of Roslyn Estates, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Stacey Goldsmith to Lewis T. Biblowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joshua Biblowitz of Lake Success, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Goldsmith, 26 years old, is a guidance counselor at Weber Junior High School in Port Washington, L.I., and is the dean of students at Cambridge University, England, for the Musiker Summer Discovery Program.
A graduate of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, she received a master's degree in counseling from Long Island University.
Her father is the director of United States sales and marketing for the Toronto publishing company Maclean Hunter Printing.
Her mother, Norma B. Goldsmith, is the director of personnel for the National Council of Jewish Women.


Don't Shun Clams, Just Cook Them Well
THERE is ample evidence that clams, as delicious as they may be, pose serious health hazards when eaten raw.
But that does not mean forswearing them.
It just means serving them well cooked.
Clams, like some other kinds of bivalves including mussels and oysters, constantly flush the water of their habitat through their bodies and easily pick up microorganisms.
Thorough cooking -- for about six minutes after the clams have opened -- can destroy any disease-bearing microorganisms in the clams as well as any that might be transmitted by the shucker.


Technology; A Pen Mightier Than the Password
In recent years, consumers have been issued a variety of identification numbers, passwords and code names for the growing array of electronic equipment in their lives.
Soon, however, a simple signature may be sufficient to use an automated teller machine or to sign on to a personal computer.
Signature verification software, a technology that companies have been trying to develop for years, will be offered by the end of October as an option in the NCR 3125 Notepad, a new hand-held computer that reads commands written on its screen with a special pen.


Elise Balboni Has Wedding
Elise Meredith Balboni and David Derby Saltonstall were married yesterday in Andover, Mass.
The Reverend Jack Smith, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Cochran Chapel at Phillips Academy.
Ms.
Balboni, who is keeping her name, is 27 years old.
The former budget director for the Massachusetts State Senate Ways and Means Committee, she graduated from Harvard College and is to begin an M.B.A. program at Stanford University this fall.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Balboni of Andover, Mass.
Her father owns a management consulting company bearing his name in Andover.
Her mother, Sheila Balboni, is the executive director of Community Day Care Centers in Lawrence, Mass.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17
How the Soviet Union will feed itself this winter is a growing concern, the Administration said, predicting a poor Soviet harvest, and concerned that financing problems might delay Western food aid.
Page A1


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
OUT AFTER DARK  By Hugh Leonard. Andre Deutsch/Trafalgar Square, $24.95.


The Cultivated Gardener; What Vegetable Besides Garlic Has a Fan Club?
The farmer in me gloats over garlic planting season.
Everybody else is out planting shrubs and trees and perennials, but I need a vegetable to put in the ground.
As much as I love flowers and shade trees, I'm partial to things I can eat.
And garlic just about tops the list.
I overdid it once.
For millenniums, garlic has been treasured for its medicinal properties, and one night I felt a cold coming on.
So I chopped up about 20 raw cloves and tossed them into a bowl of piping hot pasta and olive oil.
Comfort food.
I wolfed it down, watching a rerun of "Cheers." A few minutes later, I broke into a sweat.
My heart started beating faster.
I could almost see the waves of garlic fumes emanating from my skin.
I was thinking idly of calling 911 when I fell into a pasta coma -- and woke up the next morning cold-free.


Canada's Tax
To the Editor: I wish to respond to the article "Frustration of Getting a Refund on Canada's New Tax" (July 7).
While it is true that visitors to Canada will need to keep track of eligible receipts to claim their tax back, I would like to point out that the intent is to make a significant portion of a visit free of Canada's Goods and Services Tax.
Transportation services, which constitute up to 50 percent of the cost of a trip, are generally G.S.T.-free for visitors from outside Canada.
We have a rebate system for the G.S.T. paid on accommodation and on goods subsequently taken out of the country.


Who Is Hurt the Most By Defense Dept. Cuts
To the Editor:
"So Far, St. Louis Handles Arms Cuts" (Business Day, Aug. 8), the fifth and last article in your "Military-Industrial Upheaval" series, well describes the severity of Defense Department cuts in St.
Louis.
But your accompanying map rates Missouri as relatively unaffected by cuts.


Gooden Undergoes Surgery on Rotator Cuff
Dwight Gooden underwent nearly an hour of arthroscopic surgery yesterday to repair a partial tear of the rotator cuff and a tear of cartilage in his right shoulder.
Frank Cashen, the general manager of the Mets, conceded that the discovery of trouble with the rotator cuff came as a shock.
He said that it was impossible to predict Gooden's future perfectly, but that the organization had been told by its doctors that the star right-hander stood a solid chance of being ready to pitch by the start of next season.


Don't Shun Clams, Just Cook Them Well
THERE is ample evidence that clams, as delicious as they may be, pose serious health hazards when eaten raw.
But that does not mean forswearing them.
It just means serving them well cooked.
Clams, like some other kinds of bivalves including mussels and oysters, constantly flush the water of their habitat through their bodies and easily pick up microorganisms.
Thorough cooking -- for about six minutes after the clams have opened -- can destroy any disease-bearing microorganisms in the clams as well as any that might be transmitted by the shucker.


Holly Swan Wed in Maine
Holly Jean Swan, a daughter of Mrs.
Harmanus Swan Jr., of Wilton, Conn., and the late Mr.
Swan, was married yesterday to Thomas Edward Needham Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Needham of Bangor, Me.
The Rev.
Joseph David Stinson officiated at the Congregational Church in Boothbay Harbor, Me.
Ms.
Swan, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, is an account executive at Dumont, Moriarty &amp; Associates in Boston.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Mr.
Needham, 27, graduated cum laude from Bowdoin College and is completing studies for an M.B.A. degree at Babson College.


Washington Food Fair
Washington will host a festival during the Columbus Day weekend commemorating the 200th anniversary of the charter that authorized the establishment of the Federal city.
The outdoor event, called A Taste of D.C., will take place Sunday and Monday, Oct. 13 and 14, from 11 A.M. until 6 P.M. on Pennsylvania Avenue from 9th Street to 14th Street, N.W.
Primarily a food festival, A Taste of D.C. will include stands representing over 30 Washington restaurants, ranging from the American Cafe and the Hard Rock Cafe to Zen's Ethiopian Restaurant and Negril.


Eight Characters in Search of a Happy Ending in Dobbs Ferry
THE cast of characters in this tale includes a construction engineer, the producer of short-subject films, the owner of a video company, a part-time drama teacher, an out-of-work actress and a school secretary.
The plot revolves around how their lives become intertwined through a series of friendships, romances and even marriage.


Synergy's Long History
To the Editor:
"Will Intramural Squabbling Derail Debt-Ridden Sony?" (Aug. 11) says that "some analysts already dismiss synergy as the leveraging of the 90's -- another fad dreamed up by investment bankers." Attempts to forge corporate synergy, in fact, have a long history in the consumer electronics business, and at Sony.


Dr. Karen M. Matz Engaged to Dr. Joseph G. Bell
The engagement of Dr.
Karen Marie Matz to Dr.
Joseph Gerard Bell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Bell of Shenandoah, Pa., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Matz of Huntington Valley, Pa.
Dr.
Matz, 29 years old, is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the Tufts-New England Medical Center in Boston.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.D. degree from Hahnemann University.
Dr.
Bell, 30, is a fellow in maternal and fetal medicine at Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.D. from Thomas Jefferson University.


DANCE
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
September


Vatican and Albania Establishing Relations
The Vatican and Albania established diplomatic relations today, putting behind them more than 40 years of anti-church persecution by the Balkan country's former Stalinist Government.
The Vatican has now established relations with all countries of Eastern Europe and with Moscow.


Connors Surrenders to Courier; Edberg Topples Lendl
Just when it seemed that the magical mystery tour of Jimmy Connors was going to last forever -- or at least as long as the United States Open -- the 39-year-old miracle worker was ambushed by logic, reality and an unsentimental, unflinching siege inflicted by French Open champion Jim Courier in their sun-drenched semifinal on the Stadium Court yesterday.
"I don't know if we will ever see anybody like him again," said Courier, who nonetheless made certain the Open would see no more of its resident rabble-rouser.


Beth O'Reilly and Robert C. Junkin Are Married
Beth Ann O'Reilly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul T. O'Reilly of Belmont, Mass., was married there yesterday to Robert Caldwell Junkin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Junkin of Weston, Mass.
The Rev.
James McGowan officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of Mercy.
Mrs.
Junkin, 28 years old, graduated from Providence College.
She is a marketing manager at the IDX Corporation in Brookline, Mass.
Mr.
Junkin, 28, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in accounting from Northeastern University.
He is the assistant controller at O'Brien/Knight Medical Instruments in Cambridge, Mass.


Rail Europe
To the Editor: I look forward each year to your compilation of railpass rates and information.
This year (June 2) I discovered that I could not purchase a Scandinavian Railpass at the prices listed.
Because the phone number you offered was steadily busy, the Scandinavian Tourist Board gave me another number, for Eurocruise.
In response to a question, the Tourist Board confirmed my discovery at Eurocruise and other travel agencies: There is no source where a retail customer can avoid a $10 per order (not per pass) charge for rail passes.
Hence, the prices given to you for publication were false and misleading.
TIMOTHY H. BUCHMAN Teaneck, N.J.
Dag Scher of Rail Europe, general sales agent for Scandinavian Rail Passes, confirms that $10 is added to the cost of each order for all types of European rail passes.
The fee covers the cost of an 800 phone line and the Federal Express service used to ship tickets.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
THEATER BENEFIT
Some friends of the 10-year-old Yorktown Theater Company who have made it in show business have volunteered to help the Westchester troupe make it through the next decade by appearing at a benefit Saturday night.


'The Rooster Trapped in the Reptile Room'
The characters Lula and Sailor first appeared in Barry Gifford's novel "Wild at Heart" and then reappeared in David Lynch's movie of the same name.
As we visit them at home in Metairie, La., Sailor and Lula are nearing 50 years old.
But they remain open to new experiences, one of which is a first encounter with Faith No More, the funk-and-roll band whose collage of speed-metal, rap and hard rock represents the jumbled, invigorating 90's.
The group's new album, a follow-up to last year's "Real Thing" (Reprise), is set for release in January.
Lula heard the music before she opened the door.
She had been to a blankets-for-the-poor collection drive organized by the Rev.
Goodin Plenty at Bayou Lacombe, across the road from where the Crab Festival was taking place.
Lula Ripley, her friend Beany Thorn and several other women members of the Church of Reason, Redemption and Resistance to God's Detractors, had devoted their Saturday to collecting blankets and other donations to be distributed to the poor and homeless the next day at the tent show in Slidell.


Results Plus
HOCKEY  Finland Upsets Sweden in Canada Cup  Finland upset Sweden, the world champion, by a 3-1 score yesterday in Toronto and enhanced its chances of making the Canada Cup playoffs for the first time.
Petri Skriko, Janne Laukkanen and Teppo Numminen scored Finland's goals, and Markus Ketterer made 30 saves.
Nicklas Lidstrom scored Sweden's goal with three minutes remaining.
It was Finland's first international tournament victory over Sweden since the 1985 world championships in Prague.
Finland's record is 2-1-1, while Sweden dropped to 1-3-0 and is likely to miss the playoffs.
Sweden outshot Finland by 31-14 before a crowd of about 8,300.
GOLF Weibring Holds Canadian Open Lead  D. A. Weibring had 69 strokes yesterday in the third round of the Canadian Open in Oakville, Ontario, and one of them was perfect.
Weibring hit a 4-iron shot into the cup for a hole-in-one on the 181-yard seventh hole.
It was the third ace of his PGA Tour career and it helped him take a three-shot lead over Ken Green going into the final round today.
Weibring has a 54-hole total of 14-under-par 202.
Green shot a 68 yesterday and had birdies on two of the last three holes.
Jim Benepe and Brian Kamm, who were 1-2 going into the third round, dropped back into a tie for third at 206 with David Edwards, Fred Couples and Jim McGovern.
Ray Stewart kept alive his hopes of becoming the first Canadian winner in 37 years.
He shot a 70 and was at 207.(AP) Thompson Keeps Lead: Rocky Thompson bogeyed the final hole for the second straight day but still held a one-stroke lead after the second round of the PGA Senior Tour's First of America Classic in Grand Rapids, Mich.
Thompson shot a two-under-par 69 and was at seven-under 135, a shot in front of Harold Henning, Bob Reith, Lee Trevino and Gene Littler. (AP) Browne Does It Again: Pat Browne Jr., a 58-year-old New Orleans lawyer, won his 15th United States Blind Golfers Association national championship yesterday with a blistering 86-stroke round at Walt Disney World in Orlando, Fla.
That gave him a two-day total of 187, 20 strokes better than David Meador of Nashville, the last man to beat Browne. (AP) GYMNASTICS South African Athlete Breaks the Ice  Alan Daly, a 21-year-old college student, marked South Africa's return to international competition yesterday at the world gymnastics championships in Indianapolis.
South Africa's exile from the world sporting stage, a result of apartheid policies, technically ended three days earlier.
But it was up to Daly to transform policy into performance.
Competing in the opening round of compulsories, Daly became the first South African since 1966 to record a score at the world championships.
With a total score of 51.775, Daly stood in 74th place out of 101 gymnasts. (AP) HORSE RACING  Senor Speedy Ends 0-for-10 Skid  Senor Speedy, who lost the Forego Handicap to Housebuster by a nose two weeks ago, broke an 0-for-10 losing streak when he slipped through on the rail and won the Fall Highweight Handicap yesterday at Belmont.
The race assigns high weights to horses in a six-furlong sprint.
Senor Speedy, a 4-year-old colt owned by Robert Perez, made a late dash from fifth place to first to outrun Sunshine Jimmy by 2 1/2 lengths, with Diablo another length back.
The winner, carrying 131 pounds, dashed the six furlongs in 1:083/5and returned $10.20 for $2 to win.


Israel Dismayed by Bush Delay on Loans
Israel's leaders reacted today with a mixture of dismay and pugnacity over the confrontation with Washington that they fear has made their request for $10 billion in United States loan guarantees a hostage of a planned Middle East peace conference.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir suggested in a television interview that an American refusal to provide the aid was likely to affect the peace process, including the question of Israeli participation.


One Night It's Jeans; Another Night It's 40's Glamour
Clara Hale, the 86-year-old founder of Hale House, a Harlem home for babies born addicted to crack, was the guest of honor at a Sag Harbor, L.I., fund-raising dinner and jazz performance on Aug. 31 in the American Legion Hall.
On Monday, a Western-dress hoedown was held in Southampton under a series of tents decorated by Macy's with bales of hay, hurricane lamps and sunflowers.
The buffet dinner and square dance on the estate of Gillis M. Addison benefited the 55-year-old Southampton Association's scholarship fund, which provides scholarships for students on the South Fork of Long Island.
Ralph Lauren and his wife, Ricky, headed the committee of "trail bosses" and "bronco busters."


Elizabeth Rosen Marries J. P. Gleason
The marriage of Elizabeth Jane Rosen and Joseph Patrick Gleason took place yesterday at Beechwood in Newport, R.I.
The Rev.
Richard A. Dannenfelser, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gleason, 29 years old, is the daughter of Sharon J. Rosen of Providence and Narragansett, R.I., and Harris N. Rosen of Providence and Wakefield, R.I.
She graduated with honors from the Parsons School of Design.
She is an art director at Lowe &amp; Partners, a New York advertising agency.
Her father is the president of the School House Candy Company and the Rosbro Plastics Corporation, both in Pawtucket, R.I.
Her mother, Sharon J. Rosen, directs an investment program at Brown University.


Et Tu, Candiotti? Cry Indians After Losing To Former Mate
Tom Candiotti pitched a five-hitter today in his first start against his former Cleveland teammates and lowered his American League-leading earned run average to 2.34 as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Indians, 4-1.
Devon White matched his career high with four hits, Kelly Gruber homered and Roberto Alomar doubled in two runs for the first-place Blue Jays, who have won four straight over all and 11 in a row against Cleveland.


Sunday Dinner; Close to Lincoln Center, More Options for Diners
Not long ago, patrons of Lincoln Center complained that finding quality dining nearby was a challenge.
Now, opportunities abound as ambitious restaurants have taken root all over the neighborhood.
Here are three good bets, all within a short walk of Lincoln Center.
Andiamo
1991 Broadway, near 67th Street; (212) 362-3315 -- This towering, attractive restaurant just two blocks north of Lincoln Center is hidden down a corridor behind a casual street-front spot called Cafe Bel Canto.
The dining room is a high-ceilinged loft with a balcony that can be reached by an iron staircase.
Track lights illuminate abstract paintings and a papier-mache piano player.


Songs of the 50's and 60's in 'Beehive'
"BEEHIVE" (the hairdo) is a symbol of, and a sincere salute to, girl groups (the Shirelles, the Shangri-Las) and the girls without groups (Brenda Lee, Leslie Gore) who, with their songs, shamelessly brought the inanities of the 1950's right into the next decade -- that is, until the cause-inspired music of the 60's put all that to rest, for a time.
Now, with the recurring psychological ramifications and the increasing commercial lure of nostalgia, it appears that the B-word and all it represents never quite went away.
It was simply intimidated by guitars and streams of long hair.
And even if it did go away for a while, it keeps coming back with a vengeance, and with more cans of hairspray, no matter the ozone layer.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


Alicia B. Altman, Librarian, Weds
Alicia Barbara Altman and David Peabody Southwell were married yesterday St.
Gabriel's Episcopal Church in Marion, Mass., by the Rev.
Ernest W. Cockrell.
The bride is the daughter of Dorothy Freking Altman of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and the late Jerome J. Altman.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Southwell of London.


Lauren B. Sinai Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Sinai of Lexington, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lauren Beth Sinai, to Daniel Robert Aaronson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Aaronson of Lexington.
A wedding next September is planned.
Ms.
Sinai, 23 years old, was until recently a reporter for Money Magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the chief economist for the Boston Company, and heads its subsidiary, the Boston Company Economic Advisors in New York and Boston.
Her mother, Lee Sinai, taught at the Lexington Montessori School and was the administrative assistant to the academic vice president of Tufts University.


Delos Wilson Rentzel Dies at 81; Helped Develop Airline Industry
Delos Wilson Rentzel, a leader in the development of American aviation as a Federal official and an airline executive, died Friday at St.
Anthony's Hospital in Oklahoma City.
He was 81 years old.
His death was caused by pneumonia and complications of a stroke, his family said.


Selling Many Ways for Customers to Save the World
Saving the world by the way you shop, the simple version: household cleaner made from vinegar and citrus juice, cat litter pellets made from recycled paper.
The less simple version: a purse made from an old tire.


Wine; A Wine of One's Own
WHAT WITH HIKING, BIRD WATCHING, mushrooming, wine making, gliding and theater-going, Cathy Corison is a woman of varied and consuming interests.
Some are more consuming than others, but one alone stands out, and it isn't bird watching.
Before everything else, Corison is a wine maker.
She's been at it for 15 years now, working in the Napa Valley in California, but for the first time she may be on the verge of stardom, or what passes for it in the wine world.
She has just released the second vintage of her own Corison cabernet sauvignon to enthusiastic reviews.


Noted With Pleasure
The Company of Writers
Reflecting on the influence of earlier generations of poets on her work, Amy Clampitt argues that a sense of tradition, of a poetic community, is essential to the art.
This is from the title piece in her collection "Predecessors, et Cetera" (University of Michigan, paper).


Soviet Official Calls for New Economic Community
The head of a commission running the Soviet economy called today for an economic agreement embracing former Soviet republics and Eastern European nations.
The official, Ivan S. Silayev, head of a temporary economic management committee set up by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev after the failed coup last month, said, "We believe we will have a similar arrangement to what you have now," referring to European Community cooperation on trade and economic policies.


Lynn Dadourian, Lawyer, Is Wed
Lynn Alesandra Dadourian and Dikran Nazart Barsamian were married yesterday at Holy Martyrs Armenian Church in Bayside, Queens, by the Rev.
Karnig Hallajian.
The bride, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander A. Dadourian of Plandome, L.I.
The bridegroom, 26, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dikran Barsamian of Leonia, N.J.


Insuring Against Pitfalls If a Trip Must Be Canceled
IT has been the kind of year that throws curves at the chart of normal expectations.
Wars, coups d'etat, air crashes, train derailments, a hurricane, and cruise ship fires, crashes and sinkings transfixed the world.
The impact spread wide, and thousands of people tore up their travel plans.
The continuing climate of uncertainty has begun to teach leisure travelers never to lay out more than they can afford to lose and to compute the premiums for trip-cancellation insurance into their basic travel costs.
Some travel agencies are even asking clients to sign a waiver if they reject cancellation insurance as part of a nonrefundable tour package.


Often-Neglected Attics Need Yearly Inspection
MOST attics get little attention, but they should be inspected at least once a year.
Spring is the best time to do this, because any repairs that may require working on the roof are easily done during warm weather and there is little pressure to hurry the work before winter arrives.
If your attic has gone without a spring inspection, it is a good idea to check it in the fall.
This averts possible problems, the majority of which are most likely to occur during the winter.


From Behind Bars, Ayala Sounds A Warning Aimed Right at Tyson
One night over dinner soon after he won the heavyweight title in 1986, Mike Tyson was recounting for an acquaintance his impressions of a junior middleweight named Tony Ayala.
His memories had been formed a few years earlier, when Tyson was an amateur not long removed from a juvenile-detention center in upstate New York and Ayala appeared headed for a shot at the world title.
As Tyson conjured up the fighter Ayala had been, his eyes grew wide and his voice took on a childlike awe.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Times Magazine last Sunday with an article about the airline industry misidentified the airport in which passengers were shown waiting.
They were at the Dallas-Fort Worth airport, waiting for an American Airlines flight, not the Pittsburgh airport, waiting for a USAir flight.


Black Marchers in Protest At Hynes's Summer Home
More than 100 chanting black marchers led by the Rev.
Al Sharpton carried the Crown Heights racial protest to a private beach community in the Rockaways section of Queens yesterday to stage a peaceful but noisy demonstration at the summer home of the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes.
"Hynes, Hynes, have you heard? This is not Johannesburg!" the marchers shouted outside the prosecutor's two-story retreat on Jamaica Bay in Breezy Point, a cooperative community whose residents are mostly white.
It is guarded by a private security force and surrounded by Gateway National Park on the western tip of the Rockaways.


Often-Neglected Attics Need Yearly Inspection
MOST attics get little attention, but they should be inspected at least once a year.
Spring is the best time to do this, because any repairs that may require working on the roof are easily done during warm weather and there is little pressure to hurry the work before winter arrives.
If your attic has gone without a spring inspection, it is a good idea to check it in the fall.
This averts possible problems, the majority of which are most likely to occur during the winter.


Anger, Hostility and Coronary Disease
INITIALLY, Dr.
Lynda H. Powell planned to specialize in human behavior and its relationship to weight loss.
But after spending a frantic day preparing for a dinner party, she said she found she had a new understanding of the effects of stress, and so decided to make that topic her specialty.
The holder of an undergraduate degree in sociology from the University of Massachusetts and a master's degree in counseling psychology from the University of Colorado, Dr.
Powell earned a doctorate in psychology from Stanford University.


Business Diary/September 1-6
COMPANIES Why It Took So Long to Expose B.C.C.I.


New York State Moves Closer to Tougher Emissions Code
New York State has moved a step closer to adopting auto-emissions regulations as strict as California's: A justice of the State Supreme Court has rejected a lawsuit intended to block the new rules.
The suit had been filed by the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association and the big three automakers, among others.
They had argued that adopting the California standards was so important a step that it could not be taken without action by the State Legislature.


Baltics' Independence Recognized by Beijing
China announced today that it had recognized the three Baltic republics, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, which were formally granted independence from the Soviet Union on Friday.
An official statement, carried by the New China News Agency, quoted China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, as saying that the Chinese Government was "ready to develop friendly relations and cooperation with the three countries."


Same Newspaper, Different Name


Patricia Dysart, Designer, Weds
Patricia Chapman Dysart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh Dysart Jr. of Needham, Mass., was married yesterday to Bradley John MacKenzie, a son of Amanda Fisk MacKenzie of Washington and John P. MacKenzie of New York.
The Rev.
Benjamin Lentz performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in South Dartmouth, Mass.
The bride, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, is a senior designer at Lapham/Miller Associates, a communications design company in Andover, Mass.
She graduated from the Massachusetts College of Art.
Her father, a certified public accountant, retired as the managing partner of Touche Ross in Boston.


Maryellen Freese Wed To Steven J. Podlovits
Maryellen Joan Freese, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Freese of Dix Hills, L.I., was married yesterday to Steven John Podlovits, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Podlovits of Middle Village, Queens.
The Rev.
Edward Scharfenberger performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew Roman Catholic Church at Dix Hills.
The bride, 28 years old, is a mortgage representative for Chemical Bank in Jericho, L.I.
She is studying business at Long Island University.
Her father, who recently retired, was the vice chairman and chief financial officer of Grumman in Bethpage, L.I..


Fashion; Jump Starts
ORFEH, THE SINGING HALF OF THE RHYTHM and blues duo Or-N-More, whose first album will be released by EMI this month, admits that her towering hair, close-fitting clothes and even the practiced pout on her lips have fashionable antecedents.
But while owing a debt to professional teases like Madonna and Brigitte Bardot, Orfeh's look is all her own.
"I'm a runway model from the gutter," she says of her giddy pastiche of thrift shop and designer fashions.
"My style is real. It's not something you can buy."
For the people on these pages, style is nothing less than a signature, the outward expression of the singular drive that will earn them a place in the spotlight this season.
Gini Alhadeff, whose new art and literary magazine, XXIst Century, will be published in October in conjunction with Rizzoli, and her advisor, Francesco Pellizzi, the editor of RES, an anthropological journal, cultivate a patrician simplicity.
In Pellizzi's case, he jokes, the plainness borders on the "priestly."


Streetscapes: The McFarlane-Bredt House; The Old Yacht Club On Staten Island
IT'S like a race between two glaciers, each moving imperceptibly.
On the one hand are the forces of nature -- gravity, wood rot, water penetration, giant vines; on the other, a somewhat equivocal desire by New York City to restore a picturesque but hidden Staten Island landmark.
The house, the McFarlane-Bredt House, at 30 Hylan Boulevard in the Clifton section, is a waterfront villa from which New York Yacht Club members watched the first defense of the America's Cup in New York Harbor in 1870.


Q and A
Mobile Home Lot Question: I live in a mobile-home community on Staten Island.
I own my home but rent the land it occupies.
I recently received a notice from the owner saying rents would go up because of rising taxes.
Residents of the community do not have written leases, but are there any laws that the landlord must follow when it comes to rent increases for mobile-home lots? . . .
Frances Buonvicino, Staten Island.


EXPERTS WORRIED OVER FOOD SUPPLY FOR SOVIET WINTER
Predicting a poor Soviet harvest, and concerned that financing problems may delay Western food aid, Administration and private experts on agriculture are increasingly worried about how the Soviet Union will feed itself this winter.
The consensus among the experts is that the Soviet harvest will be as much as 25 percent smaller than last year's.
Crops have been gathered and sold to central authorities late, if at all, partly because of the political turmoil in the wake of the failed coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Heidi Farrish Is Married
Heidi Farrish, a daughter of Gail Farrish of Boston and Dr.
Grover Farrish of Hyannis, Mass., was married yesterday to George Turver Laub, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Geroge W. Laub of Buffalo.
The Rev.
John Shule, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Federated Church of Edgartown, Mass.
The couple both received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Virginia.
Mrs.
Laub, 28 years old, is a sales manager for IMRS, a software company in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
The bridegroom, 29 and a graduate of Colgate University, is a mergers and acquisitions manager in New York at the Toronto Dominion Bank.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Indoor Tropics
Q.
We have an empty shelf near our bathtub.
Although this area is bright, it does not receive direct sun.
Assuming we add a lattice for support, what climbing plants could we grow? -- Jan O'Donnell, Hempstead, L.I.


Miss DiMartino Has a Wedding
Janet Lynn DiMartino and David Scott Delany were married yesterday at Most Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in East Hampton, L.I., by the Rev.
Donald J. Desmond.
The bride, 34 years old, is a daughter of Mrs.
I.
Jerome Cohen and a stepdaughter of Mr.
Cohen of Harrisburg, Pa.
Her father was the late Peter E. DiMartino.
The bridegroom, 30, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Graham Delany of Charlottesville, Va., and East Hampton.


Air Fares
To the Editor: Someone explain to me the following: Airline: Northwest, Class: First, Round Trip.
Fare from New York to Akron (391 miles) $920.
Fare from New York to Minneapolis (1,015 miles) $1,092.
So 391 miles comes out to $2.35 a mile and 1,015 miles comes out to $1.08 a mile.
Where is the logic?
Or, try Continental and: New York to Akron, Y One Pass, Unrestricted, One Way $310, Three-day advance purchase $214.
New York to Cleveland, Y One Pass, Unrestricted $296, No advance purchase available.


It's Sunday Afternoon and Here Come the Blahs
It is Sunday afternoon, sometime past 3 o'clock.
The weekend hourglass is spilling its treasure.
Only Sunday night remains before the Monday-morning blahs -- return to the office, school or work.


Swarthmore New Orientation Seeks to Promote Racial Tolerance
In an effort to foster a stronger sense of understanding on a campus that was divided over racial issues last semester, Swarthmore College is involving people from all sectors of the school in freshman orientation seminars.
Last week, employees from the physical plant and security, departmental secretaries, religious advisers, students and professors met in groups of about eight to discuss Vincent Harding's "Hope in History," a book that argues that the civil rights struggles of the 1960's demonstrated the importance of working together for social justice.


Focus: Chicago; A Housing Surge Gives Tenants the Edge
WITH the addition of nearly 4,000 units in six new downtown rental apartment complexes in the last 18 months, tenants are now dictating the terms here.
Competition is forcing leasing agents to offer a variety of inducements, from free health-club memberships to months of free rent and guarantees of limited increases at renewal time.


Dollar Plunges On Jobs Data
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
135.65
136.83
140.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7145
1.7470
1.5685
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1393
1.1416
1.1633
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7185
1.6809
1.8933
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$348.90
$348.00
$390.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Katherine DeGroot Is Wed
Katherine J. DeGroot, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leslie J. DeGroot of Chicago, was married yesterday to Jon Montgomery Harris, a son of Judith Harris of Marin, Calif., and Jack Harris of Chicago.
The Rev.
Charles Bailey officiated at the Dutch Reformed Church in Fort Miller, N.Y.
The bride, who is 35 years old and is keeping her name, is an artist.
Her father heads the thyroid study unit at the University of Chicago, where he is a professor of medicine.
Mr.
Harris, 33, is the president of Repro-Tech Construction in Fort Edward, N.Y.
His father is the president of the Harris Steel Company in Cicero, Ill.


A la Carte: An Encore for an Inn's Reincarnation
PETER'S INN is back for an encore.
In 1988, something special occurred at this former country-and-western bar on Laurel Road, near the Long Island Rail Road in East Northport.
A European-trained chef, Bruce Grassley, who had worked at fancy French restaurants in Manhattan and Chicago as well as on the Continent, set up shop.


Soviet Notebook; Phones Are No Longer on Party Line
In the three weeks since Moscow journeyed from coup back to crisis, the most tangible change in the city's environment, at least by small-talk consensus, is that the telephone lines seem clearer.
Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian republic, who led the overthrow of the apparat, said the reason was that the state's legion of K.G.B. bug-masters had been driven from their earphones.
With fewer parties on the line, the connection is better, at least on some phones.


Wall Street; A.D.R.'s Multiply in the Rush to Diversify Abroad
The barometer is rising for A.D.R.'s, the vehicle by which American investors can own foreign stocks.
According to the Bank of New York, the largest single issuer of A.D.R.'s, or American depository receipts, trading volume on United States exchanges rose to a record half-year high of 2.6 billion A.D.R.'s valued at $42.8 billion.
It was a 37 percent increase over the first six months of 1990.


Regina Termine Has a Wedding
Regina Anne Termine, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Termine of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Dr.
John Anthony McPhilliamy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick W. McPhilliamy of Little Neck, Queens.
The Rev.
Vincent J. Termine, an uncle of the bride, officiated at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Roman Catholic Church in Forest Hills.
Mrs.
McPhilliamy graduated from Pine Manor College.
She manages her father's office in Glendale, Queens.
Dr.
Termine is an internist and the director of medicine at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Flushing, Queens.


Foot Patrols And Public Safety
I was invited to attend the meeting of the Suffolk County Community Alliance to "address the problems of COPE, foot patrols and public safety"  [ "Grudgingly, Police Agree to Givebacks in Suffolk," Aug. 4 ] .
To hear the remarks of some community leaders, you would think Long Island was the South Bronx!
I am not at all convinced that elimination of foot patrols and COPE units will lead to a rash of crime and vandalism.
No one wants street gangs to roam through our business districts.
No one wants our quality of life to be disrupted by an impotent police force.
Our taxes being what they are, no one should expect less than consummate police service.
Police Commissioner Guido's solution is to hire 300 more policemen in October, then another 200 in the spring, revamp here and expand there; at a cost of $45 million -- only $100 per household, he says.
The problem is, his $100 is added to hundreds of increases for myriad programs and expenses of other levels of government, and our already absurd tax bill soars even higher!
Patrick Halpin is right when he said at the meeting that the line on taxes must be held.
Period.
Those crying the loudest represent the special interest of the public-sector employee, who must come to the reality that the public pays them and the public is broke!


PLACES
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
ALICE TULLY HALL . . . 875-5050  Lincoln Center
AMERICAN JEWISH THEATER . . . 633-9797  307 W. 26th St.
AMERICAN PLACE THEATER . . . 840-3074  111 W. 46th St.
AMERICAN PRIMITIVE GALLERY . . . 966-1530  596 Bway, at Houston St.
BEACON THEATER . . . 496-7070  Bway at 74th St.
BROADHURST THEATER
Telecharge . . . 239-6200  235 W. 44th St.
BROOKLYN ACADEMY
OF MUSIC . . . 718-636-4100  30 Lafayette Ave., Bklyn.
BROOKLYN MUSEUM . . . 718-638-5000  200 Eastern Pkwy, Bklyn.
CARNEGIE HALL AND  WEILL RECITAL HALL . . . 247-7800  Seventh Ave. at 57th St.
CIRCLE IN THE SQUARE
1633 Bway, at 50th St.
Telecharge . . . 239-6200  Downtown: 159 Bleecker St. . . . 254-6330
CIRCLE REPERTORY CO. . . . 924-7100  99 Seventh Ave. S.
CITY CENTER . . . 581-7907  131 W. 55th St.
CSC REPERTORY . . . 677-4210  136 E. 13th St.
DANCE THEATER WORKSHOP . . . 924-0077  219 W. 19th St.
AARON DAVIS HALL . . . 650-7100  City College, Convent Ave. at 135th St.
AVERY FISHER HALL . . . 875-5030  Lincoln Center
FLORENCE GOULD HALL . . . 355-6160  55 E. 59th St.
INTERNATIONAL CENTER  OF PHOTOGRAPHY . . . 860-1777  1130 Fifth Ave., at 94th St.
Midtown: Sixth Ave. at 43d St.
JOYCE THEATER . . . 242-0800  175 Eighth Ave., at 19th St.
MADISON SQUARE GARDEN AND
THE PARAMOUNT . . . 465-6741  Seventh Ave. at 32d St.
LA MAMA, ANNEX THEATER . . . 475-7710  74A E. Fourth St.
MANHATTAN THEATER CLUB . . . 645-0905  City Center, 131 W. 55th St.
MERKIN CONCERT HALL . . . 362-8719  129 W. 67th St.
METROPOLITAN MUSEUM
(Exhibition information) . . . 879-5500  (Concert information) . . . 570-3949  Fifth Ave. at 82d St.
METROPOLITAN OPERA HOUSE . . . 362-6000  Lincoln Center
ROBERT MILLER GALLERY . . . 980-5454  41 E. 57th St
MILLER THEATER . . . 854-7799  Bway at 116th St.
MINSKOFF THEATER
Ticket Master . . . 307-4100  Bway at 45th St.
MUSEUM OF AMERICAN
FOLK ART . . . 595-9533  Columbus Ave. at 65th St.
MUSEUM OF MODERN ART . . . 708-9400  11 W. 53d St.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF DESIGN . . . 369-4880  1083 Fifth Ave., at 89th St.
NEW YORK STATE THEATER . . . 870-5570  Lincoln Center
92D STREET Y  At Lex. Ave. . . . 415-5440
PLAYWRIGHTS HORIZONS
Ticket Central . . . 279-4200  416 W. 42d St.
PUBLIC THEATER . . . 598-7150  425 Lafayette St.
QUEENS MUSEUM . . . 718-592-2405  Flushing Meadow Park, Flushing
RADIO CITY MUSIC HALL . . . 247-4777  Sixth Ave. at 50th St.
ROUNDABOUT THEATER COMPANY
After Sept. 24 . . . 869-8400
Criterion Center, 1530 Bway, at 45th St.
SONNABEND GALLERY . . . 966-6160  420 W. Bway.
TOWN HALL . . . 840-2824  123 W. 43d St.
WHITNEY MUSEUM  OF AMERICAN ART . . . 570-3633  945 Madison Ave., at 75th St.


Flights To Hawaii Are Declining
Despite the recent boom in hotel construction in Hawaii, the number of flights to Hawaii from the United States mainland is declining.
Air seat availability has dropped by 8.4 percent since last year because of service cuts, according to a survey by Travel Weekly, an industry newspaper.
This month, Pan Am is discontinuing its daily 747 flight from Los Angeles, which provided 140,000 air seats a year.
Continental and America West Airlines are also planning service cuts for the fall.
Hawaiian Airlines has canceled over half its flights since last year.
United expects to fill in some, but not all, of the gap.


Laura Lush and S. L. Paulus of WCBS-TV Wed
Laura Lush, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Lush of Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Stephen L. Paulus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence F. Paulus of New York.
Judge William Maher of the Peekskill City Court officiated at the Tarrytown (N.Y.) Conference Center.
The couple both work in the news department of WCBS-TV in New York.
Mrs.
Paulus, 28 years old, is a production assistant and an associate director.
She graduated cum laude from Brooklyn College.
Her father, who is retired, was a printer at The New York Times for 31 years.


Caroline Minot, Decoupage Artist, Wed
Caroline Mary Minot, a daughter of George R. Minot of Santa Barbara, Calif., and the late Helen Minot, was married yesterday to George deBenneville Bell Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bell of Gladwyne, Pa.
The Rev.
Frederick W. Rapp performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Bridgehampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Bell, 35 years old, and her husband, 34, graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
A decoupage artist, she owns Minot Designs, a company selling hand-decorated lacquered enamel ware, in New York.
She received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of the State Street Bank and Trust Company in Boston.


THE NEW SEASON: THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
September


French Style at an Inn in Lakeville
WHEN the Wake Robin Inn in Lakeville changed hands several years ago, a new chef was installed.
At the same time, the dining room altered its appearance, even reinventing itself with a new name, Savarin, that spoke presumably of its serious intentions.
At that time, we found the menu, presentation and food merited a rating of Very Good, with the caveat that time would iron out the slow service and minor shakiness in preparation.
We looked forward to a later visit, expecting to find things even better.
It's taken about three years to wend our way back to the Wake Robin Inn.
In the interim, we learned that there have been several changes of chef though the French influence continues.
The restaurant is much as we remembered it, with the same simulated rose moire wallpaper, handsome breakfront sideboard against one wall, white brick fireplace, floral-patterned draperies, well-spaced tables and soft lighting.
To our surprise, the service problems we had encountered were still present, and perhaps even intensified: youthful, well-intentioned but insufficiently trained servers.
Plates were removed before all diners were finished, and silverware and water had to be requested.
In a pricey restaurant like this, where starters run from $5 to $11 and entrees average $22.50, a diner feels entitled to service befitting the restaurant's intent and price structure.


Viola Makes His Pitch, and the Braves Hammer It
Frank Viola stood on the mound yesterday at Shea Stadium, but he might as well have been seated at the negotiating table.
The Mets had made their medical statement at the start of the afternoon, laying put the details of the surgery performed on Dwight Gooden and Sid Fernandez, and then it was left to Viola to make his statement.
Think hard, Viola could have told the Mets with a strong outing.
Think long and hard before I'm gone, Viola, a free agent after the season, might have said quite loudly with a shutout.
Viola's agent was in the stands.
General Manager Frank Cashen was in the team's private box.


'A Whole Different Ball Game'
To the Editor:
Although I have been part of the publishing industry for only a few years (as publisher of the Carol Publishing Group), I do know that a mixed review -- such as the one written by James Edward Miller of Marvin Miller's book, "A Whole Different Ball Game: The Sport and Business of Baseball" (July 14) -- is better than a bad review.


Hegelian Dialectical Model With Mustache
With his signature mustache and bug eyes, Salvador Dali (1904-89) was perhaps his own most outrageous creation.
Even before he became synonymous with crass commercialism, this pioneer of Surrealism was among the century's most controversial and colorful figures.
Although his very popularity and buffoonery probably hurt his critical reputation, to all evidence Dali's work has been neglected and dismissed by the art establishment.
Two years after his death, the arrival of DALI: The Salvador Dali Museum Collection (Bulfinch/Little, Brown, $45) serves as a reminder that the range and caliber of his earlier painting were indeed overshadowed by the countless scribbles and blank-page signings he merchandised as "Art" in the later part of his career.
Offering 92 paintings and 68 drawings and watercolors spanning the years 1917 to 1974, the book also includes a foreword by A. Reynolds Morse, the owner of the collection, and an introductory essay by Robert S. Lubar, a professor at the Institute of Fine Arts in New York City.
Though it may be true, as Mr.
Lubar says, that "Dali's paintings offer more than a clever transcription of his systematized confusion," Mr.
Lubar's own rather dense prose offers less.
With Dali's "adherence to a Hegelian dialectical model" and his "using vision to discredit reality" offered by way of explanation, it's still hard to apprehend what Mr.
Lubar means when he claims that "Dali establishes a substitute world whose appearance is mediated by volition." While apparently Dali was never really taken seriously enough, Mr.
Lubar inadvertently demonstrates that it's equally possible to take him too seriously at the same time.
As handsomely reproduced in these pages, the pictures themselves provide the best testimony for Mr.
Morse's contention that Dali should be recognized "as a major factor in twentieth-century art."


Field of Maybes Is a Spirit Lifter For Democrats
The race for the Democratic Presidential nomination finally lurched to life in Iowa this weekend with a fledgling class of potential candidates, a lot of full-throated Bush-bashing and an almost palpable relief among Democratic loyalists that their party was fighting back.
"We have, finally, candidates who are willing to take on George Bush and point out what his vulnerabilities are," said John Roehrick, the chairman of the Iowa Democratic Party, as he joined with more than 500 Democrats to cheer on the potential standard-bearers in Sioux City on Friday night.
"For far too long we've been silent."


Pamela Treiber Wed To Lyman Baldwin 3d
Pamela Hope Treiber, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard F. Treiber of Old Brookville, L.I., was married yesterday in Glen Cove, L.I., to Lyman Jeffrey Baldwin 3d, the son of Mrs. and Mrs.
Baldwin Jr. of Naples, Fla.
The Rev.
Richard D. McCall performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Baldwin, 28 years old, graduated from Bentley College.
She is the commercial property supervisor of the Treiber Insurance Group, an agency in Garden City, L.I., that is owned by her father.


Laura Sank Wed To William Gump
Laura Sidney Sank, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis Sank of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to William Howard Gump, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank E. Gump of Summit.
The Rev.
Allen Tinker, a Baptist minister, performed the interfaith ceremony in the courtyard of the Beacon Hill Club.
Mrs.
Gump, 27 years old, is a manager of public policy for Pfizer in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Rochester, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in public policy from Columbia University.
She was a Jacob Javits Congressional Fellow in Washington.
Her father is a pediatrician in Summit and Warren, N.J.
Her mother, Phyllis Sank, is a public-relations consultant in Summit.


Correction
A picture caption on Aug. 18 with a review of Norris Houghton's "Entrances &amp; Exits: A Life In and Out of the Theater" reversed the identities of the two men shown.
The person on the left was Norris Houghton; on the right was T. Edward Hambleton.


No Answer as Georgia Again Asks for Recognition
Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, the President of Georgia, said today that he had made another appeal to Soviet leaders to recognize his small Caucausian republic's independence proclamation, but that he had received no answer.
Mr.
Gamsakhurdia said Georgia sent the request to the new executive State Council, consisting of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the leaders of other Soviet republics, on Friday.


INSIDE
Peaceful Brooklyn Protest
More than 100 blacks marched to the summer home of the District Attorney to protest his handling of the Crown Heights car accident.
Page 28.
Anti-Abortion Doctors


Leyla Turkkan, Executive, Weds
Leyla Naile Turkkan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Attila Turkkan of New York, was married yesterday to Alexander William Smallens, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Smallens 2d of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Polk, a minister of the United Church of Christ, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Smallens, 30 years old, founded and heads Set to Run, a public-relations company in New York and Los Angeles.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father is the president of Overseas Development Corporation, an import-export company in New York.
Her great-great grandfather was Suphi Pasha, the minister of education and justice to the Ottoman Sultan Abdul Al-Aziz.


Soviet Notebook; Hasidic Sit-in at Library
A group of Hasidic Jews of the Lubavitcher sect occupied the giant Lenin Library today, demanding the release of thousands of manuscripts seized from their group 70 years ago.
But the library's head said he could not hand over the books, since that might set a precedent for other claimants to the state's archives.


AREA JOBLESSNESS CONTINUES TO RISE
August unemployment in New York City neared double-digit levels and reached its highest mark in seven years, 9.3 percent, according to the Labor Department.
The number of unemployed was 50 percent higher than the level a year earlier and was also significantly higher than the city's July jobless rate, 8.8 percent.


Last Rites; Gorbachev and Friends Cut a New Deal
"THE absenteeism and indifference of the masses can be explained by the fact that the masses are tired of words and resolutions," Lenin wrote on the eve of his revolution, the one that finally received last rites last week.
It was replaced by a jerry-built collective of executives from the sovereignty-starved republics of the withered Soviet empire.
Empowered by fresh words and resolutions, a government entity called the State Council was invented in a few days, with authority supposed to be rooted not in the Kremlin but in a scattering of provincial capitals.
Lenin's plaint about the missing people was no less true as the new State Council was brought into the world, an anxious creature sounding of good intentions, but wrapped in some familiar authoritarian swaddling.
The people were nowhere to be found in the latest lightning mix of words and resolutions, as the major republic leaders moved in with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to replace the atrophied Kremlin center with their own attempt at loosely federated authority.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


Sightseeing on the Oberland Express
THE ceremonies in July to inaugurate the new 509-yard tunnel on the Montreux-Oberland-Bernois cog railway, known as the M.O.B., began at Rougemont, one of the little chalet-like stations along the single track line that heaves up from Montreux on Lake Geneva through Alpine valleys for 39 lavishly scenic miles.
The M.O.B.'s own brass band, made up of ticket-sellers, repairmen and guards, played "Onward, Christian Soldiers," "When the Saints Go Marching In" and other un-Helvetian tunes.
The station hotel's owner, Ernest Cottier, passed around thin, stemless glasses of Mont-Sur-Rolle white wine.
Railway officials, local dignitaries and the band then boarded a shiny new three-car train for a two-mile ride to the tunnel, whose neat walls include some stones from the ancient ruined Chateau de Vanel near its site.
The director of the line, Edgar Styger, presided over ribbon-cutting rituals at both ends of the tunnel.
Then the train rolled on, through steep meadows and mountain vistas, to a tiny chalet hotel near the end of the line, where a five-course luncheon was served, with mushrooms called "les morilles du tunnel."


A Big Victory, A Bigger Tantrum
To the Sports Editor:
One could not have asked for a more exciting tennis match than the recent Jimmy Connors-Aaron Krickstein five setter.
What a heroic effort by an aging champion!
How sad that for this viewer and I'm sure for many others it was so seriously marred, by Connor's behavior.
His language, both uttered and muttered while repeatedly berating the umpire was uncalled for, obscene, and unpardonable.
His gestures no less so.


Jeanne Reynolds to Wed John D. Daus
Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Hamilton 4th of Richmond have announced November wedding plans for Mrs.
Hamilton's daughter, Jeanne Elizabeth Burnham Reynolds, and John Djem Daus, a son of Capt. and Mrs.
Rudolph Halouk Daus of Alexandria, Va.
Miss Reynolds is also a daughter of the late Julian Sargeant Reynolds, a lieutenant governor of Virginia.
Miss Reynolds, 28, graduated from St.
Catherine's School and Duke University.
She owns J. E. B. Reynolds Corporation, a home services agency in Alexandria.
She is the granddaughter of Mrs.
Richard S. Reynolds Jr. of Richmond and the late Mr.
Reynolds, who was chairman of Reynolds Metals in Richmond.
The company was founded by her great-grandfather Richard Samuel Reynolds.
She is also a great-granddaughter of William Henry Veeneman, who was the chairman of Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky.


Sunflowers Signal the End Of Summer
SIGNALING the end of summer, sunflowers bloom.
More than 20 varieties of sunflowers grow in the Westchester area, providing a mosaic of color: orange, mustard and canary yellow, topaz and even purple.
"There's something very beautiful about this simple flower," said Victoria Zeph, a chef who grows Italian white and velvet queen sunflowers in her vegetable garden in Carmel and at her restaurant, Zeph's, in Peekskill.
The fresh vegetables and herbs are cooked in the restaurant, but Ms.
Zeph carefully arranges the sunflowers and places them in a window of the old mill building on Central Avenue, providing a feast for the eyes.


Resurrection of the Dead Sea Scrolls
ONE might think that since Plato and Aristotle are in the public domain, the same would hold true for the anonymous writers of the Dead Sea Scrolls.
But since 1947, when the first of the 800 scrolls were discovered in a cave by a Bedouin shepherd boy, access has been tightly controlled by a small circle of scholars, who have built their careers on translating and analyzing the 2,000-year-old religious works.
Last week when a group of researchers announced that it had broken the monopoly by using a computer to reconstruct part of the texts, some keepers of the scrolls seemed as outraged as musicians condemning manufacturers of bootleg tapes.


LEADER'S MISSTEPS PUZZLE THE FRENCH
After several faux pas by President Francois Mitterrand during the failed Soviet coup, France is abuzz with speculation that he has lost his political touch.
On the evening of Aug. 19, the first night after the coup, Mr.
Mitterrand spoke on television as if the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, had been irreversibly ousted.
To make matters worse, he also read a letter sent to him by Gennadi I. Yanayev, who had been named the head of a governing committee by the coup plotters.


Presidential Life's Embattled Founder Takes to the Stump
Several months ago, as public jitters over the safety of high-yield junk bonds were sending the giant insurer Executive Life down its long road to ruin, Herbert Kurz went on the defensive.
If policyholders of his Presidential Life Insurance Company got nervous, the junk bond-laden insurer could also face a destructive run.
So he drove to New York City, where he lectured at length to financial reporters about how Presidential differed from Executive Life.
A few months later, Mr.
Kurz was again on the stump, this time scolding a California news commentator for bad-mouthing Presidential on a radio talk show.
Just a few weeks ago, he urged a group of insurance agents who sell his company's policies to ignore predictions that Presidential could be the industry's next fatality.


Absences Used to Protest Conditions at Bellevue
The emergency ward at Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan began accepting patients again yesterday after two days of diverting all but the most critically ill during what appeared to be an informal "sick out" by nurses protesting staff shortages and budget cuts.
A spokesman for the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which operates Bellevue and the city's 10 other municipal hospitals, said the absences had "no effect on service" at Bellevue, which has one of the busiest emergency wards in the city.


Sports of The Times; Martina And Jimbo: A Great Run
FORGET the age.
Forget the business of the geezers and the codgers, the players who are no longer "spring chickens," as the eminent American linguist Martina Navratilova put it.
The lasting value of this United States Open may not be that 34-year-old Navratilova reached the final only to be pounded by Monica Seles, 7-6, 6-1, and that 39-year-old Jimmy Connors reached the semifinals only to be pounded by Jim Courier, 6-3, 6-3, 6-2.


Kazakh Chief, Seeking What Works, Backs Both Order and Free Economy
In all the euphoria and panic roused by the abrupt collapse of central authority after the failed coup last month, the imperturbable Asian visage of a shepherd's son from the steppes of Kazakhstan seemed to materialize at every critical juncture.
Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, the President of Kazakhstan, was among the first leaders President Mikhail S. Gorbachev telephoned from the Crimea when he was freed from house arrest imposed by the coup plotters.
When the republics began scrambling to proclaim independence, Mr.
Nazarbayev was among the first to search for ways to salvage order.


Camera
How much more improving can the 35-millimeter single lens reflex camera take?
Some photographers are shouting, "Enough already!"
But cameras are far from perfect and foolproof.
Many unsolved problems exist.
For instance, camera movement probably ruins more pictures than any other single factor in photography.


Birthday Boy Deserves Chiding?
To the Sports Editor:
Amidst all the glow, praise and photos for the birthday boy Jimmy Connors last Monday, I was looking for some words of condemnation of his disgusting, abominable, bratty behavior toward the chair umpire during his outburst over an overrule on an overhead.
I was keenly disappointed that all The New York Times (and my local newspaper) did was to quote some of the garbage he mouthed but took no editorial stand.
If ever a situation demanded the assessment of a warning or penalty by an official, this was it.
SOL BROWDY Lawrenceville, N.J.


New Jersey Commuters Stranded Due to Leak
Thousands of commuters leaving the Port Authority Bus Terminal for New Jersey were delayed for hours yesterday afternoon because of a leak in the antifreeze system beneath the ramps leading from the Lincoln Tunnel.
The leak of 300 gallons of vegetable-based oil occurred about 4 P.M., as workers were performing routine repairs on the ramps' aging antifreeze system.
The oil is heated by steam during the winter to keep the ramps from freezing.


Garcia Extortion Retrial to Begin This Week
Robert Garcia, the former South Bronx Congressman who resigned last year after he was convicted of extortion -- a conviction that was later reversed -- is to go on trial again this week on the same charges.
The 58-year-old former Representative will be tried in Federal District Court in Manhattan with his wife, Jane Lee, a former jockey turned consultant, and Ralph Vallone Jr., a lawyer from Puerto Rico.


Privatizing of Land in England Sets Off Battle
For centuries, the fenced reservoirs and filter ponds near Hackney have endured as an island of open space amid the densely settled neighborhoods of northeastern London, part of a network built 400 years ago to assure a supply of fresh water to the capital.
Now, this land, along with tens of thousands of other acres across Britain set aside long ago for watershed protection or water delivery systems, is facing possible sale and commercial development, after it has been declared surplus property for disposal by Britain's newly privatized water authorities.


Washington's Defense Scuttles Stanford, 42-7
Billy Joe Hobert threw two touchdown passes and fourth-ranked Washington forced five turnovers in a 42-7 victory over Stanford on today in the season and Pacific-10 Conference opener for both schools.
Washington is ranked No. 1 in The New York Times's Top 20.
Jay Barry ran for two touchdowns, Beno Bryant and Leif Johnson each ran for one, and Walter Bailey recovered a fumble and had an interception as the Huskies beat the Cardinal for the eighth consecutive time.
Defensive tackle Steve Emtman also had an interception.


Quebec Separatist Hails Baltics' Independence
The newly recognized independence of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia has been seized upon by Quebec nationalists as a point of encouragement for their own dreams of an independent Quebec.
The firing up of the separatists threatens to add a new complication to Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's efforts to keep Canada united.
Quebec's separatist leader, Jacques Parizeau, has hailed Baltic independence as a sign that small states can go their own way and be recognized by world leaders even in this era of large political federations.
The three Baltic states have a population of around 8 million people, comparable to Quebec's 7 million.


Rail Europe
To the Editor: I was interested in the reply (Letters on Travel, July 21) to a complaint regarding the service -- or more properly, the lack thereof -- rendered by Rail Europe.
My wife had the same experience, compounded by the fact that it turned out that she knew more about European rail schedules than the person she was talking to.
First, it should be noted that communicating with Rail Europe in White Plains, N.Y., by phone is a task itself, since all lines are perpetually busy.
Then my wife was told that there was no direct rail link between Geneva and Marseilles; apparently the train leaps over Marseilles en route to Nice. (Obviously, it stops at Marseilles en route, as my wife knew from a timetable she had.
I agree with an earlier letter writer.
Move Rail Europe back to the Big Apple.
THOMAS L. HUGHES New York, N.Y.


Ms. Tilghman, Geologist, Wed
Jennifer Fox Tilghman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Chew Tilghman of Lexington, Ky., was married yesterday to Peter Montague Cholnoky, a son of Mrs.
Imre J. Cholnoky of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr.
Cholnoky.
The Rev.
Richard F. Van Wely performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
The couple are both graduates of Dartmouth College.
Mrs.
Cholnoky, 24 years old, was until recently a geologist with ICF Kaiser Engineers, an environmental consulting company in Fairfax, Va.
Her father is a vice president of the Rand McNally Book Manufacturing Company in Versailles, Ky.


Making a Difference; Buying Software Concerns
Sanjay Kumar joined Computer Associates International Inc. in 1987 when it acquired the Uccel Corporation of Dallas, where he had headed research and development.
Now, as Computer Associates' senior vice president of planning, he is directing the aggressive merger and acquisition strategy of the Garden City, L.I., software giant.
Last week, Computer Associates agreed to buy Pansophic Systems Inc., of Lisle, Ill., for about $290 million.
Just two weeks earlier, it acquired On-Line Software International Inc., Fort Lee, N.J., for about $120 million.
All three companies produce business software, primarily for mid-range and mainframe computers.


Unsteady Rams Work on Getting a Grip
By the end of the week, the Los Angeles Rams had pieced themselves together again, although small cracks were still visible from last Sunday.
But there seemed less time to look back and a greater urgency to plan ahead, considering that it's the Giants they face this Sunday.
The Rams' 24-14 loss to the Phoenix Cardinals would not go away, though.
There were seven turnovers in that game and a few more during the week, but the theme was still the same: hold the ball or lose.


Learning While Serving
To the Editor:
In "Work Force or Nonworking Poor?" (Forum, July 21), George B. Autry suggests that school reform is one important route to a better-prepared pool of workers.
But the many young people out of school will need extra assistance.
One proven way to help them is provided by national youth service programs.


Diane Hochberg Is Engaged
Mrs.
Sid Gross of Bridgeport, Conn., and Dr.
Irving Hochberg of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Diane Leslie Hochberg, to Howard Allen Greer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Greer of Marlborough, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hochberg, 28 years old, is an account supervisor at Lou Hammond &amp; Associates, a public-relations agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Mr.
Greer, 28, is a national sales manager in Boston for Automatic Data Processing.
He graduated from Fairfield University.


Bridge
One of the best-known personalities on the national bridge scene is Ron Andersen, who is in action at a tournament somewhere almost every weekend of the year.
Since a regional bridge weekend usually lasts five days, he does not spend much time at home in Chicago.
In addition to belonging to a select group of players who have won more than 30,000 master points, he has written widely on the game, acts as a host at game shows held at tournaments and heads the commentary desk at the finals of national team championships.
His nickname is the Hog, derived from "the Hideous Hog," a character in many bridge books by the late Victor Mollo.
The two Hogs, living and fictional, have one obvious attribute in common apart from bridge ability: their resonant voices command respect from audiences large and small, and they are rarely at a loss for words.


Ms. Farrington Marries on L.I.
Elizabeth Jane Farrington, a daughter of Mrs.
Richard K. Farrington of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Mr.
Farrington, was married yesterday to Eric David Statman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Statman of Northport, L.I.
The Rev.
Randolph Becker, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Westhampton (L.I.) Bath and Tennis Club.
The bride, 30 years old, is a vice presidentin New York of the English brokerage of Barclays de Zoett Wedd.
She graduated from Milton Academy and St.
Lawrence University.
Her father was a vice president of Massachusetts Financial Services in Boston.


Can't We Also Save Backyard Animals?
To the Editor:
Our little town's first rabid raccoon has been detected, to our collective dismay.
My wife and I are also dismayed at the lack of action by government agencies and wildlife organizations.
In five years since this problem was identified, those supposedly protecting the welfare of citizens and wildlife alike have done nothing but take defensive actions like vaccinating pets.
Now they are going door to door making people prove their pets have been inoculated. (I suppose they confiscate your cat if you can't find the receipt from the vet.) Meanwhile, people must worry about the safety of their pets and children.


Ms. Fitzpatrick Has Wedding
Teresa Cocks Fitzpatrick, a daughter of Constance Brown of Salisbury, Conn., and John C. Fitzpatrick of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joseph Patrick Finnegan, a son of Mrs.
John G. Finnegan of Rye, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Finnegan.
The Rev.
Bernard McMeel performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Lakeville, Conn., assisted by the Rev.
Joseph Flanagan and the Rev.
Edmond O'Brien.
The bride, who is 27 years old and is known as Tracy, was until recently a development officer for the Greater New York Council of the Boy Scouts of America.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is a lawyer in Bronxville.


Don't Shun Clams, Just Cook Them Well
THERE is ample evidence that clams, as delicious as they may be, pose serious health hazards when eaten raw.
But that does not mean forswearing them.
It just means serving them well cooked.
Clams, like some other kinds of bivalves including mussels and oysters, constantly flush the water of their habitat through their bodies and easily pick up microorganisms.
Thorough cooking -- for about six minutes after the clams have opened -- can destroy any disease-bearing microorganisms in the clams as well as any that might be transmitted by the shucker.


Lisa Freundlich to Wed Samuel Guss
Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar Freundlich of West Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Helaine Freundlich to Samuel M. Guss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Guss of Bellmore, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Freundlich, 30 years old, is the national marketing liaison in New York for the accounting firm of Ernst &amp; Young.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in technical communications from Drexel University.
Her father owns Sophia Originals, a jewelry wholesaler in New York.
Her mother, Lillian Freundlich, is the office manager for J. P. Rudolph, an insurance broker in Livingston, N.J.


The Drive Is On to Sell Foreclosured Properties
THREE years after real estate market started skidding downhill, mortgage lenders throughout the metropolitan region are struggling to rid themselves of homes and apartments taken back from owners, builders and investors who defaulted on mortgage loans.
The foreclosures have helped to make the sales market more favorable to buyers than it has been for more than a decade.


The Executive Computer; At Last, Lotus Ships 1-2-3 for Windows
The Lotus Development Corporation has finally shipped its Windows version of the 1-2-3 spreadsheet, more than a year after its archrival, the Microsoft Corporation, shipped Windows 3.0 and the Microsoft Excel 3.0 spreadsheet.
Now comes the moment of truth.
Lotus 1-2-3, the world's most popular business application for DOS computers, has to prove all over again that it deserves a top spot in the era of graphical computing.
Judging from an initial look at 1-2-3 for Windows, Lotus has made a very smooth, if belated, transition to Windows from DOS.
It is a logical choice for companies that rely on 1-2-3 for DOS, and the point-and-click Windows graphical command system makes 1-2-3 much easier to use.


Agnes Alexis and Kyland Howard Wed
Agnes Karen Alexis, the daughter of Grace Alexis of New York, and Samuel Alexis of Mobile, Ala., was married yesterday to Kyland Winthrop Howard, the son of Mrs.
James L. Howard of Teaneck, N.J., and the late Mr.
Howard.
The Rev.
Robert Jeffers performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The bride, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from the University of Virginia.
She is a lawyer for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in Washington.
Her father, who is retired, was a production worker at General Motors Corporation in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her mother is a sales associate at Bloomingdale's in New York.


Where's The Surprise?
To the Editor:
How dismaying to read Caryn James's opinion that "most movie goers love watching trailers"  [ "You Can't Tell a Movie by Its Trailer," Aug. 18 ] .
In my experience, the only fun that trailers provide is the opportunity to laugh at the stupidity of movies I would never pay to see.
As Ms.
James rightly points out, those previews that do not distort or misrepresent their films give away all their surprises.
I have always hated these monstruous screen invaders.


Southern Discomfort
SIGNPOSTS IN A STRANGE LAND
By Walker Percy.
Edited by Patrick Samway. 428 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


UNCLE FOOD
My mouth started to water as I dug out my pots and pans to prepare the treats described on the "Frenchies and Other Secrets" menu in Laura Cunningham's Food column "Uncle Food" (Aug. 11).
But it was Cunningham's uncles -- Gabe and Len -- who touched my heart.
Images of Gabe exclaiming, "Oh, pumpernickel bread!" while downing flank steak and of Len sweating over the stove in his pith helmet are fixed in my memory.
These were men who knew how to rise to the occasion, men who could soothe a bereft child.


OFF AND RUNNING
With a new season at the starting line, and the winners and losers yet to be determined, audiences may yearn for a little inside information before plunking down the price of a ticket.
Herewith a bit of the buzz.
Casting Coups
Anjelica Huston as Morticia ("The Addams Family") Julia Roberts as Tinkerbell ("Hook") Jeremy Irons as confusingly complex ("Kafka")  John Gielgud as all the characters' voices ("Prospero's Books") Twiggy as sitcom royalty ("Princesses") Casting Off
Michelle Pfeiffer as a plain waitress ("Frankie and Johnny") Richard Gere as a Japanese-American ("Rhapsody in August") Don Johnson as a sensitive peasant ("Paradise") All Eyes Upon . . .
Kurt Masur, taking up the baton at the New York Philharmonic The gussied-up Guggenheim, 20 months and $55 million in the making  All that jazz at Lincoln Center Michael Jackson's dangerous new album (and new look?) Steven Spielberg, hooked on Peter Pan Tony Randall's National Actors Theater, the latest crack at an American repertory company Believe It When You See It
The 42d Street Redevelopment Project.
Rome was built faster.
"Billy Bathgate." Postponed indefinitely.
Billy Heavensgate?
"Annie II." Rights returned to creator.
"Gone With the Wind II." No one really gives a damn.
Department of the Politically Correct
The brainy Belle in Disney's "Beauty and the Beast"  Don Henley, Billy Joel, et al. in a benefit for Walden Woods, at Madison Square Garden Marlee Matlin as a hearing-impaired prosecutor in "Reasonable Doubts" Sean Connery rescuing the Brazilian rain forest in "Medicine Man" "Artists of Conscience: 16 Years of Social and Political Commentary" at the Alternative Museum Patrick Swayze as a doctor in Calcutta in "City of Joy" Department of Deja Vu
"Alien 3" "I Still Dream of Jeannie," the TV movie "Dynasty," the mini-series Redd Foxx -- Sanford without the Son Carol Burnett -- without her Friends Twyla Tharp, a new company in tow Hot Couples
Warren Beatty and Annette Bening ("Bugsy") Meg Ryan and Alec Baldwin  ("Prelude to a Kiss") Alec Baldwin and Jessica Lange ("A Streetcar Named Desire") Jessica Lange and Nick Nolte ("Cape Fear") Jessica Lange and Tommy Lee Jones ("Blue Sky") River Phoenix and Keanu Reeves ("My Own Private Idaho") Birthday Bashes
20 years of the avant-garde at the Kitchen 25 years of "Star Trek" 30 years of the avant-garde at La Mama 70 years of Jean-Pierre Rampal 100 years after his death, a Seurat show at the Met 200 years of Rossini And it's 500 years after Columbus's most famous voyage Gone but Not Forgotten
Martha Graham, with a 14-minute premiere at City Center Marvin Gaye, with a new live album George and Ira Gershwin, with four new songs in "Crazy for You" on Broadway Desi Arnaz and his band, babaluing at the Copacabana Forgotten but Not Gone
Joan Collins, Broadway-bound in Noel Coward's "Private Lives" Desi Arnaz Jr. as Desi Arnaz Sr. in the film "The Mambo Kings" Suzanne Somers as a mom in ABC's "Step by Step"  Raiders of a Lost Art  "It's a Wonderful Life," the musical "Nick and Nora," the musical "Anna Karenina," the musical "Madame Bovary," the movie "Return to the Forbidden Planet," the Off Broadway sci-fi musical It's a Dog's Life
"Beethoven," the movie, featuring a St.
Bernard Asta, in "Nick and Nora" on Broadway "Dog Logic," an Off Broadway comedy about a pet cemetery "Dogfight," Marines and the women they battle over  Weimaraners, courtesy of William Wegman, at the Whitney The Last Sequel (Or So They Promise)
"Freddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare," Elm Street gets nailed again "Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country"


Maestro of the Moment
THERE WERE TIMES THESE PAST MONTHS when Kurt Masur, the new music director of the New York Philharmonic, seemed to be all over town -- poking into every byway of New York's musical life and working rooms like the politician he almost became.
One evening, he was in tiny Weill Recital Hall for a violin recital, the next at the Metropolitan Opera for "Salome" or at the Carnegie Hall centennial gala or seeing "Les Miserables" with his wife and son.
During the day, he met with Philharmonic musicians, staff and board members or darted about the area in search of concert sites and a home.
His jacket slung over his shoulder, his barrel chest incongruously topped by one of his collection of Western-style string ties, he looked the very picture of slightly touristy, heartily undaunted self-confidence.


'Twelfth Night' Is Illuminated by Lustrous Performances
IN cheerful conclusion of her first season as the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's artistic director, Bonnie J. Monte has staged a classy "Twelfth Night" and sprinkled it with stardust.
It isn't likely that, in its time, the festival has come up with performances as knowing and lustrous as Laila Robins's captivating Olivia, Elizabeth McGovern's satirical Viola, Edward Herrmann's idiosyncratically interesting Malvolio and Paul Mullins's strangely ominous Feste.


Susan Ades Weds Stephen Lawlor
Susan Clare Ades, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan M. Ades of Sands Point, L.I., was married yesterday to Stephen Cashman Lawlor, a son of Dr.
Robert Lawlor of Chelmsford, Mass., and the late Helen Lawlor.
Justice Vincent R. Balletta Jr. of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Ades, who is 29 and is retaining her name, is an exhibition project director at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in museum education from George Washington University.
Her father is the president of the Auburn Label and Tag Company and the New York Woven Label Company, both in New York.


The Day's Highlights
The Outlook: Cold and Hungry
FOOD AID IS STALLED AND A BLEAK HARVEST IS ON THE WAY The political upheaval in the Soviet Union has stalled implementation of a program to deliver $500 million worth of American grain.
With experts predicting a Soviet harvest 25 percent smaller than last year's, Bush Administration officials are worried about how the Soviet peoples will feed themselves this winter.
Page 1.
Strengths and Weaknesses Out in the Hinterlands


Topics of The Times; Cash but No Carry
High noon last Friday marked a great moment in the history of cash machines.
Or, at least, the history of New York City cash machines.
It was the moment at which a young woman noticed that the person who'd been ahead of her had forgotten to take the money -- and announced it to the world at large.
This young woman could have slid the pile of twenties into her hand and taken off.
No one would have known, and the money's true owner had already left the building.
Instead she stood before the cash machine, her own bank card in her hand, and summoned an employee.


Kate Hogan Married to Kevin Bruen
Kathleen Bridget Hogan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Patrick Hogan of Kattskill Bay, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kevin Patrick Bruen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles P. Bruen of Monarch Beach, Calif.
The Rev.
Edward Pratt, a Roman Catholic priest, assisted by the Rev.
Janet Hatfield Legro, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church in Hudson Falls, N.Y..
The couple are both assistant district attorneys in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office.
Mrs.
Bruen, who is 27 years old and known as Kate, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a law degree from Washington and Lee University.
Her father, who is retired, was a dentist in Hudson Falls.
Her mother, Catherine Hogan, is a real estate sales agent with Realty USA in Glens Falls, N.Y.


Corrections
A report on Aug. 25 about the wedding of Elizabeth Jacks and Alfred Scott misidentified the bridegroom's late mother.
She was Ruth Schlesinger Scott.


The World; Ideology Fades, Battle Lines Sharpen
THE end of the cold war cooled the ideological fevers of Central America, but strife in the region persists.
The continuation of the civil war in El Salvador, the violence that lingers on the margin of the waning war in Guatemala and the uneasy peace that threatens to erupt into new warfare in Nicaragua all reflect pragmatic issues previously masked by political sloganeering.
Opponents have largely stopped hurling epithets like "communist" and "fascist" at each other.
In their place are complicated questions with elusive resolutions: personal security for ex-combatants, land and other property rights, and access to power and influence.
Every group that has taken up arms in Central America over the last three decades has raised those needs, but in the heat of the East-West differences they were often obscured.
Now those issues have become the adversarial essence.


Intense Campaigning Enlivens Primary Races
THE political primary process, vital for the selection of candidates but generally ignored by all but the most active party members, is attracting intense interest this year in several Westchester communities, especially in Yonkers and the town of Greenburgh.
In both communities, primary campaigns, which end Thursday with party regulars selecting their candidates for the Nov. 5 general election, are being conducted with the intensity of final campaigns.
Polls will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M., just as on Election Day.


Salomon's Other Influence
To the Editor:
The Market Watch column (Aug. 18) states that John Gutfreund was "the man who built and ruled Salomon," but anyone familiar with the Street knows that Billy Salomon brought the firm from obscurity to earn it a place as the top market maker and one of the big five investment bankers.
Billy was a man of character while John, the opportunist to whom Billy handed the reins, was driven by personal avarice.
He was one of those instrumental in putting together the Phibro deal that lined all the Salomon partners' pockets with millions.
Wall Street lore has it no members of the cabal had the courtesy to inform Billy of what was afoot.
TOM BALLANTYNE  Melbourne Beach, Fla., Aug. 20


Moment of Truth
With the indictment of Clair E. George, Iran-contra prosecutors have thrust their investigation deep into the operational heart of the Central Intelligence Agency to determine whether there was an illegal effort within the Reagan Administration to keep the affair hidden from Congress.
As the Deputy Director for Operations, Mr.
George directed covert activities worldwide at the intelligence agency, and therefore stood at the juncture of both sides of the affair -- the secret arms sales to Iran and the covert effort to arm the Nicaraguan rebels after Congress cut off direct aid to them in 1984.


China Enlivens Hong Kong's First Direct Vote
For the first time in the 150-year history of Hong Kong, people here will be able to vote directly for some of their legislative representatives in an election scheduled for Sept. 15.
And in the final days before that vote, the most compelling, most emotional campaign issue in this British colony is China.
While the 54 candidates competing for the 18 directly elected seats in the legislature have been discussing pollution, traffic and crime, their positions are often interchangeable and their debates dull -- until the subject of China is introduced.
Then, voices are raised, tempers flare and charges and countercharges fly.


YUGOSLAVS JOUST AT PEACE MEETING
The European Community opened a Yugoslav peace conference today with pledges of cooperation and good will, but after several warlike speeches from Serbian and Croatian leaders it became clear that the way to agreement would be difficult.
"It will be a thorny path without a doubt," said Hans van den Broek, the Dutch Foreign Minister, who holds the community presidency for the last half of 1991.
Mr. van den Broek has been working virtually full-time for the last two months on getting the Yugoslav antagonists to the negotiating table.


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
Swados's article brought back memories of my own brother, Stewart, tall, blond, good-looking, bright (I.Q. 149), a terrific athlete.
At age 18 he was diagnosed with schizophrenia, paranoid type, with psychotic tendencies.
This was the year that he also wound up his stint as president of the senior class at the Lawrenceville School in New Jersey.


Can't We Also Save Backyard Animals?; King of Pests
To the Editor:
Your list of tramp species (or pests) that may inherit the earth in the wake of mass extinctions (Science Times, Aug. 20) omits a leading contender: namely, ourselves.
Omniverous, shrewd, nosy, supremely adaptable, Homo sapiens surely deserves top rank among the hardy, ubiquitous species such as weeds, rats and cockroaches that make life miserable for the rest of the earth's flora and fauna.
ROBERT SCHMID Hanover, N.H., Aug. 21, 1991


It's a Singles Weekend, And the Pins Are Flying
Irving Cohen was trying to arrange seating in the midst of chaos.
Scores of people were demanding choice places in the cavernous dining room of the Concord Hotel where he is the maitre d'hotel.
On his huge Pegboard, there were several thousand pins -- blue, pink, green, white and orange -- representing guests or empty seats at colored rings denoting each of the room's 600 tables.
To make things worse, his private phone was constantly ringing.
Mothers were calling.
Anxious mothers from Brooklyn, anxious mothers from Bronxville, from Scarsdale, from Miami, requesting, even begging Mr.
Cohen to seat their unmarried daughters next to a "nice Jewish boy." Once in a while, he said, he got a call from a mother requesting that her son be placed next to a "nice Jewish girl."


Robert Taylor Scott Keith 3d Wed To Kristin Ann Ridder in Larchmont
Kristin Ann Ridder and Lieut.
Robert Taylor Scott Keith 3d of the Navy were married yesterday at SS.
John and Paul Roman Catholic Church in Larchmont, N.Y.
Msgr.
Joseph J. Boyd, assisted by the Rev.
Robert J. Verrigni, performed the ceremony .
Mrs.
Keith, 25 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Lytle Ridder Jr., of New Rochelle, N.Y.
She graduated from Marymount University.
Until recently she was employed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in San Diego.
Her father is the publisher of School Guide Publications and the president of the Catholic New Publishing Company, which was founded by his great-grandfather Henry Ridder in 1886.
The two companies are in New Rochelle.


As Banking Failures Increase, A New Bank Opens Its Doors
A RECORD number of banks in Connecticut are going broke, but a new one has opened in the town of Essex, which already had almost one bank for every 1,000 residents.
Maritime Bank and Trust Company, the first new bank in the state in more than a year, opened its single office on Route 153 in the lower Connecticut River Valley town.
"We started this project three years ago and quickly found out that timing is everything," said the chairman of the bank, Richard R. Manning, who also heads City Coal Inc., in nearby New London.
"We'll probably be the only bank to start up for a long time."


World Markets; Waiting to See How Far Gold Falls
Already well in decline, gold has been dipping even further in the last two weeks.
Some hopeful analysts are raising the possibility that gold is finally near its bottom, which would be a signal to buy.
But for others, gold's dismal performance in recent years is such a bad memory that they are waiting -- even hoping -- that it will fall considerably more.
Then, and only then, do they be expect a rally, even if it is just a small one.
On Friday, gold closed in London at 348.05 an ounce, its lowest level since June, 1990 and below the psychologically important $350 level.
It dipped to $347 an ounce a week ago.


Making a Difference; Nearing Approval of a Life-Saving Drug
As a teen-ager in the Netherlands, Hubert J. P. Schoemaker turned down a chance to play professional soccer.
That decision could ultimately help to save lives.
He instead went on to become a co-founder of Centocor Inc., a biotechnology company in Malvern, Pa.
Last week, an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration recommended approving the company's first drug, a treatment that could prevent deaths from bacterial infections.


Helmick and Turner Broadcasting End a Business Tie
Turner Broadcasting System has severed its consulting contract with Robert Helmick, the United States Olympic Committee president, whose work as a paid consultant for groups with ties to the Olympics has come under scrutiny.
Helmick is scheduled to give his side of the story to the U.S.O.C. executive board at a meeting in Chicago today.


Colleges Beginning Their Fall Series
MANY schools and universities around the state offer the public professional series that rank with the best anywhere as well as faculty and student recitals of high quality and low cost.
The Tokyo String Quartet ushers in the season for the Chamber Music Society at Yale University with a recital at 8 P.M. on Tuesday at Sprague Hall.
On the program are Mozart and Schumann Quartets plus a Piano Quintet by the dean of the university's Music School, Ezra Laderman, with Ilana Vered the assisting artist.


New &amp; Noteworthy
SEVENTH HEAVEN, by Alice Hoffman. (Fawcett Crest, $5.99.) When a divorcee named Nora Silk moves with her two children to Long Island in 1959, she has such a disruptive effect on the suburban calm that it is rumored she is a witch.
Alice Hoffman "has complete control over this bustling story, shuffling its many vignettes as cleverly as she captures the nuances of its many voices," Alida Becker said here last year.
SATURDAY NIGHT, by Susan Orlean. (Fawcett Crest, $5.99.) Cruising in a muscle car in Elkhart, Ind., watching the debutantes in a Hispanic neighborhood in Phoenix, dancing at Blob's Polka Park in Jessup, Md., hanging out with the waitresses at the Hilltop Steakhouse in Saugus, Mass., and with the homeless men at the Bowery Mission on New York's Lower East Side -- Susan Orlean dedicated herself to finding out what is so special about those hours of mandatory recreation called Saturday night.
Last year our reviewer, Scott Simon, said the book is written "with much zest and considerable insight" by "a fine and engaging guide."


Arrests in a Killing Police Say Was Revenge
Revenge for a rape last year was the motive for the killing of a photographer in January, the police said last week, after they arrested two men and charged one of them with the shooting.
In announcing the arrest of John Valverde, 21 years old, the police said that the photographer, Joel Schoenfeld, had a history of abusing female models who posed for him, regularly luring young women to his studio through newspaper advertisements that promised a career in fashion modeling.
He was found dead in his Greenwich Village studio on Jan. 5, shot once in the head.


When Is A Van Not a Van? When It's An Expo
IF it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, well. . . .
Which is to say that if it drives like a van and packs like a van, then you might be forgiven if you think that it's a van.
Mitsubishi, though, probably won't forgive you.
The company last week introduced its 1992 Expo and LRV twins and it is going to absurd lengths to pretend that they are not the minivans that the Federal Government thinks Japan is dumping on these shores.


Philippines Close to Rejecting Treaty on U.S. Bases
The Philippine Senate moved to the brink of rejecting a new military bases treaty with the United States today, but Washington said it remained optimistic that the accord would be enacted.
The treaty, which allows the United States to keep Subic Bay Naval Station for another 10 years, was close to defeat after eight senators signed a resolution declaring their opposition.
The pact needs 16 votes in the 23-member Senate to be ratified.


Hiking Trail To Lapland
An extensive network of hiking trails, in addition to the thousands of miles already in use, is being developed in Finland.
The most ambitious, demanding and expensive project is the expansion of the UKK Trail, named for the late President Urho Kekkonen, to provide a marked 930-mile route along the eastern side of the country from near the Gulf of Finland to Lapland and the northernmost area.
The route winds through vast coniferous forests and between lakes and ridges with unharnessed rapids in pristine countryside.


The Rural, Rustic and Quiet Life on West Fire Island
IT was as if Captain Kidd and his pirates were landing.
As unfamiliar adults paddled a raft toward the island, two children frolicking in the surf dived behind a small boat to hide.
Strangers are rare on West Fire Island, the Long Island island where Josh Gibson, 6 years old, and his cousin Katie Scherger, 11, spend their summers.
The lack of electricity, telephones and a nearby 7-Eleven helps keep the curious away.
The island can be reached only by private boat, and because treacherous sand bars surround it, few make the attempt.


Wall Street; More Time for Fraud Victims?
How much time should victims of investment fraud be given to file suit under Federal securities laws?
Considerably more time than they have been given by the Supreme Court of the United States, in the view of Senator Richard Bryan, Democrat of Nevada.
Mr.
Bryan is leading a Congressional fight over this little-noticed but important legal point.
The Court, by a 5-4 margin, ruled on June 20 that plaintiffs must sue within a year of discovering that they were bilked, and within three years of the commission of the fraud.
And the Court applied this new standard to all pending cases -- thereby penalizing plaintiffs who filed years ago for failing to comply with a rule that did not then exist.


Ms. Bookis Weds Frederick Bond
Mary-Louise Bookis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Blaise Charles Bookis of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., was married yesterday to Frederick Blake Bond, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Minor Casey Bond of Williamsburg, Va.
The Rev.
James Moulketis performed the ceremony at St.
Nicholas Greek Orthodox Church in Wyckoff, N.J.
Ms.
Bond, 31 years old, is the deputy makeup manager at Time magazine.
A graduate of Mount Holyoke College, she received a master's degree in English literature from Stanford University.
Her father retired as a New York City public school teacher.
Her mother, Judith Bookis, teaches English at the Clifton (N.J.) Public High School.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


Songs of the 50's and 60's in Bridgeport
"BEEHIVE" (the hairdo) is a symbol of, and a sincere salute to, girl groups (the Shirelles, the Shangri-Las) and the girls without groups (Brenda Lee, Leslie Gore) who, with their songs, shamelessly brought the inanities of the 1950's right into the next decade -- that is, until the cause-inspired music of the 60's put all that to rest, for a time.
Now, with the recurring psychological ramifications and the increasing commercial lure of nostalgia, it appears that the B-word and all it represents never quite went away.
It was simply intimidated by guitars and streams of long hair.
And even if it did go away for a while, it keeps coming back with a vengeance, and with more cans of hairspray, no matter the ozone layer.


Motel Safety
To the Editor: The article on safety in motels (Aug. 18) brought back the experience we had in February 1990.
We were spending the winter in Arizona and had driven in early February down to Nogales in a rented car where we stopped at the Americana Motel.
We were told to park our car around back near to where we had access to a door near our room.
The next morning we found the car had been stolen.
In fact, it was the second one to have been stolen the same night.
The news was received in a laconic fashion by the management and the police treated it as well as a common occurrence, suggesting that the car was probably already in Mexico.


Miss Heins Weds R. J. Brownback 3d
Elisabeth Phillips Heins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Heins 2d of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Russell James Brownback 3d, the son of Wilma Grunert Brownback of Cazenovia, N.Y., and Mr.
Brownback Jr. of Edina, Minn.
The Rev.
Edward J. Dougherty performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Princeton Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 26 years old, is a student at the Parsons School of Design.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is an executive vice president at Lehman Brothers in New York.


Judge Thomas's South Africa Connection Needs Clarification
To the Editor:
Judge Clarence Thomas, President Bush's Supreme Court nominee, has had a disturbing record of affiliations and joint activities with lobbyists for the South African Government, which Congress should explore in his confirmation hearings.
The most important of these lobbyists are Jay Parker and William Keyes.
According to filings with the Department of Justice, Mr.
Parker was registered as an agent of South Africa's Transkei bantustan, or tribal homeland, in 1977-78 and was the official agent of another South African bantustan, Venda, 1981-85.
In 1985, Mr.
Parker and Mr.
Keyes incorporated International Public Affairs Consultants, registered as a lobbying agency for the South African Government, receiving $360,000 a year, plus expenses.


Louise Klixbull, Dance Director, Weds
Louise Klixbull, the daughter of Annemarie Klixbull of Odense, Denmark, and Tyge Pedersen of Bonn, Germany, was married yesterday in Copenhagen, to David Lawrence Taub, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Taub of Fresh Meadows, Queens.
Niels Uldal, a city councilman of Copenhagen, performed the ceremony on the lightboat at the end of the Nyhavn Canal.
Mrs.
Taub, 26 years old, is keeping her name professionally.
She graduated from the Martha Graham School of Contemporary Dance in New York, and is the founder and artistic director of the Klixbull Dance Company in New York.
Her mother is an actress at the Banden Teater in Odense.
Her father is a reporter for Danmark Radio og TV, in Bonn.


Cheerless in Texas
Beneath the glamour of pom-poms and pep rallies, cheerleading is serious business in Channelview, Tex.
And evidently none took it more seriously than Wanda Webb Holloway.
Two years running, Mrs.
Holloway's daughter, Shanna, failed to make the junior high school cheerleading squad, and Mrs.
Holloway came to blame Verna Heath, the mother of Shanna's chief rival, Amber.
Authorities said that Mrs.
Holloway asked her former brother-in-law, Terry Harper, to help her find someone who would kill Mrs.
Heath for money.
Mr.
Harper went to the police.
Mrs.
Holloway's lawyers said she was entrapped and that she never intended to hurt anyone.
But prosecutors described her as "the ultimate stage mother" who hoped that with Mrs.
Heath dead, Amber would be too distraught to go on cheering, leaving an opening for Shanna.
Last week, a jury found Mrs.
Holloway guilty of solicitation of murder and sentenced her to 15 years in prison.


Sports of The Times; Dwight Gooden: The Arm That Is the Mets
WHENEVER baseball people talk about a pitcher's arm, it's as if he had only one.
And in a way, he does.
Sandy Koufax dunked his left arm in a basin of melting ice after every game he pitched.
Tom Seaver wouldn't carry luggage with his right arm, wouldn't sleep on his right arm.
For them, as for every pitcher, their other arm merely existed.
Their baseball arm was their career.
And for the second time in three seasons, Dwight Gooden's arm hurt when he pitched.


White Plains Rejects Westhelp Project for Homeless
AFTER an unusual two-night session of debate, the White Plains Common Council's Republican minority defeated a plan to provide transitional housing for the homeless and adjourned Wednesday evening under a shower of threats, raised fists and shouting.
The 4-3 vote in favor, one short of what was needed, ended almost four years of wrangling over a plan that was once intended to be the county's catalyst for community assistance to the homeless.
Instead, the project became the focus of neighborhood opposition and political maneuvering.


The Louvre
To the Editor: On a recent visit to Paris with my family, I was faced with extremely long lines at the Louvre.
The initial lines were to enter the reception area through the pyramid main entrance in which the ticket counters were located.
Faced with a extensive wait, I noticed unused automatic ticket machines at both ends of both ticket counters.
There were machines which accepted coins -- the admission charge is 30 francs -- and machines which accepted Visa cards, which I used instantly to buy my tickets.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


Where to Eat In Moscow
Two new brochures, Moscow Metro Restaurant Guide and Moscow Hotel Restaurant Guide, are available to travelers.
The metro guide lists about 35 free enterprise restaurants -- they are not associated with Intourist -- and their specialties.
Restaurant addresses and telephone numbers are included along with a subway map, but John E. Felber, who compiled the brochure, has yet to work out a method linking the restaurants with subway stops.
Visitors to Moscow must call the restaurants to make reservations, and ask for the nearest metro station.
The same is true of the hotel restaurant folder, which includes 10 hotels and their restaurants that are joint ventures between the Soviet Government and hotel chains.
Mr.
Felber, who is editor of Soviet Travel News, a weekly newsletter published in the United States, says that eventually the maps will be coded to indicate the nearest subway stations.
Meanwhile, the two folders can be had by sending $1 and a self-addressed stamped envelope to International Intertrade, Box 636, Federal Square, Newark, N.J. 07101.


Anne Keith to Wed William T. Cocke
Mrs.
Robert Newman Slawson of Annapolis, Md., and Mr.
Martin Langhorne Keith of Alexandria, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Anne Langhorne Keith, to William Tomphson Cocke 4th, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Cocke 3d of Sewanee, Tenn.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Keith, 26 years old, is the deputy executive director of the Truck Cap Industries Association, a trade group in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Hogan &amp; Hartson.


Time to Open The Treasury's Auction Club?
The Federal Government has always depended upon rich and powerful men to help it make ends meet.
For the past two centuries, the plutocratic assistance has been provided by the likes of John Jacob Astor and J. P. Morgan and, of course, Jay Cooke, the legendary banker and devout abolitionist who almost singlehandedly sold the Treasury bonds that financed the Civil War.
Today, the rich and powerful men on which the Government relies are the usually obscure executives of the 39 firms known as "primary dealers," the firms through which the Federal Reserve Bank of New York buys and sells Treasury securities to adjust the nation's money supply.
The Fed also requires primary dealers to bid regularly at Treasury auctions and to make a market in Treasury debt.
In return, the primary dealers are the only institutions, besides banks, that are allowed to submit auction bids on behalf of other investors -- and thus, they can spy out market trends and attract new customers seeking their guidance.


Miss Malto Marries Gerardo I. Pangilinan
Maria Rowena N. Malto, a daughter of Brig.
Gen.
Levy M. Malto and Mrs.
Malto of Quezon City, the Philippines, was married yesterday to Gerardo I. Pangilinan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Santos C. Pangilinan of Quezon City.
The Rev.
Thomas J. Dzurenda performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Stony Hill Parish Church in Watchung, N.J.
Mrs.
Pangilinan, 27 years old, graduated from the University of the Philippines, as did her husband.
She received a master's degree in labor and human resources from Ohio State University.
She is a compensation analyst at the Republic National Bank of New York.
Her father retired from the Philippine Army.
Mr.
Pangilinan, 31, received a master's degree and a doctorate in physics from Ohio State.
He is a post-doctoral researcher at Washington State University in Pullman, Wash.
His father is a civil engineer in Quezon City.


ANTIQUES
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
September
"MODERN MASKS AND HELMETS" Among the 40 compelling examples of armor from the industrial and post-industrial world are protective coverups worn while playing sports, on the battlefield and in industry.
Thursday-Nov. 19, Museum of Modern Art.


Don't Shun Clams, Just Cook Them Well
THERE is ample evidence that clams, as delicious as they may be, pose serious health hazards when eaten raw.
But that does not mean forswearing them.
It just means serving them well cooked.
Clams, like some other kinds of bivalves including mussels and oysters, constantly flush the water of their habitat through their bodies and easily pick up microorganisms.
Thorough cooking -- for about six minutes after the clams have opened -- can destroy any disease-bearing microorganisms in the clams as well as any that might be transmitted by the shucker.


Miss Orr Marries James Walton Jr.
Elizabeth Andrews Orr, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. Orr Jr. of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to James Mellon Walton Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walton of Pittsburgh and Ligonier, Pa.
The Revs.
Frederick Bender and Max Smith performed the ceremony at St.
Lukes Episcopal Church in Darien.
Mrs.
Walton, 25 years old, graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a distributor of medical publications in Darien.


Rent Decontrol
To the Editor:
The statement in "Decontrol Eases In on Boston's Border" on July 14 -- an article about phasing out of rent control in Brookline, Mass. -- that the 1988 reassessment caused property taxes on private homes to double or even triple is erroneous.
While assessments did indeed frequently double, average tax increases were in the 20 to 25 percent range -- substantial, to be sure, but far less drastic than a doubling of taxes.


Two-Wheeling Virginia's Two-Lanes
PROBABLY every bicyclist has the same fantasy, of velvety ribbons of blacktop and silence broken only by the soft zipping sound of new touring tires on pavement.
In this vision, the roads wander off in all directions, and there are no trucks on them.
That pretty much describes the four-day trip I made in central Virginia in June.
It covered almost 200 miles of two-lane roads, interspersed with four bed and breakfasts and about as many traffic lights.
Maybe this is attainable in any state, but Virginia also has a long season, gentle contours and a back road to everyplace.
My choice was as arbitrary as this: it was about February when I started plotting spring bike trips, so I was looking at states that are half-warm.
Also, I had been watching reruns of Ken Burns's Civil War series.


TRYING ON THE 60's
What a wonderful blast from the past I got from Francine Prose's Hers column "Trying On the 60's" (Aug. 11).
I haven't thought about that "huge, abandoned hotel" in a lot of years, if, in fact, it's the same one.
I remember that living next door to this hotel were two innovative light-show designers who certainly changed people's perception of what should go on walls.
Then I recalled the Diggers and the free food they gave away almost daily, the boxes and boxes of free clothing and bedding placed at street corners in the Haight and Golden Gate Park area for anyone to pick from.
There was a generosity of spirit and mind; imagination and improvisation were in full sway.
Extended families became abundant as the number of single-parent households increased.
There was a feeling of belonging and that people cared.
Yes, I, too, feel like an old-timer when my daughter's friends ask, "What was it like in those days?" Now I have your article to show them.
MARGARET BROOKS
New York, N.Y.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 8, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
2
3
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon and his relationships with five women.
3 *
3
TIME BOMB, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.99.) A child psychologist tracks down the perpetrators of crimes spawned by hatemongers.
4
6
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop on the trail of a Florida con man.
5
2
UNDER SIEGE, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $5.95.) Chaos in Washington when the kingpin of the Medellin drug cartel is brought there for trial.
6
6
THE FIRST MAN IN ROME, by Colleen McCullough. (Avon, $6.95.) The rivalry of two men in the Roman Republic in 110 B.C.
7
33
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) Chinese-American women and their mothers.
8
11
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) A get-together in a Scottish town.
9
16
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
10 *
8
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $5.95.) A woman schemes to get control of a movie studio.
11
2
PRIME DIRECTIVE, by Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens. (Pocket, $4.95.) A "Star Trek" novel.
12
1
BATTLEGROUND, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.95.) The Marine Corps in the struggle for Guadalcanal; the fourth volume of "The Corps."
13
47
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
14
1
GENUINE LIES, by Nora Roberts. (Bantam, $4.99.) Two writers have a problem: to reveal or conceal the secrets of a glamorous film actress.
15
4
THE ENCHANTED LAND, by Jude Deveraux. (Avon, $4.95.) The romance of a Kentucky plantation owner's daughter and a Texas rancher.
16 *
1
INTO THE DARKNESS, by Barbara Michaels. (Berkley, $5.50.) An inheritance brings a woman eerie experiences and romance.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
16
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
11
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
3
8
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
3
THE DOCTOR, by Edward E. Rosenbaum. (Ivy, $4.99.) A physician's experiences as practitioner and patient; originally published in 1988 as "A Taste of My Own Medicine."
5
94
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
25
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
7 *
409
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
8
9
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
9
3
MICHAEL LANDON, by Aileen Joyce. (Zebra, $4.50.) The sweet and sour life of the late television writer, producer, director and actor.
10
15
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
58
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
38
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
17
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
4
4
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
5
6
THE FAT-BURNING WORKOUT, by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.95.) A program designed to trim the body and tone muscles.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Division Of Labor
To the Editor:
The article on the search for artistic directors for regional theaters  [ "It's a Tough Job, but Somebody's Got to Want It," Aug. 18 ]  identifies Andre Bishop as the new head of Lincoln Center Theater.


The World; Will the U.S. Miss Its Partner, The Kremlin?
WITH the transformation of the Soviet Union from a monolithic superpower to a loose confederation of republics, the United States appears to be losing not only its superpower adversary, but also its post-Cold War partner in resolving international disputes.
Ever since Mikhail S. Gorbachev came to power in 1985, American diplomats had become increasingly comfortable, and in recent years almost reliant, on working with the Soviet Union to resolve regional problems from Eastern Europe to the Persian Gulf, from the West Bank to Angola.


POP &amp; JAZZ
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
September


Answering The Mail
Q.
Both the sink and counter top in my bathroom are made of composition material in an off-white color.
A black ring about an eighth of an inch wide has developed around the basin drain.
Is there any way I can get rid of the ring?
A.
The black ring may be either dirt mixed with soap residue, or mildew or a combination of both.
Either way, I suggest using an old toothbrush to scrub it off.
If it is mostly dirt and soap curd, then you should be able to scrub it off with a scouring powder like Comet or Zud.
If it is mildew or mold, you will have to also use a mixture of Clorox and water (about one part bleach to three parts water).
Allow this to soak about five minutes and then flush with water.


D. H. Secor Wed To Wendy Sibert
Mary Gwendolyn Sibert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Pearson Sibert of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was married there yesterday to David Halfyard Secor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Alton Secor of Wayland, Mass.
The Rev.
Carlton Lee performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
The bride, who is 26 years old and known as Wendy, is a senior assistant director of admissions at Wellesley College.
She graduated from Lake Forest College and received a master's degree in student personnel administration from Columbia University.
Her father retired as a vice president of the Bank of New York.


Boating; World's Best Yachtswomen Rally in Newport
Jody Swanson, a 26-year-old sailor from Buffalo, is devoting the coming year to preparing for an Olympic campaign in Barcelona, Spain.
But when it comes to sailing against the best yachtswomen in the world, she has to look no further than a regatta this week in Newport, R.I.
Swanson is defending champion among 48 skippers planning to compete tomorrow in the biennial Rolex International Women's Keelboat Championship.
The five-day event is drawing sailing crews from nine countries, including Japan, New Zealand, Australia and Canada.
Four of the teams come from Russia and former republics of the Soviet Union.


Judge Thomas Takes the Stand
After a summer of wrangling over what Clarence Thomas believes and what his Supreme Court nomination portends, the judge will present himself on Tuesday to the Senate Judiciary Committee.
On political grounds alone, his prospects for approval are thought to be good.
But his voluminous written record leaves him with much to explain and the burden of proving that he will protect some treasured civil rights and liberties.
The senators, too, will be on public trial; the quality of their questions will reveal whether they are both eager and competent to fulfill their constitutional role as a full partner in the appointment process.
Contrary to theories that the Senate's "advice and consent" role is limited to measuring a nominee's technical fitness, the confirmation power is as broad as the President's power to nominate.
No less than the chief executive, the senators can weigh policy and ideology.


Can Jefferson Make It in Moscow?
As exhilarating and revolutionary as the events in the Soviet Union have been, they have failed to break that society's most troublesome governmental tradition -- the habit of anti-constitutionalism.
Boris N. Yeltsin rallied tens of thousands by condemning the coup as "anti-constitutional." When the plotters were defeated, Mikhail S. Gorbachev was restored to the presidency in the name of constitutionality.
But this was only lip service to an idea that has never taken root in Russia.


Manhattan Man Is Charged With Killing Man Left in Box
A 45-year-old man from midtown Manhattan was arrested early yesterday morning and charged with murder following the discovery of a body on Friday in a cardboard box outside a bank on Park Avenue, the police said.
"Fingerprints on evidence from the crime led to the arrest," Sgt.
Norris Hollomon said of the arrest of the suspect, identified as John Boyle of 301 West 48th Street.


A Temporary Cutback In Subway Service
Bottlenecks resulting from last month's fatal subway derailment have forced a temporary 25 percent cutback in the number of express trains on the Lexington Avenue line during rush hours, the Transit Authority said Friday.
Trains that normally run about 35 miles per hour must slow to 10 m.p.h. when they pass through the tunnel just north of Union Square, where 22 support columns were damaged in the Aug. 28 accident.


AIDS Test Required From Rape Suspect
A rape suspect in Monroe County has been ordered by a judge to undergo an AIDS test and to release the results to the alleged victim.
The case is unusual because the suspect, 21-year-old Clyde Dwayne Sellers, may be the first person in the state required to take an AIDS test before trial.
Most court rulings on this subject apply to convicted criminals.


Crowd Assaults a Policeman After an Arrest in Brooklyn
A police officer was assaulted early yesterday by an angry crowd that gathered in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, after the officer and his partner arrested a man for firing a handgun and resisting arrest, the police said.
The officer, whom the police declined to identify, broke a finger when several bottles were thrown at him.


Wai T. Ngai Is the Bride of Curtis Mo
Wai Tuen Ngai, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fong Fai Ngai of New York, was married last evening to Curtis Luke Mo, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Luke Mo of Blacksburg, Va.
The Rev.
Orlanda Brugnola, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Montauk Club in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Mo, 27 years old, graduated with distinction from Columbia University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her parents both work in the New York garment industry; her father is an inventory planner, and her mother is a seamstress.


Miss Cryer Weds V. E. Angermueller
Deborah Lee Cryer and Victor Edward Angermueller were married yesterday in Southport, Conn.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Alastair Votaw at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Angermueller, 27 years old, graduated from Skidmore College and is an account executive at MJM Creative Services Inc., a conference planning concern in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Cryer of Indian Hills, Ohio.
Her father is a director in the management systems division of Proctor &amp; Gamble in Cincinnati.
Her mother, Kristin Cryer, is a tax consultant for Keys &amp; Simpkinson, a financial services company in Cincinnati.


Unwilling to Write Political Prescriptions
KOOP
The Memoirs of America's Family Doctor.
By C. Everett Koop.
Illustrated. 342 pp.
New York: Random House. $22.50.


Keen Comments Reflect Match
To the Sports Editor:
I would like to commend the CBS television crew for perspicacious coverage during the Labor Day match at the United States Open between Jimmy Connors and Aaron Krickstein.
Specifically, I was impressed by the astute comments provided by Tony Trabert and John McEnroe (guest commentator) during the tenacious second-set tie breaker.
I'm sure that even the late venerable champion Bill Tilden would have appreciated the dialogue on "mistakes vs. luck" as a determinant in match outcome.


N.Y.U. Plans to Honor Early Law Alumnae
New York University Law School will honor some of its first female graduates at the centennial of the class of 1892 this week.
The celebration, beginning Wednesday evening at Carnegie Hall, will also include tributes to the nearly 5,000 women who have graduated since the first women set out to gain legal educations in a male-dominated field.


Prices Take a Tumble As Quality Heads Up
With many customers pinched for cash these days, the audio industry has steered its current design efforts toward twin goals: lower prices to make products affordable, and better value to make them attractive.
Throughout the field there has been a switch in attitudes toward design, as is evident from the new stereo equipment being introduced this fall.
Even companies known for expensive perfectionism in the past now pay attention to the relationship between price and performance.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


A Survivor Returns to Help Those Still on the Streets
SEVERAL days after a Federal judge dismissed Bridgeport's bankruptcy petition, Sandra Vining-Bethea was driving through the city's East Side in her silver minivan talking about the decision.
"I really have no patience with politics," said the 41-year-old AIDS outreach worker, who was dressed in a peach jumpsuit, her cinnamon-colored hair wrapped in a French roll.
"All I know is that I was born and raised in this town, and the problems are massive."


Heather Elizabeth Hild Is to Marry in December
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Hild of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Heather Elizabeth Hild to Nathaniel Bartlett Atwater Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Atwater of Little Compton, R.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Hild, 24 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is the assistant marketing manager for Hild Sails, a sail manufacturer in City Island, the Bronx.
Her father heads the company.


Correction
A chart last Sunday with an article about blimps misstated the number of blimps operated by Airship International.
It is three -- two for Sea World and one for the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.


Mood in Beirut's Southern Suburbs Is Still Defiant
Even though the Syrian-backed Government has moved forcefully in recent months to disarm Lebanon's militia fighters, the mood remains defiant here in Beirut's southern suburbs, the belt of poverty surrounding the southern and eastern fringes of the capital.
This overpopulated area, home to thousands of refugees driven north by Israeli air strikes and incursions, is the main stronghold of the Iranian-backed Shiite Muslim fundamentalist group calling itself the Party of God.
Somewhere deep inside the maze of endless alleys and intertwining roads, Shiite kidnappers affiliated with the Party of God are believed to hold some or all of the 10 Western hostages, whose freedom diplomats believe may be near as a result of stepped-up diplomacy.


Inviting In the Relatives
To the Editor:
"Cutting Costs on a Second Home," (Your Own Account, Aug. 18) correctly points out that "just one extra day of vacation could make a difference at tax time."


C. M. Avena Weds Karen L. Andress
Karen Lee Andress, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph C. Andress of Old Saybrook, Conn., was married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Old Lyme, Conn., to Charles Michael Avena, a son of Angela Avena of Whitestone, N.Y., and the late Carmine Avena.
The Rev.
David Good and the Rev.
Robert Bergin, a Roman Catholic priest, co-officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, is a psychiatric social worker for the Department of Mental Health at Connecticut Valley Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
She graduated from Goddard College and received a master's degree in social work from Boston College.
Her father is a vice president at UNC Naval Products in Montville, Conn.
Her mother, Jean Andress, is a sales representative at Marlborough Country Barn, a furniture store in Old Saybrook.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
ROOMMATES BY COMPUTER
AMID piles of clothing and electric appliances of every description, Judith Gibbons of Staten Island met Uri Sheth of Poughkeepsie for the first time last weekend.
The two are freshmen roommates at the State University at Stony Brook.


Budget Cuts Take Toll on Collegians In Different Ways
WHEN Joseph Masi's basketball coach called to tell him there would not be a team for the 1991-92 season, he thought it was a joke.
"When I realized he wasn't kidding, I couldn't believe it," said Mr.
Masi, a senior at the New York Institute of Technology in Old Westbury.
"My first thought was that I'm not going to play ball in my last year of school. Then I started worrying about my scholarship."


Safety Net: 2 Top Quarterbacks
The season-ending knee injury that befell Eagles quarterback Randall Cunningham and the broken thumb that knocked out Seattle's Dave Krieg for eight games will force other National Football League teams to examine their own backup quarterback situations.
The Eagles went to Jim McMahon, a 10-year veteran with a 52-25 record as a starter in Chicago and San Diego.
Seattle turned to Jeff Kemp, a 10-year veteran who has started for the Los Angeles Rams and San Francisco.
Both emerged with victories.


Data Update
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE RICES
July 91
June 91
July 90
Nation
$ 103,000
$ 102,000
$ 98,100
Northeast
143,500
141,800
143,300
Midwest
79,700
78,300
76,100
South
92,900
90,700
88,800
West
144,600
148,600
139,700
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
*4*Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.37
9.39
10.46
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.01
7.10
8.40
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.22
9.24
10.26
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.94
6.96
8.15
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.26
9.30
10.33
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.90
6.94
8.33
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.47
9.50
10.67
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.58
7.59
8.56
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.74
5.62
7.85
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.12
9.12
9.85
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Melancholy in the 50's
SKATING IN THE DARK
By David Michael Kaplan. 226 pp. New York:  Pantheon Books. $19.


Wendy Levin Is Married
Wendy Levin, a daughter of Jenny Levin of New York and Victor Levin of Roslyn, L.I., was married last evening to Bradford Kilbride Justus, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bertram W. Justus of Fullerton, Calif.
Rabbi Burt A. Siegel performed the ceremony at the Water Club.
Mrs.
Justus, 31 years old and a graduate of Sarah Lawrence College, was until recently the marketing manager for travel at Simon &amp; Schuster, the publishing house in New York.
She has been named the associate publisher of Fodor's travel guides.
The bridegroom, 31, is a freelance advertising copywriter in New York.
He graduated cum laude from Amherst College.


Notre Dame Continues Big Ten Dominance
Rick Mirer ran for 3 touchdowns and threw 58 yards to Irv Smith for another as No. 7 Notre Dame beat Indiana, 49-27, today.
Notre Dame is ranked sixth in The New York Times's Top 20.
Mirer, who this week had charges dropped after being arrested Aug. 30 for being drunk and disorderly, scored on runs of 46, 6 and 1 yards as Notre Dame won its 14th straight game over a Big Ten opponent.


Katherine Defoyd Weds David Murray
Katherine West Defoyd, the daughter of Mrs.
Joseph C. A. Eckhardt of Ashland, Ore., and Jim L. Defoyd of Houston, Tex., was married yesterday to David Gordon Murray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Murray of Millbrook, N.Y.
The Rev.
J.
Patrick Mauney, a deputy to the Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church,performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's stepsister, Laurel Eckhardt, in Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The bride, who is 28 years old and keeping her name, is the projects coordinator in the New York City Mayor's Office of Partnership Programs.
She graduated from San Francisco State University and received a master's degree in public administration from New York University.
Her mother, Linda West Eckhardt, is a cookbook author.
Her father is a lawyer in Houston.


On Abortion, More Doctors Are Balancing Practice and Ideology
By vocation, Dr.
Thomas A. McCarthy is an obstetrician and gynecologist.
By avocation, he is a pastor at a fundamentalist Christian church.
From both pulpits, Dr.
McCarthy delivers the same message: Life is sacred and abortion is wrong.
He is one of a growing number of obstetricians who align themselves with the anti-abortion movement and who practice what they preach.
On the simplest level, this means that Dr.
McCarthy and others like him will not terminate a pregnancy for any reason.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE CHOICE  By Barry Reed. Crown, $20.


P. W. Daly Wed To Ms. Marasco
Amy Anne Marasco and Peter William Daly were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Chappaqua, N.Y.
The Rev.
Timothy Ives, assisted by the Rev.
Timothy C. Conlon, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
The bride, 33 years old, is a daughter of Carol S. Marasco of Stamford, Conn., and Alan L. Marasco of Rye, N.Y.
The bridegroom, 28, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Daly of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Surviving Sexual Abuse
To the Editor:
As a writer and a survivor of sexual abuse myself, I was pleased to see a review of Betsy Petersen's "Dancing With Daddy: A Childhood Lost and a Life Regained" (Aug. 4).
However, Dara Culhane makes some rather damaging statements toward the end of her otherwise favorable review.


Miss Taylor Wed To James Brenner
Stacey Margaret Taylor, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stirling Grant Taylor of Weston, Mass., was married there yesterday to James Chamberlain Brenner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford James Brenner of New York.
Msgr.
S.
J.
Rossiter performed the ceremony at St.
Julia's Church.
Mrs.
Brenner, 31 years old, is a consultant at Cambridge Associates, a financial advisory concern in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Vermont and received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College.
Her father owns Tropic Heat, a fuel oil distributor in Newton Lower Falls, Mass.


POSTINGS: Sunnyside Gardens; A Curb Cut Stirs Dispute
Tired of looking for a legal, on-street parking space near his house, John Vasilis decided to turn a narrow strip at the side of his residence in Sunnyside, Queens, into a driveway.
But when the Buildings Department, in 1988, issued a permit for Mr.
Vasilis to cut the curb in front of his house at 39-90 46th Street, it did not notice that the house stands within the Sunnyside Special Planned Community Preservation District.
The district was designated by the city in 1974 to assist the preservation of the original 1920's community of Sunnyside Gardens, which was built by Henry Wright, Clarence Stein and Frederick Ackerman as an early, and highly regarded, effort in planned urban development.
It consists of large homes built around common interior courtyards and gardens -- and no driveways.


Making a Difference; A Studio Head Who Values Costly Talent
As the chairman of the Tristar Pictures subsidiary of Sony Pictures Entertainment, Michael Medavoy has spent the Japanese parent company's money rather freely for the last year and a half, with inconsistent results.
Tristar's "Hudson Hawk," starring Bruce Willis, was a major flop earlier this year.
But Mr.
Medavoy also has what most industry executives consider a sure-fire hit for the coming Christmas season in Steven Spielberg's "Hook." And last week, Mr.
Medavoy spent more of Sony's money on high-priced talent, signing Woody Allen to make his next movie for Tristar, the corporate sibling of Sony's Columbia Pictures studio.


A Desperate Boy in Desperate Times
THE WHISTLING SONG
By Stephen Beachy. 411 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


Christine Johnson and John Hall Wed
Christine Mary Johnson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George D. Johnson of Hatboro, Pa., was married yesterday to John Patrick Hall, a son of the late Anne Hall and the late Henry Hall, both of Philadelphia.
Msgr.
Joseph W. Murray performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Church in Jenkintown, Pa.
The bride, 28 years old, is an editor at The Allentown Morning Call in Allentown, Pa.
She graduated from Mount St.
Mary's College.
Her father is a mid-Atlantic regional marketing and sales manager for the Donnelley Directory.
Her mother, Kathleen Rita Johnson, is the office manager at Fast Forms Plus, a printing company in Fort Washington, Pa.


ARCHITECTURE
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
Exhibits


POSTINGS: Seed Lab Moving; Stonington Complex Started
DeKalb Plant Genetics, the big hybrid seed company based in DeKalb, Ill., will replace its current Groton, Conn., research laboratory with a $6.2 million, 53,000-square-foot laboratory, greenhouse and office complex near the Mystic Seaport in Stonington, Conn.
Ground was broken Aug. 9.
The new facility, to be completed a year from now, will employ about 60 people in the company's biotechnology program.
DeKalb conducts its research and marketing of corn, sorghum, sunflower and varietal soybean and alfalfa seed worldwide.


Making a Difference; Extracting Siberian Oil
Big oil companies remain wary about pledging billions to ventures in the vast oilfields of the Soviet republics.
But a deal joining Phibro Energy Inc. of Greenwich, Conn.; a Houston-based independent, Anglo-Suisse Inc., and a Russian oil association nearly a year ago is already providing the Russians with foreign currency from crude exports.
Several other independent oil companies in the West had signed deals before the coup attempt last month, but few have moved as rapidly as the Phibro-Anglo-Suisse group, called White Nights.
A Russian oil cooperative has 50 percent ownership.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on Aug. 25 about the composer John Adams omitted copyright information for a two-measure excerpt from the opera "The Death of Klinghoffer." The music was by Mr.
Adams and libretto by Alice Goodman.
Copyright $; 1991 by Red Dawn Music (represented by Hendon Music/Boosey &amp; Hawkes Inc.).


Yugoslav Peace Conference Begins


Often-Neglected Attics Need Yearly Inspection
MOST attics get little attention, but they should be inspected at least once a year.
Spring is the best time to do this, because any repairs that may require working on the roof are easily done during warm weather and there is little pressure to hurry the work before winter arrives.
If your attic has gone without a spring inspection, it is a good idea to check it in the fall.
This averts possible problems, the majority of which are most likely to occur during the winter.


It's Hard to Figure Rams, So Giants Stay on Guard
From the Giants, you can be reasonably sure of getting a rounded offense, ball control and solid defense.
From the Los Angeles Rams, who knows?
The Giants might get an answer when they play the Rams at 1 P.M.
Sunday in Giants Stadium.
The game will be carried in the New York area by Channel 2 and WNEW-AM.


Miss Goldsmith, Student, Is Wed
Daphne Amanda Goldsmith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard M. Goldsmith 3d of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to James Patrick Kennedy 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Kennedy of Columbus, Ohio.
The Rev.
Foster Wilson performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Rumson.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Villanova University and is studying for a master's degree in public administration at New York University.
Her father is the managing director of the Updata Group, an investment banking concern in Holmdel, N.J.
Her mother, Nadine D. Goldsmith, is the chief executive of Goldsmith Rabstein Associates, an advertising agency in Holmdel.


Christine Riley Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Ivers W. Riley Jr. of Watchung, N.J., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Christine Susan Riley, and Mark John Simko, a son of John J. Simko of Dunellen, N.J., and the late Dorothy Simko.
Miss Riley, 26 years old, is a travel counselor with American Express Corporate Travel in Piscataway, N.J.
She graduated from Centenary College.
The bridegroom-to-be, 29, is an associate in the law firm of Psak &amp; Parker in Middlesex, N.J.
He graduated from Rutgers University and received a law degree from Seton Hall University.


Jody Sayler Weds Christy Guzzetta
Karen Jody Sayler, the daughter of Joan Sayler of Edmond, Okla., was married yesterday to Christy Guzzetta, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Guzzetta of Yonkers, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Philip Culbertson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Chapel of Our Lady in Cold Spring, N.Y.
The bride, who is known as Jody, is 45 years old and is keeping her name.
She is a principal in the architectural firm of Sayler &amp; Alexandrakis in New York.
A graduate of the Parsons School of Design, she received a master's degree in architecture from Columbia University.
Her mother, who is retired, was one of the first women licensed as a commercial pilot in this country.
Her father was a pilot for American Airlines.


Michele Campbell Weds J. R. Boffa
Michele R. M. Campbell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerson Martinez Campbell of Ellington, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeffrey R. Boffa, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Boffa of Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald McKinney of the First Unitarian Church of Brooklyn performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's grandmother Hilda Striker in Pomona, N.Y.
Ms.
Campbell, who is 28 years old and is keeping her own name, is an associate at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from Stanford University.
Her father owns Hartford Manufacturing, aerospace component producers.
Her mother, Zelma Alpert Campbell, is an office manager in Wethersfield, Conn.


The Nation; Who's Judge Thomas? For Now, It Depends On Who You Are
EACH Supreme Court nomination there have been eight in the last decade -- has a dynamic of its own.
Robert H. Bork, for example, was a lightning rod, his forcefully stated positions evoking strong passions that still reverberate nearly four years after the Senate rejected his nomination.
Clarence Thomas, who goes before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday, is a Rorschach test.
What people see in his nomination depends largely on what they bring to it, on the hopes and fears they project onto a 43-year-old black man with a made-for-Hollywood life story whom President Bush chose to succeed Justice Thurgood Marshall.


Will Misses Become Hits When They Play at Home?
Video had the recessionary blahs this year, but a healthy infusion of new titles improves the prospects for fall.
As is true in most seasons, several big titles dominate, while many of the rest are solid entries that may have done only moderately well in movie theaters but could become stronger attractions in video stores on Friday and Saturday nights.
Technically, the season began last month with the release of Fox's "Home Alone," one of the largest box-office money makers ever, at a low price of $24.98, and Orion's "Dances With Wolves," the Kevin Costner epic, whose price, almost $100, is tailored for rentals rather than sales.
Either or both could be among the most successful titles in video history.


The New Nora in Joanna Gleason's World
"To begin with," says Joanna Gleason, who is talking about the forthcoming musical "Nick and Nora," "I'll be wearing high heels on stage for the first time ever."
This is not quite the idle thought it seems.
"Nick and Nora" is Broadway's answer to the celebrated "Thin Man" movie series in the 1930's and 40's that starred Myrna Loy and William Powell.
Ms.
Gleason will be playing Nora Charles, and, as she sees it, you have to get a certain lift into the role.


Los Angeles Held Liable for Rape by Officer
In a decision that broadens the liability of California municipalities for wrongdoingby law-enforcement officers, the State Supreme Court has ruled that Los Angeles must pay $150,000 to a woman raped 10 years ago by an on-duty police officer who had detained her on suspicion of drunken driving.
On a vote of 5 to 2, the court held Thursday that the officer had acted in the course of his employment and that the city was therefore liable.
The decision, which reversed an appellate court ruling, reinstated a jury's award to the woman, who has been identified in court papers only as Mary M.


Deborah Frank Engaged to Wed
The engagement of Deborah Frank to Peter J. Shabecoff has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Frank of Great Neck, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Frank, 25 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree cum laude from Harvard University.
She is to join the New York law firm of Davis, Polk &amp; Wardell this fall.
Her father is a lawyer in Manhasset, L.I.


4 Held in Slaying Of Lawyer on Road
Four New York City men were arrested for the murder of an East Meadow, L.I., real-estate lawyer, the state police said.
The victim, Sergio Taub, 31 years old, was shot in the chest on Aug. 31 while he was driving home from his office in Queens on the Meadowbrook Parkway.


Ski Training On a Cruise
The high seas may not be every skier's idea of a place to prepare for the coming season, but the Norwegian Cruise Line has a sailing for skiers from Sept. 28 to Oct. 5, leaving from Miami.
On board the Norway during its Caribbean cruise will be the ski champions Billy Kidd, Jimmie Huega, Suzy Chaffee, Hank Kashiwa and Doug Lewis.
Every day they will present programs ranging from exercise workouts to ski tips to equipment selection advice for all skiers on board.
The ski celebrities also will be available for questions and answers, socializing and autographs.
Representatives from the Stratton, Vt., and Steamboat and Vail-Beaver Creek, Colo., ski resorts will give presentations about their facilities during the cruise and there will be drawings for prizes.
In addition to preparing for skiing, passengers will be able to visit St.
Martin, St.
John, St.
Thomas and Pleasure Island in the Bahamas.
Prices for the cruise range from $1,195 to $5,495 a person, double occupancy.
Information: (800) 327-7030.


FOCUS: Chicago; A Housing Surge Gives Tenants the Edge
WITH the addition of nearly 4,000 units in six new downtown rental apartment complexes in the last 18 months, tenants are now dictating the terms here.
Competition is forcing leasing agents to offer a variety of inducements, from free health-club memberships to months of free rent and guarantees of limited increases at renewal time.


CHINESE RELATIONS
Nicholas Kristof says, "Chinese has about two dozen expressions for 'wife,' " but "most of the terms are unflattering" (On Language: "Chinese Relations," Aug. 18).
In a recent visit to China, I heard men referring to their wives as
wode furen
(my esteemed consort). The word
furen
is normally reserved for addressing ladies of distinction, such as
Chiang furen
(Madame Chiang Kai-shek). It is a far cry from the egalitarian
airen
(spouse, literally meaning "lover") in use since the Communist government abolished the feudal-sounding
xiansheng
(husband) and
taitai
(wife) some 40 years ago.
I take this exaggerated formality as a yearning among urban, educated Chinese for old-time civility and decorum.
NAILENE CHOU WIEST
Ossining, N.Y.


FILM
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
September
"DOGFIGHT" In 1963, Marines compete to find the ugliest date; River Phoenix discovers Lili Taylor.
The director Nancy Savoca has to find the quirks in this obvious plot, but she did that in "True Love," a comic gem about an Italian-American wedding.
Opening Friday.
"FREDDY'S DEAD: THE FINAL NIGHTMARE" Opening on Friday the 13th, this is supposedly the last installment of the visually impressive "Nightmare on Elm Street" series about the dreamy Freddy Krueger, complete with lethal nails and debonair fedora.
"PARADISE" It's easy to believe that Melanie Griffith and Don Johnson are married in real life, but will he be convincing as her shrimp-fisherman husband on screen?
A friend's son comes to stay with them in the country, evoking memories of their own dead child.
Another remake of a French film, the sweet "Grand Chemin." Sept. 18.
"THE FISHER KING" Jeff Bridges is an obnoxious disk jockey who causes a tragedy.
Robin Williams is a wise fool, a homeless, former professor of medieval history who thinks the Holy Grail is hidden in a tycoon's apartment.
Terry Gilliam gets the benefit of the doubt for having directed "Brazil." Sept. 20.
"INDIAN RUNNER" Sean Penn directs and writes this story of rivalry between Nebraskan brothers, one good, one bad.
Viggo Mortensen plays the rebel and David Morse the cop, with Charles Bronson and Sandy Dennis as their parents.
Shown at Cannes, it's reportedly a solid, distinctive first film.
Sept. 20.
NEW YORK FILM FESTIVAL The opening-night film is the Polish director Krzysztof Kieslowski's "Double Life of Veronique," with Irene Jacob (best actress at Cannes) as two women, one Polish, one French.
Other highlights include: "La Belle Noiseuse," Jacques Rivette's story of a painter; Jim Jarmusch's "Night on Earth," which tells five stories about taxi drivers; "The Adjuster" by the talented young Canadian director Atom Egoyan.
Sept. 20-Oct. 6, Lincoln Center. (875-5050)
"RAMBLING ROSE" Laura Dern is ahead of her time as a sexually free woman in the 1930's.
She goes to visit a Southern town, where Robert Duvall and Diane Ladd are among the shocked folks.
Martha Coolidge, the director of "Valley Girl," takes on a different female type; Calder Willingham adapted his semi-autobiographical novel.
Sept. 20.
"DECEIVED" A non-cute Goldie Hawn movie?
When her husband (John Heard) dies, it turns out his identity was fake, and she's in big trouble.
Co-written by Bruce Joel Rubin (the megahit "Ghost" and megaflop "Jacob's Ladder").
Sept. 27.
"THE SUPER" Joe Pesci plays a slumlord ordered by the court to live in one of his own buildings.
His hard heart softens (so he's not as tough as the "Goodfellas" killer for which he won an Oscar).
Directed by Rod Daniel ("K-9"), it will need Joe Pesci's manic edge.
Sept. 27.
"MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO" If you thought "Drugstore Cowboy" was offbeat, wait till you see Gus Van Sant's new film, a story of street hustlers with echoes of Shakespeare's "Henry IV, Part 1." River Phoenix and Keanu Reeves are the hustlers, with a Falstaffian pimp.
The movie will be shown at the New York Film Festival, where its ambition and artiness may find its most accepting audience.
Sept. 29.
October
"THE BUTCHER'S WIFE" Clothed and not visibly pregnant, Demi Moore returns to "Ghost"-land as a clairvoyant from North Carolina.
She marries a New York butcher, falls for a psychiatrist played by Jeff Daniels, and brings romantic comedy to her Greenwich Village neighborhood.
"CITY OF HOPE" John Sayles's gritty but hopeful view of politics involves construction workers, the Mob, a virtuous councilman (Joe Morton), and too many other characters to keep straight.
The fictional Hudson City is the scene of police brutality, racial violence and the writer-director's relentless intelligence.
"COOL AS ICE" Can the blond white rapper Vanilla Ice stay hot long enough to make this movie a hit?
And will he try to play this plot straight?
His motorcycle breaks down in a small town, he raps, he wins a good girl's heart and the good citizens' respect.
Sure.
"FRANKIE AND JOHNNY" If you can buy Michelle Pfeiffer and Al Pacino as losers, you'll buy this film.
Pfeiffer gets plain (which makes her a gorgeous woman with no makeup) as an emotionally repressed waitress involved with a short-order cook (Pacino).
Garry Marshall ("Pretty Woman") directs.
Terrence McNally adapted his play "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune."
"HARD PROMISES" Sissy Spacek and William Petersen star in this romantic comedy about a rogue who tries to win his ex-wife back on the eve of her wedding.
Sounds trite, but the director, Martin Davidson, did the wonderful HBO baseball movie "Long Gone."
"HOMICIDE" David Mamet's latest is the closing-night feature of the New York Film Festival.
His regular and best actor, Joe Mantegna, is a confused Jewish cop who investigates the murder of a Jewish woman and thinks he is onto an anti-Semitic conspiracy.
Mamet's smart-guy mind game won't reveal too much too soon.
"HOUSE PARTY 2" Wholesome rap stars Kid 'n' Play return in this sequel, but not Reginald and Warrington Hudlin, who directed and produced the high-energy original.
There may be plenty of new energy from this grab-bag cast: Full Force, Iman, Queen Latifah and Georg Stanford Brown.
George Jackson and Doug McHenry (producers of "New Jack City") co-direct.
"KAFKA" The brilliant Jeremy Irons, who can be Kafkaesque under the sunniest circumstances, plays Kafka.
The second film by Steven Soderbergh is daringly different from "Sex, Lies and Videotape." Shot in black and white in Prague, it is an imaginative journey into Kafka's life and mind, with Theresa Russell as his love and Alec Guinness as his boss.
"LET HIM HAVE IT" Peter Medak's last film, "The Krays," was the story of real-life criminal brothers from England.
It was first-rate but too English for American audiences, and this sounds the same: the story of Derek Bentley, a retarded British teen-ager who was hanged for taking part in a 1952 warehouse robbery and murder.
"LITTLE MAN TATE" Smart, no-nonsense Jodie Foster parlayed her best-actress Oscar for "The Accused" into her first directing job: the story of a lonely 7-year-old prodigy, Fred Tate, caught in a tug-of-war between his working-class Mom (Foster)and a child psychologist (Dianne Wiest).
"OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY" Great casting can save this no-longer-timely version of the 1989 play.
Danny DeVito mixes greed with comedy as Larry the Liquidator, the ruthless Wall Street takeover king, who targets a factory run, with old-time humanity, by Gregory Peck.
Penelope Ann Miller is Peck's soft-looking, tough-talking lawyer.
Directed by Norman Jewison ("Moonstruck").
"THE RAPTURE" Mimi Rogers is a woman who turns from sex to evangelical Christianity and prepares for the Apocalypse.
The first film directed by the screenwriter Michael Tolkin tackles an ambitious, slippery subject.
Meant to be haunting and provocative, it convinced the New York Film Festival, which will present it.
"29TH STREET" This could be a breakthrough for Anthony LaPaglia, who stole "Betsy's Wedding" from Alan Alda.
Here he is a finalist in the New York State Lottery, in conflict with Dad (Danny Aiello) and thugs who want his lucky ticket.
"WHORE" If it's as blunt as its title, this might be the ultimate rejoinder to "Pretty Woman." Ken Russell brings his typically lush style and controversial approach to this not-pretty story of a prostitute.
Played by Theresa Russell (a no-holds-barred actress herself), her life is rough, vulgar, passionless.
November
"THE ADDAMS FAMILY" Charles Addams's lovable ghoulish family is hilariously cast -- Anjelica Huston is Morticia and Raul Julia is Gomez.
The first film directed by the cinematographer Barry Sonnenfeld ("Miller's Crossing"), with a script by the very funny Paul Rudnick ("I Hate Hamlet").
"ALONE TOGETHER" Goldie Hawn does the plucky-single-Mom routine.
Set in Key West in 1969, this is heavy on 60's memorabilia.
Hopeful signs: it's directed by Chris Menges ("A World Apart"), with a fine cast including Arliss Howard and Keith Carradine.
"AN AMERICAN TAIL: FIEVEL GOES WEST" In this sequel to Don Bluth's animated mouse-tale, the Russian-immigrant Fievel Mousekewitz fulfills every kid's fantasy: he becomes a gunslinging lawman in the Wild West.
Voices by Amy Irving, Jimmy Stewart, Dom DeLuise and John Cleese.
"Presented by" Steven Spielberg, directed by Phil Nibbelink and Simon Wells.
"ARTICLE 99" Deja vu, Catch-22.
Irreverent but dedicated doctors and nurses, this time in a veterans' hospital.
Ray Liotta, Kiefer Sutherland, Forest Whitaker and Kathy Baker star.
"AT PLAY IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD" Missionaries and mercenaries threaten a village on the Amazon River in this version of Peter Matthiessen's newly-topical, politically correct 1965 novel.
Hector Babenco ("Kiss of the Spiderwoman") directs Aidan Quinn and Kathy Bates.
"BEAUTY AND THE BEAST" Set in 18th-century France, this animated feature blends the classic Disney-musical treatment with the classic fairy tale.
Music by the "Little Mermaid" people.
"BUGSY" The first Beatty-Bening baby, with Warren Beatty as the man who built Vegas and Annette Bening as the glamour-girl he loves.
Barry Levinson directs.
"CAPE FEAR" Martin Scorsese, one of the few best directors alive, remakes the 1962 film noir.
Robert De Niro is the ex-con who terrorizes a lawyer (Nick Nolte) and his wife (Jessica Lange).
"LOVE CRIMES" Sean Young is an ambitious Atlanta prosecutor, who tracks down an alleged rapist (Patrick Bergin).
He is more interested in sex games than in sex; she
wants
to be his victim, to test her kinky side.
Lizzie Borden, who directed the smart semi-documentary about prostitutes, "Working Girls," is aiming for controversy and will probably get it.
"THE MAMBO KINGS" Based on Oscar Hijuelos's rich, Pulitzer Prize-winning novel.
Armand Assante and Antonio Banderas are Cuban brothers who move to New York in the 1950's and find brief success with a musical group called the Mambo Kings.
They idolize Desi Arnaz, played here by Desi Arnaz Jr.
Great possibilities, but can first-time director Arne Glimcher -- an art dealer turned movie producer -- pull this off?
"MEETING VENUS" She can act, but can she lip-sync?
Glenn Close plays a Swedish opera diva with Kiri Te Kanawa's dubbed-in voice in this romantic comedy about a tyrannical conductor trying to pull off a major Paris production.
Directed by the Hungarian director Istvan Szabo ("Mephisto"), with Niels Arestrup as the conductor.
An international goulash, with music.
"MY GIRL" The new Macaulay Culkin movie, even though he only plays the heroine's best friend.
Anna Chlumsky is an 11-year-old tomboy, jealous when her widowed mortician father (Dan Aykroyd) falls for his cosmetologist (Jamie Lee Curtis).
This is not a John Hughes film, but you'd never know.
"NOISES OFF" Peter Bogdanovich (who needs a hit) directs this version of Michael Frayn's popular Broadway farce.
Carol Burnett, Michael Caine and Christopher Reeve are members of a disaster-prone theater troupe.
"PROSPERO'S BOOKS" Peter Greenaway's visually extravagant, eccentric version of Shakespeare's "Tempest," with John Gielgud as Prospero guiding us through the books he has taken to his island exile.
Praised and excoriated for "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover," Mr.
Greenaway returns to the lyrical meditations about art that informed his "Draughtsman's Contract." Included in the New York Film Festival.
"SHINING THROUGH" Melanie Griffith fights World War II and doesn't even have to get dirty.
She is a half-Jewish secretary from Queens sent by the O.S.S. to Berlin, on a mission to spy on a Nazi officer.
With Michael Douglas as her sometime-lover and boss.
Based on Susan Isaacs's best-selling novel.
December
"CITY OF JOY" Patrick Swayze, who plays a doctor in the poorest section of Calcutta in this film directed by Roland Joffe ("The Killing Fields").
"FATHER OF THE BRIDE" A sure sign of regressive times: a big-wedding-movie remake.
This updated version of the Spencer Tracy-Elizabeth Taylor classic stars Steve Martin as the Dad who worries about losing his little girl and Diane Keaton as the good Mom.
From Charles Shyer and Nancy Meyers, who made "Baby Boom," the least realistic having-it-all film in recent memory.
"FOR THE BOYS" Personal traumas, historical battles and music as Bette Midler and James Caan play long-lived U.S.O. performers seen from World War II through Vietnam.
A pet project of Midler's, directed by Mark Rydell, who also directed her best film, "The Rose."
"FRIED GREEN TOMATOES" Kathy Bates visits Jessica Tandy in a nursing home and hears her story about female friendship in an old Southern town.
In flashbacks to the 1920's, Tandy turns into Mary Stuart Masterson.
From Fanny Flagg's affecting comic novel, "Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle-Stop Cafe."
"GRAND CANYON" Lawrence Kasdan, of "Big Chill" fame, turns his serio-comic ensemble approach to Los Angeles in the 90's.
Danny Glover, Kevin Kline, Steve Martin, Alfre Woodard and Mary McDonnell, among others, discover that the city is a killer but it's a wonderful life.
"HIGH HEELS" Pedro Almodovar's women are always on the verge of some sort of nervous breakdown.
Here a daughter marries her mother's former lover.
He turns up dead, and the women share the mother-daughter experience of being murder suspects.
"HOOK" Or "Peter Pan II," Steven Spielberg's glitzy, updated fantasy about a grown-up Peter (Robin Williams), a still-villainous Hook (Dustin Hoffman) and the spritely Tink (Julia Roberts).
The year's most-awaited and probably biggest movie, arriving in time for Christmas vacation.
"THE INNER CIRCLE" Andrei Konchalovsky ("Runaway Train") shot this in Moscow -- within Kremlin walls and K.G.B. headquarters, we're told.
Bob Hoskins plays a K.G.B. agent who seduces the wife of Stalin's personal projectionist.
Tom Hulce and Lolita Davidovich star, with a cast of Soviet actors.
Why is this opening on Christmas Day?
"JACK THE BEAR" Danny DeVito grapples with life as the widowed father of two small sons and host of a late-night horror show.
Directed by Marshall Herskovitz (a "Thirty something" creator), written by Steven Zaillian ("Awakenings"), it sounds heavy on Feelings and will need all the star's bittersweetness.
"THE LAST BOY SCOUT" A buddy-movie-mystery, with Bruce Willis as a detective whose client is murdered (good work, Bruce) and Damon Wayans as the dead woman's ex-football-player boyfriend.
They team up to solve the murder and along the way make the world safe for professsional football.
Action by the director Tony Scott ("Top Gun").
Words by Shane Black ("Lethal Weapon"), who got $1.75 million for this script.
"MADAME BOVARY" Claude Chabrol's faithful version of Flaubert's novel, starring Isabelle Huppert as the hopelessly romantic housewife.
Visually these bourgeois are more
hauts
than
petits
, in a film that was widely praised in France, where they take Emma seriously.
"MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART" Anne Parillaud ("La Femme Nikita"), Patrick Bergin, John Cusack and Jeanne Moreau star in a complicated love story spanning 30 years, two continents and you don't want to know how many coincidences.
A Canadian Inuit Indian loves a half-Cree woman, who falls for him
and
a white map maker.
Directed by the New Zealander Vincent Ward, whose exquisite time-traveling film, "The Navigator," suggests he can maneuver through this.
"MEDICINE MAN" The first of many eco-movies comes from John McTiernan, the director of "Die Hard." Sean Connery is a temperamental scientist in an endangered rain forest; Lorraine Bracco is his assistant.
Written by Tom Schulman, who wrote the mawkish "Dead Poets Society"; maybe the stars can prevent this from being "Dead Trees Society."
"THE PRINCE OF TIDES" Columbia Pictures is working triple-time to put out the word that it's great, but this vanity-production could still turn out to be the "Hudson Hawk" of the winter.
Barbra Streisand directs, stars and co-wrote this version of Pat Conroy's best-selling novel.
She is a New York psychiatrist, Nick Nolte is a Southern man whose suicidal sister was Streisand's patient.
The last time she directed, it was "Yentl."
"RHAPSODY IN AUGUST" From one of the true masters, Akira Kurosawa.
Set near Nagasaki, it explores the effects of the atomic bomb on three generations of a family.
Sachiko Murase plays a woman who lived through the bombing, with Richard Gere as her Japanese-American nephew.
"RUSH" The superb Jennifer Jason Leigh ("Last Exit to Brooklyn") plays an addicted undercover narcotics agent, in a drama of crime, cocaine and love with Jason Patric.
Based on Kim Wozencraft's autobiographical novel, this is the first film directed by Lili Fini Zanuck, who co-produced "Driving Miss Daisy."
"STAR TREK VI: THE UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY" After "Star Trek V," this should be called "Star Trek VI: How Dare They?" But it's the 25th anniversary of "Star Trek," so the old standbys -- William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy and the rest of the Enterprise crew -- take on the Klingons for a "final adventure," so they say.
The promising sign is that it was directed by Nicholas Meyer ("Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan").
January
"ALIEN 3" Look out, slimy space creatures, Sigourney Weaver is back as the macho Ripley and this time she's directed by David Fincher, the man behind Madonna's Vogue video.
Charles Dance joins her on a distant planet to fight that annoying alien-in-the-stomach feeling.
"BLUE SKY" Jessica Lange is an emotionally volatile wife and Tommy Lee Jones her scientist husband.
In 1962, they become involved in a military cover-up.
Directed by the always-smart Tony Richardson ("Tom Jones").
"FREEJACK" Billed as a "futuristic action adventure," it better have a sense of humor.
Emilio Estevez is a race car driver who crashes into the year 2009.
There he is pursued by a bounty hunter played by, really, Mick Jagger.
Anthony Hopkins (Hannibal Lecter himself) stars as a sleazeball selling immortality.
Directed by Geoff Murphy ("Young Guns II").
"NAKED LUNCH" David Cronenberg ("Dead Ringers") brings the right creepy-crawly sensibility to William Burroughs's apparently unfilmable novel.
Peter Weller, better known as Robocop, plays a writer in a bizarre land of addicts, spies and monsters.
The cast includes Judy Davis, Ian Holm and Julian Sands.
February
"BASIC INSTINCT" Gay activists have called this movie homophobic.
Its star, Michael Douglas, and director, Paul Verhoeven, say it is an unbiased murder mystery.
On the streets of San Francisco, Douglas is a cop tracking down a serial killer.
Verhoeven's last film was the Schwarzenegger smash "Total Recall," but he can get much stranger ("Spetters").
"BEETHOVEN" Charles Grodin's suburban family is disrupted by a St.
Bernard named Beethoven.
Do stories get sillier than this?
"MISSISSIPPI MASALA" The second film by the talented Indian-born director Mira Nair ("Salaam Bombay") is a romance about race, prejudice and cultural identity.
Denzel Washington falls in love with the daughter of an Indian family expelled from Uganda, now running a motel in the South.
Spring
"FERNGULLY: THE LAST RAIN FOREST" The little rain forest that could.
This ecologically responsible animated feature, based on a children's book, is a fantasy about a jungle in jeopardy.
Voices by Christian Slater, Robin Williams, Tim Curry.
"HOWARD'S END" E. M. Forster's elegant 1910 novel about an unconventional Edwardian family is given the Merchant-Ivory treatment.
Starring Anthony Hopkins, Vanessa Redgrave and Emma Thompson.
J.
F.
K.
Oliver Stone's already-controversial film takes on the Kennedy assassination and the possibility of a conspiracy.
Kevin Costner plays Jim Garrison, the district attorney who tried to prove a conspiracy, with Gary Oldman as Lee Harvey Oswald.
"LOVE FIELD" Another J. F. K. movie, this one with an interracial theme.
Michelle Pfeiffer is a Dallas housewife obsessed with Jacqueline Kennedy.
On a bus to J. F. K.'s funeral, she meets a black man and his small daughter.
Directed by Jonathan Kaplan ("The Accused").
"PRELUDE TO A KISS" Alec Baldwin and Meg Ryan in a fairy tale about love.
Ryan's spirit enters an old man's body, and Baldwin must decide whether beauty is skin deep.
Written by Craig Lucas and directed by Norman Rene, who brought the play to Broadway.
"SHADOWS AND FOG" How is Madonna connected to Mia Farrow and John Malkovich?
Could she be their long-lost daughter?
We'll have to wait for Woody Allen's new comedy to find out, but we know it is set in the 1920's, shot in black and white, and also features Jodie Foster, Kathy Bates, John Cusack and Allen.


Soviet Society Yearns, Above All, for Order; Live From Moscow
To the Editor:
Cable News Network's coverage of events in the Soviet Union will doubtless be judged another triumph.
Yet differences in the role and value of the news media during the Persian Gulf war and the Soviet coup present a number of ironies.


New Yorkers, etc.
Breathes there a soul who has never had a lemon for a dinner partner -- the kind of lemon that translates to an unmitigated nonreturnable two-hour disaster.
It's possible but not probable, especially since it applies to the business, social and benefit circles of a big city.
Fortunately for the men and women who attend scores of dinner parties each season -- and are revving up for the new one -- lemons are the exception rather than the rule.
True, there aren't a lot of peaches either, male or female, but most guests, while they may not be balls of fire, intellectual giants or personality kids, are at least pleasant to be with.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport 178,000
2 William Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, water view; taxes $3,300.
Bohemia 175,000
110 Hill Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 17-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, 0.75 acres; taxes $3,500.
Levittown 127,500
214 North Bellmore Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, l-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Northport 204,000
154 Church Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; basement, fireplace, 1-car attached garage, 0.5 acres; taxes $3,500.
Oakdale 170,000
212 Matthews Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath 27-year-old ranch; great room, eat-in kitchen, basement, pool; taxes $5,000.
Sayville 185,000
298 Astor Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; dining room, den, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $4,700.
OTHER AREAS Chappaqua, N.Y. 397,500
75 Seven Bridges Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, den, deck, screened porch; taxes $7,450.
Torrington, Conn. 124,000
89 Blake Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 90-year-old Victorian; front porch, updated kitchen, 0.33 acre; taxes $1,882.
Wayne, N.J. 300,000
111 Timberline Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen, fireplace; taxes $5,798.


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
As I read Swados's article about her brother, Lincoln, I realized that I knew him.
I would see Lincoln on the street wearing a suit of olive-green Army clothes.
When I heard that he had died -- for he was a fixture on the Lower East Side -- I missed him, and now, he has an identity and a place in time.
BERT ZACKIM
New York, N.Y


October Wedding For Miss Devine
Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Martin Devine of Arlington, Mass., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Suzanne Mary Devine, and Robert Andrew Karr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Karr of Bainbridge Island, Wash.
Miss Devine, 30 years old, is an operations coordinator at Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University, and received a master's degree in art history from Williams College and an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is the counsel of the Lexington Insurance Company in Boston.
Her mother, Helen Devine, teaches an eighth-grade class at St.
Agnes School in Arlington.


Israel's Security Costs
Israel is paying for its obsession with security as its military needs divert attention and funds from such social issues as homeless Soviet Jews, troubled schools and a failing health-care system.
Magazine, section 6.


A Kosher Tour Of Thailand
Meals from the only glatt -- or rigorously kosher -- restaurant in Bangkok will be served during what the organizers describe as the first glatt kosher tour of Thailand.
The 16-day trip, with departures every Wednesday starting Oct. 30 through next April, is offered by Adventures in Paradise, a specialist in tours to Southeast Asia.
Tina's Restaurant, which, the tour company says, will provide a la carte meals while the tour is in Bangkok, offers a variety of Thai, Indian and Western dishes.
All its kitchen procedures are supervised by a qualified mashgiach; by arrangement with Dusit Hotels and Resorts of Thailand, the company adds, meals served outside Bangkok will be prepared and served under strict supervision.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


A Grass-Roots Effort To Preserve a Forest
A 48-ACRE tract of forest land here has become the focal point of a citizens campaign to preserve the last woods in this three-square mile village.
The village's Mayor, its Board of Trustees, the State Parks Department and the County Executive have all indicated their support for the grass-roots preservation effort.
But the question is whether enough money can be raised to purchase the tract from a developer who bought it for $5 million and plans to build 82 homes on it.


On Her Terms
Dr.
Frances K. Conley has not completely forgiven the Stanford Medical School, but she is coming home.
Dr.
Conley, a prominent neurosurgeon who quit the Stanford faculty in June complaining of sexism, said last week that the school had changed its ways enough -- and promised to make more changes -- to persuade her to return.
That fact that Dr.
Conley is going back even though the main issue in her resignation is officially unresolved -- she left right after the appointment of a man she called a sexist as acting head of neurosurgery -- suggests that a resolution to her liking is on the way.
In announcing her return, officials said that they were reviewing charges of sexism against the acting head of neurosurgery, Dr.
Gerald Silverberg, and that a decision about the chairmanship would be influenced by their review.
Dr.
Conley was less cagey about the issue.
She said she had told Stanford that she would not return as long as Dr.
Silverberg was chairman.


Mutual Funds; The Investor's Typical Mistakes
Mutual fund investors cannot expect to hit the bull's-eye every time.
But some simple strategies can tip the odds in their favor.
Here are what some fund experts say are common mistakes.
*
Failing to diversify.
The best way to reduce investment risk is to diversify among various financial markets.
Yet many investors buy a number of funds that invest in the same market segment.


Lithuania's Prosecutor Denies Rehabilitating Nazi War Criminals
Lithuania's chief prosecutor yesterday denied a report that two Lithuanians convicted by Soviet tribunals of Nazi war crimes had been exonerated, and said that a third man named in the report had been properly cleared because it was never proved that he participated in the murder of Jews.
"The Government of the Republic of Lithuania has not started issuing certificates of rehabilitation for Nazi war criminals," Arturas Paulauskas, Lithuania's Prosecutor General, said in a statement released in Moscow in response to a report in The New York Times.


Miss Millstein, A Lawyer, Is Wed
Elizabeth J. Millstein, a partner in the law firm of Anderson, Kill, Olick &amp; Oshinsky, and Kenneth Dale Tremain Jr., an assistant vice president in the capital markets group at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith, both in New York, were married last evening at the Quaker Ridge Golf Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Cantor Raymond Smolover and the Rev.
Louise Peach, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Tremain, 28 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira M. Millstein of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father, a senior partner in the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, is the chairman of the Central Park Conservancy and a vice chairman of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
Her mother, Diane Greenberg Millstein, is the president of DGM-I Corporation, a real estate development company in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mr.
Tremain, 27, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tremain of Katonah, N.Y.
He graduated from the University of Virginia.
His father is the chief patent counsel for the Quantum Chemical Corporation in New York.


Q and A
Testing Ceramics for Lead
Q.
I recently purchased stoneware in Mexico but am reluctant to use it because it may possibly contain lead.
Is there a way to test for lead? -- Moira Tamayo-Cole, Brooklyn


The Executive Life; Making the Scene At the U.S. Open
It's a sweltering afternoon at the U.S.
Open, and Boris Becker is drenched with sweat going into the third set.
The stadium's upper levels are packed with spectators, but down below, the crowd is sparse.
At center court, the two boxes belonging to the Chase Manhattan Corporation are conspicuously empty, their blue plastic seats shimmering in the sun.
Don't think Chase doesn't harbor serious tennis fans.
Just outside the stadium, in an enormous air-conditioned hospitality tent, a handful of Chase executives -- and their guests -- are lolling on wicker settees, swilling Bloody Marys and shouting at Becker's image on a big-screen television.
From time to time, they amble by the bar for another cocktail, or select a few hors d'oeuvres from the silver chafing dishes on the buffet table.
When Becker smashes a volley, they break into cheers and whistles.


Racial Debate 101
City College of New York is getting a drawn-out lesson in race and controversy.
Even before its black studies chairman, Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., spoke last July of his theories of a Jewish- and Mafia-led conspiracy against blacks in Hollywood, there was Dr.
Michael Levin, who in his academic writings asserted that blacks are intellectually inferior to whites.
In Dr.
Levin's case, the school moved to censure him, investigating the tenured philosophy professor and setting up separate sections of his courses for those offended by his views.
Dr.
Levin sued, and on Wednesday a Federal judge ruled that the school violated his rights to free speech and due process and may not punish him for his views.
The professor, who is on leave to write a book on racial differences, said he thought the ruling would help the case of Dr.
Jeffries.
On Thursday the school suspended its investigation of Dr.
Jeffries while it studies the Levin decision.


The 'Private Purpose' Alternative
The number of tax-free money funds that invest in "private purpose" municipal bonds -- also called alternative-minimum-tax paper -- has more than doubled since 1989.
The average fund has increased its holdings of A.M.T. paper from 6.4 percent of the portfolio to an all-time high of 8.4 percent, according to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report in Holliston, Mass.
A.M.T. bonds are issued by governments to finance housing projects and student loans, among other things.
While the interest is free from regular income tax, it may face the alternative minimum tax, owed by those with large deductions or tax-preferred income.


Full Credit All Around
To the Editor:
In his critique of the newest plan for developing the former Penn Central rail yards into Riverside South, Paul Goldberger tells the story of how an untenable Trump City evolved into a plan that is a "cause for celebration rather than embarrassment"  [ "Lower Skyline, Higher Aspirations," Aug. 11 ] .


Audio and Video Are Finally Getting Hitched
The marriage of audio and video, after a long and somewhat tentative period of engagement, will finally be consummated.
Increasingly, audio and video systems are being merged into integrated home entertainment centers, and the new equipment to be launched this fall reflects this trend.
The pair that was joined in the new union of audio and video has come together from different backgrounds.
Audio's musically distinguished lineage reaches back nearly a century to the phonographs that immortalized the pianism of Brahms and the fiddling of Isaye.
Video, by contrast, is a brash upstart, steeped in the aura of show biz.
But the two were meant for each other.


Leslie Ann Baker Married
Leslie Ann Baker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dexter Farrington Baker of Allentown, Pa., was married there yesterday to Albert Charles Boris 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boris Jr. of Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
The Rev.
Wilbur E. Goist officiated at The First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Boris, 37 years old, is an assistant vice president at the Fidelity Bank in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
The bridegroom, 33, is a stockbroker with Alex Brown &amp; Sons in Philadelphia.
He graduated from Pennsylvania State University, where he received an M.B.A. and a master's degree in forest products.


Mary Schoenlein and William McKibbin Wed
Mary Schoenlein and William Patrick McKibbin were married yesterday at the summer home of his parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William McKibbin, in Saltaire, L.I.
Joel L. Carr, Mayor of Saltaire, officiated.
Ms.
Schoenlein, who is 35 years old and is keeping her name, is a chef who graduated from Mount St.
Agnes Academy in Hamilton, Bermuda.
She is a daughter of Patricia M. Tatum of Crawl, Bermuda, and William F. Schoenlein, a retired Air Force sergeant, of Sarasota, Fla.


Danny DeVito, This Year's Redford
Danny DeVito is the new Robert Redford.
In Hollywood, where you're only as big as the speed with which people return your calls, nobody calls back Danny DeVito "later." A gag originated in the movie business describing Robert Redford's power.
Now you can add a new player.
"In Hollywood a good script is a script Danny DeVito likes, a bad script is a script Danny DeVito doesn't like, a script that needs work is a script Danny DeVito is thinking about."
Just consider the number of phone calls and the deal making that went into the following lineup of movies, the accumulated Hollywood power implied: On Oct. 25, "Other People's Money" will be released starring Danny DeVito.
At Christmas "Jack the Bear" opens starring Danny DeVito.
In the Batman sequel, the part of the Penguin is slated for Danny DeVito.
Beginning production in January is "Hoffa," directed by Danny DeVito, starring Jack Nicholson as Jimmy Hoffa, with a part played by Danny DeVito.
In a season of films with such stars as Warren Beatty, Dustin Hoffman, Al Pacino and Michael Douglas, Danny DeVito from Asbury Park, N.J., may turn out to cast the longest shadow.


Miss Pavetti Wed To J. F. Hogan Jr.
Leah Thomas Pavetti, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Pavetti of Waterford, Conn., was married yesterday to James Francis Hogan Jr., the son of Mr.
Hogan of Bayport, L.I., and the late Mrs.
Hogan.
The Rev.
Joseph Castaldi performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Joseph in New London, Conn.
Mrs.
Hogan, 27 years old, graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Suffolk University in May.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Pavetti &amp; Freeman in New London.
Her mother, Sally Thomas Pavetti, is the curator of the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford and of Monte Cristo cottage, the O'Neill family home, in New London.


Chrysanthemums Add to Fall's Brilliance
CHRYSANTHEMUMS are synonymous with fall, which arrives on the morning of Sept. 23.
Yet these daisylike flowers never go by the calendar and bloom when they want to.
Some are in bloom now; others are showing promise with fat buds.
Most of the flower colors will match those of the trees' leaves in assorted shades of yellow, bronze and maroon.
One relatively new chrysanthemum caused a sensation among gardeners last year.
It is the tidy little groundcovering species Chrysanthemum pacificum with silver-edged leaves and a flat spreading habit.
Its only drawback is its habit of flowering late in the season.
The little yellow buttons are somewhat shy in appearing and often wait until early September.
Although tardy in this respect, once this mum's roots take hold, it becomes a showpiece.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Both the sink and counter top in my bathroom are made of composition material in an off-white color.
A black ring about an eighth of an inch wide has developed around the basin drain.
Is there any way I can get rid of the ring?
A.
The black ring may be either dirt mixed with soap residue, or mildew or a combination of both.
Either way, I suggest using an old toothbrush to scrub it off.
If it is mostly dirt and soap curd, then you should be able to scrub it off with a scouring powder like Comet or Zud.
If it is mildew or mold, you will have to also use a mixture of Clorox and water (about one part bleach to three parts water).
Allow this to soak about five minutes and then flush with water.


Corrections
Two picture captions and credits under the Critic's Choices heading on page 20 of the Arts and Leisure section today are reversed in some copies.
The top photograph shows a member of the Paul Taylor Dance Company in Mr.
Taylor's "Fancy"; the bottom photograph shows a member of Anna Teresa Keersmaeker's troupe in her "Stella."


Miss Goldberg Wed to Paul M. Russo
Allison Goldberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert J. Goldberg of Sharon, Mass., was married yesterday to Paul Martin Russo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Silvio A. Russo of Buffalo.
The Rev.
Edward Anderson, a Unitarian minister, officiated at a nondenominational ceremony at the White Elephant hotel in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Russo, 24 years old, is a design manager at Scholastic Inc., a publisher of educational materials for children in New York.
She is a graduate of Choate Rosemary Hall and Carnegie-Mellon University.
Her father is a sales executive at the Mercury International Corporation, a shoe importing concern in North Attleboro, Mass.
Her mother, Joan Goldberg, teaches elementary school in Brockton, Mass.


Connors: The Shoes
JIMMY CONNORS is up to his ankles in a shoe controversy.
Connors, who at age 39 defied the odds by winning reaching the semifinals at the United States Open, has endorsed Converse shoes for so long that the company named a line of tennis shoes for him.
Yet at the Open he has played in Nikes.
What's the story here?


Style Makers; Maribeth Ricour de Bourgies, Shoppers' Guide
When Americans go to France to shop, Maribeth Ricour de Bourgies can help separate them from their money.
Ms. de Bourgies and three other French-speaking American women lead chauffeur-driven shopping expeditions through the flea markets, fashion houses and chocolate shops of Paris.
Her Chic Promenade tours are not for the shopper who wants to discover Paris serendipitously by ambling down a street.
What she offers is instant gratification and a sense of privilege.


Clio Has a ProblemCorrections
THE SCENE: A seminar room at Harvard.
The occasion: an oral examination for a history senior in danger of flunking his final exam.
The question: "Would you care to to compare the Italians' experience of the First World War with their experience of the Second World War?" Panic strikes the student; beads of perspiration form on his brow.
His nervous response: "You mean there were two?"
What has gone wrong with historical education?
Consider the landscape.
More professional historians -- those who earn their bread by doing nothing else -- are at work today than at any time since Herodotus began his chronicle.
Graduate programs in mighty universities produce legions of Ph.D.'s, who go on to produce yet more Ph.D.'s, who populate the countless conferences and multiplying institutes.
The once-spacious chambers of the historical house have become subdivided into ever-smaller closets of specialization.
More and more is known about less and less.
Articles like "Labor Relations in the Dutch Margarine Industry 1870-1934" (History Workshop Journal, 1990) have no difficulty in finding a publisher.


Surgery Will Keep King Out of Action
BERNARD KING has undergone knee surgery that is expected to keep him out of action for at least the opening month of the National Basketball Association season.
The Washington Bullets' All-Star forward felt a twinge of pain in his right knee while exercising on a treadmill on Labor Day.
King, 34, was examined by Dr.
NORMAN SCOTT, who diagnosed the problem as torn cartilage and operated on him Friday at Beth Israel Hospital in New York.
King faces eight weeks of rehabilitation before beginning rigorous drills.


Lacquerware Brings a Glow Into the Life of a Couple
Florence and Herbert Irving, lacquerware mavens, were telling stories on each other recently.
Mr.
Irving had done most of the talking.
It was Mrs.
Irving's turn.
Mr.
Irving, said his wife, is up at 5 in the morning to begin his rounds.
He walks through their Long Island home, opening the blinds, letting in the first traces of light.
And there, in the half light, Mr.
Irving reintroduces himself to his art.


Surviving Sexual Abuse
To the Editor:
I am concerned, but not surprised, by Dara Culhane's position that Betsy Petersen overstates the long-term effects of incest in her book, "Dancing With Daddy." As a therapist who works exclusively in the field of child sexual abuse, I would like to encourage Ms.
Culhane to read some of the excellent research-based professional publications that address the issue of the long-term effects of incest.
Perhaps then she would better understand the devastation of incest and not underestimate its impact.
VALERIE ROSS HOMAN  Hartsdale, N.Y.


Soviet Society Yearns, Above All, for Order
To the Editor:
Although I am pleased that the coup attempt in the Soviet Union failed, I am concerned that Western analysts are too caught up in their own world view to reflect properly on the prospect or pace of reform in today's Soviet Union.
The issues go well beyond the style of Mikhail S. Gorbachev or Boris N. Yeltsin.


Campus Life: James Madison; Literacy Program Enhances Skills Of Local Workers
James Madison University has taken adult literacy on the road and to local industries in an effort to improve the skills of workers, many of whom are non-English speaking immigrants.
The effort comes neatly packaged in a van called the Career Enhancement Center.
It is equipped with four computers, tape recorders and plenty of chairs, and serves about 70 clients a week, pulling up to the factory doors of five major employers in the Harrisonburg area.


Rangers Swirl Into Action and Trade Rumors Follow
The Rangers hit the ice today in this cheery paper mill town, far from the madding crowd but not distant enough from the trade rumors that are casting a nervous spell on training camp.
That is the way General Manager Neil Smith says he wanted it, and planned it.


Musical History of Bleecker St.
"THE SPIRIT OF BLEECKER STREET," a new musical by Milton Polsky, Howard Berland and Gerald Jay Markoe, depicts certain historical events on or near Bleecker Street in the Greenwich Village area of Manhattan.
The production, at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst through Sept. 30, covers a period between 1799 and 1991, and its music wanders in and out of various styles like a relaxed browser strolling through Bloomingdale's.


Another Side of the Toll Brothers
To the Editor:
In reading "Getting Through Recession on Real Estate's Pricey Side," (Aug. 18) I could not find mention of the fact that Toll Brothers Inc. has owned a national landmark -- the first United States Naval Home -- and has apparently been allowing demolition by neglect.
If this organization is doing so well, perhaps it could repair the roof of this very important structure, and stop trying to demolish the John McArthur wing (John McArthur was the architect of the Philadelphia City Hall.) GERSIL N. KAY  Philadelphia, Aug. 18


That Obscure Object of Desire
THE FIRST TIME I EVER entered the kitchen of an elegant restaurant -- wending my way past the well-heeled lunch crowd and down into the work area below -- I was appalled.
I wasn't all that naive, even then.
I knew there was serious business going on in these kitchens.
I had read Orwell's "Down and Out in Paris and London" and expected that even in today's kitchens there might be suffering too, and sweat.
But still . . . the heat that rose off the wall of ranges so densely that it was almost viscous; the worried, darting eyes peering through the steam as raw materials were transmuted into this or that; the garbage pail sort of thing (maybe it was an actual garbage pail) full of gallons of some hideous liquid that would soon find a dainty application.


Elaine Fry Wed To Michael Reilly
Elaine Christine Fry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Keelin T. Fry Jr. of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday to Michael Finian Reilly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Reilly of Pearl River, N.Y.
The Rev.
Andrew P. Carrozza officiated at Holy Rosary Church in Claymont, Del.
The couple both received law degrees cum laude from Harvard University.
The bride, 26 years old, is to join the Wilmington law firm of Morris, Nichols, Arsht &amp; Tunnel as an associate in October.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary.
Her father, who is retired, was a biochemist with Du Pont in Wilmington.


Miss Frost Wed To Matthew Coe
Maureen Anne Frost and Matthew Sykes Coe were married yesterday at St.
Anthony's Roman Catholic Church in Red Bank, N.J., by the Rev.
John D. Flanagan.
The bride, 27 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence B. Frost of Atlanta.
The bridegroom, 29, is a son of Nancy N. Coe of Rumson, N.J, and Bruce G. Coe of Lambertville, N.J.


Services Consolidation Urged for Westchester
In reference to the article "Two Small Villages, a Century Old and Content"  [ Aug. 11 ] , it is time now to seriously consider consolidation of services, schools and governmental agencies throughout Westchester County.
Westchester has long been burdened by too many layers of government.
The multiple layers lead to confusion among the citizens, who often don't know who provides which service.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the Sound Shore communities.


Topics of The Times; Capra's Country
Frank Capra, one of seven children born to Sicilian peasants, traveled by steerage to America 88 years ago, and never got over the riches he found here.
He got an education.
He got a job, and provided a home for his family.
He was, in short, like millions of his fellow immigrants -- lucky in his parents' choice of a new country.
In 40 years of film making, he never stopped celebrating that luck and that country.
It was, perhaps, an America that never was: this place where the little guy was the truly big guy, and where good -- in the form of honesty and innocence and self-sacrifice -- invariably triumphed over evil.
Mr.
Smith went to Washington, and showed the Senate what a patriot really was.
Mr.
Deeds went to town from the country, and shamed the city slickers.
George Bailey, who thought he was a failure, realized (thanks to an angel named Clarence) that he had a wonderful life.


Thomas's Foes, Off to Slow Start, Say Swaying Public Will Be Hard
Many of the same interest groups that successfully fought Robert H. Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court in 1987 are reassembling to oppose Judge Clarence Thomas.
But with confirmation hearings only days away, some organizers admit that they are off to a slow start and that they will face difficulties in quickly mobilizing public opinion.
"It is not going to be a grass-roots effort that defeats Thomas because there's just not enough time to put it together," said David A. Jones, a Houston lawyer who is leading the anti-Thomas campaign there.
"It is going to have to happen in the Senate."


TALKS ON HOSTAGES HAVE BOGGED DOWN OVER ISRAELI FLIER
After hopes were raised last month by the release of two Western hostages, efforts to free the 10 still held by kidnappers in Lebanon have bogged down over the whereabouts of a captured Israeli navigator who is considered the linchpin to an overall settlement.
Lebanese kidnappers and their pro-Iranian sponsors have told the United Nations in recent weeks that the Israeli, Ron Arad, disappeared during an Israeli raid on Lebanon nearly two years ago.
They say that he is "lost" and that no group acknowledges holding him.


New Orchestra Focuses on 20th-Century Works
"I WANT audiences to be excited by the challenge of 20th-century music," said Paul Lustig Dunkel, discussing the ninth season of his New Orchestra of Westchester.
The programs will include works by Ginastera, Copland, Ellen Taafe Zwilich and Ruth Schonthal, along with the more traditional Mozart, Beethoven and Brahms.
Indeed, the first piece at the first concerts -- 8 P.M.
Saturday and 3 P.M. next Sunday at the State University of New York at Purchase -- is "Sequoia" by a New Rochelle native, Joan Tower.
An earlier modern classic is next, Prokofiev's Third Piano Concerto, with Santiago Rodriguez as soloist, and then Beethoven's Seventh Symphony.


T. E. Davin Wed To Molly Streeter
Molly Susan Streeter was married yesterday at the West Tisbury (Mass.) Congregational Church to Thomas Edward Davin by the Rev.
James C. Martin.
The bride, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Streeter Jr. of Elmira, N.Y.
The bridegroom, 33, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Davin of West Chester, Pa.
Mrs.
Davin, a graduate of St.
Lawrence University, was until recently a marketing manager for the Keds Corporation in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is the president of Streeter Associates, a general contractor in Elmira.


Reviewer Trips On Garden Path
Re: Art Review "The Natural World And Its Mysteries"  [ Aug. 11 ] : When your review tripped down the garden path to Heckscher Museum's summer exhibition "Vital Forces: Nature in Contemporary Abstraction," Mother Nature stayed outside in Heckscher Park.
A romance of nature-without-tears, the review never looked into the mystery of why this museum's trustees are determined to destroy the real nature outside by constructing a three-story building, mainly for offices and catering hall, over park wetlands.
Indeed, the museum's choice of a nature theme at the very time when they are embarking upon an environmental review designed to remove a large section of open Heckscher park land from three historic registers -- while dozens of better sites exist centrally in the town -- is no accident.


The Nation; Light at the End of the Elevator Shaft
WANT to rent an office cheap?
How about 10 offices -- or 10,000?
From downtown Los Angeles to the suburbs of Boston, buildings sit half filled, monuments of an era in which commercial lenders traded their green eye shades for tinted aviators and the word thrift took on a whole new meaning.
"This cycle is the worst since the 1930's," said Anthony Downs, a specialist in real estate economics at the Brookings Institution.
Some analysts now worry that what The Economist called "growth's dead weight" will dog the economy for a decade, helping to stretch the recession deep into the 1990's.


Two Women: One Mad, One Bad, Both Wise
TWO LIVES
"Reading Turgenev" and "My House in Umbria." By William Trevor. 375 pp.
New York: Viking. $21.95.


Thorpe Still Hasn't Received All He Deserved
THE Maltese Falcon of sport is a mysterious silver chalice, 2 feet long and 30 pounds, in the form of a Viking ship.
Lined with gold and encrusted with jewels, it had once been owned by the czar of Russia.
Now it belongs to Jim Thorpe's estate.
Or does it?
And where is it?


PHOTOGRAPHY
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may be changed, postponed or canceled.
Dates for some events have not been made final; other events are already sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 53.
September


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE DWARF GIANT.
Written and illustrated by Anita Lobel.
Holiday House. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Once upon a time in a corner of Japan things were so peaceful they were boring, until the night a red-haired dwarf with magical powers arrived -- and soon chaos ensued.


Howe Is Still Making Automatic Choices, but Now They're Good Ones
It is difficult to ignore Steve Howe when he is in the mood to talk.
He speaks with his fiery eyes, his happy hands and, of course, his moving mouth.
Smoke from a ubiquitous cigarette billows near your face, but you still listen.
Howe has a lot to say.
These days, Howe is in a jolly mood because his long-doubted comeback from drug and alcohol abuse is reaching a plateau with the Yankees.
All Howe must do is endure a final month of urine tests and battles with hitters this season and he will silence those who called him an addict.
He says he will have been clean for three years come Jan. 25, and he will probably be named the American League's comeback player of the year before then.


Case Closed
When he departed Miami for New York in 1946, a 17-year-old Leroy Strachan fled the scene of what was evidently his first and last crime -- the murder of John Milledge, a police officer.
Last year the authorities caught up with Mr.
Strachan, now a 62-year-old grandfather, and he was jailed pending extradition to Florida.
But because he had apparently led a productive, crime-free life for the last 45 years, strangers rallied to his support and William M. Kunstler took on his defense.
Last week, after 19 months of legal wrangling, all the parties involved, including the closest surviving relative of Officer Milledge, agreed on a disposition that would satisfy the law but set Mr.
Strachan free.
In return for pleading guilty to manslaughter, he is to be sentenced to the 19 months he has spent in a New York jail and seven years of probation.
"He served his time already and lived a Christian life," said Officer Milledge's grandniece.
"So give that man some freedom."


All About/Luxury Cars; A Race for the Young and Affluent
At its recent preview of new models, Cadillac touted some virtues of its 1992 Brougham: the greatest length of any car produced in this country, rear-wheel drive and maximum insulation from the road.
They are qualities -- none of them new -- that have helped make Cadillac the nation's best-selling luxury marque.
But they are features that are also aimed at a core market that is heading over the hill; the median age of a Brougham buyer is 66.
So to attract younger buyers, Cadillac, a division of the General Motors Corporation, has drastically redesigned two of its models: the 1992 Seville and Eldorado, which were introduced last week.
These cars have less chrome, a leaner more "European" look and firmer suspension systems for maximum contact with the road.
The new Cadillacs, which sell for $32,500 to $38,000, are more expensive than the average Cadillac, which now costs about $29,000.


TATARS SEEK SPLIT WITH THE RUSSIANS
From an office decked with the green banners of Islamic solidarity, Rafael F. Mukhametdinov today surveyed the ruins of the Soviet Union with satisfaction: One empire down, he mused.
One to go.
With Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Soviet Union in shards, Mr.
Mukhametdinov, a Tatar separatist leader, has set his sights on the dismantling of Boris N. Yeltsin's Russian republic, itself a mosaic of ethnic homelands where the calls for independence have grown bolder with the weakening of Moscow's grip.


Style Makers; Alexandre D. Itin, Hat Designer
Heads turn when one of Alexandre D. Itin's hats goes by.
"They're very bright and happy," Mr.
Itin said of the bold, colorful designs he paints on straw and felt.
Top hats, fedoras, derbies, sombreros, panamas and coolie hats take on a new look in the 24-year-old artist's hands.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


CHINESE RELATIONS
Kristof writes that, in Chinese, "there is a profusion of words for relations. For instance Chinese has five words for 'uncle.' " This may be of no great advantage if the current policy of limiting each family to only one child is successful.
With only one offspring per couple, eventually no Chinese will have either brother or sister (big or little).
With no siblings in the land no one will have any sort of auntie or uncle.
With no aunts or uncles, there would be no cousins!
DAVID C. GOUX
Bethel, Conn.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE CHARNEL HOUSE  By Eamonn McGrath. Blackstaff Press/Dufour Editions, Paper, $14.95.


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
It was with relief that I read Swados's article.
I say "relief," because of her intelligent depiction of schizophrenia as a miserable, self-destructive, life-shortening disease rather than as a romantic response to an insane society.
Lincoln Swados was not "voice enhanced," as the politically correct might have dubbed him.
DANIEL POLOWETZKY
Brooklyn


The Nation; In Some Parts The Battle Cry Is 'Don't Dump on Me'
No one likes the idea of being someone else's trash can.
The image of convoys bearing garbage from New York and New Jersey to be dumped in landfills in the Middle West has aroused tempers and raised the possibility of Federal legislation that would allow states to ban garbage imports.
Opposition to hazardous waste is also growing rapidly, with a number of states, including New York, Alabama and Louisiana, imposing caps or high taxes to discourage private businesses from bringing in contaminated materials from other regions.


Woman Reports Rape At Hofstra
A 19-year-old Hofstra student was raped in her dormitory room early yesterday by another student who was later arrested, the police said.
The suspect, Alexander Wilson, 19 years old, entered the room of the student and raped her at about 3 A.M., said a Nassau County Police detective, John McGough.


Miss Hartman Has Wedding
Elisabeth Wallace Hartman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Hartman of Charleston, W. Va., was married yesterday to Michael Turner Cannell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter B. Cannell of New York and Lattingtown, L.I.
The Rev.
Alfred Wallace performed the ceremony at Christ Methodist Church in Charleston.
Mrs.
Cannell, 28 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a master's degree in architecture from Harvard University.
Her father is a physician in Charleston.
Her mother, Elisabeth Hartman, is a portrait painter.


Victoria G. King and Robert J. Haas Are Married
Victoria Georgina King, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Regis J. King of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Robert John Haas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Haas of Toms River, N.J.
The Rev.
Gerald E. Murray performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Haas, 26 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is an associate store manager in New York of the Gap Kids store.
Her father is a vice president of the New York Blood Center.


U.N. Chief Asks Higher Iraq Oil Sales
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations has recommended that the Security Council raise the ceiling it imposed on Iraqi oil sales by $900 million so Baghdad can earn enough money for desperately needed food and medical supplies.
The Security Council authorized a ceiling of $1.6 billion last month, but Mr.
Perez de Cuellar, in a report circulated here in advance of its release on Saturday, recommended a ceiling of $2.5 billion.
The Council is expected to decide in the next week or 10 days how much oil Iraq can sell.
U.N.
Embargo
In his report, the Secretary General said the original ceiling set by the Council would leave Iraq about $800 million short of the amount estimated as necessary to meet the essential needs of its people.
The council has required that a third of any oil revenue go toward war reparations, and much of the rest is to help cover the costs of United Nations operations in Iraq since the end of the Persian Gulf war.


Stamps
Strange but true: there is ferment in philately.
The usually placid hobby is confronting a daunting burst of new philatelic items that appeal mainly to the young just as the graying of collectors becomes more evident.
The conflict came into focus last month at the four-day Stampshow of the American Philatelic Society in Philadelphia.
There, collectors and dealers were often scornful of promotional efforts of the United States Postal Service, which now markets everything from stamp mugs to videotapes to promote the hobby.


On Seeing and Being Seen in Manhasset
MILLIE'S PLACE in Manhasset is a scene.
Do not go there expecting normal table conversation.
Intimate, quiet dinners are impossible.
But this is a spot to see and be seen.
Considering the decibel level, the food is surprisingly good.
Additionally, Millie's Place is one of Long Island's most strikingly beautiful restaurants.


Chrysanthemums Add to Fall's Brilliance
CHRYSANTHEMUMS are synonymous with fall, which arrives on the morning of Sept. 23.
Yet these daisylike flowers never go by the calendar and bloom when they want to.
Some are in bloom now; others are showing promise with fat buds.
Most of the flower colors will match those of the trees' leaves in assorted shades of yellow, bronze and maroon.
One relatively new chrysanthemum caused a sensation among gardeners last year.
It is the tidy little groundcovering species Chrysanthemum pacificum with silver-edged leaves and a flat spreading habit.
Its only drawback is its habit of flowering late in the season.
The little yellow buttons are somewhat shy in appearing and often wait until early September.
Although tardy in this respect, once this mum's roots take hold, it becomes a showpiece.


China Says Soviets Erred Earlier in Picking Leader
The Chinese Communist Party leadership has told its senior members in a confidential analysis that the Soviet Union is restoring capitalism and that its mistake was that it did not choose the right successor to earlier leaders, Chinese with access to high-level information say.
The analysis, which is being circulated among civilian and military party units in the capital, is the first official explanation of the Soviet events to be distributed since the coup's failure on Aug. 21.
One official says the analysis is based on advice from Deng Xiaoping, China's 87-year-old senior leader.


Michigan Needs a Spark From Howard
A 93-yard runback of the kickoff opening the second half turned today's game around for Michigan and pointed the Wolverines in the right direction.
They went on to defeat Boston College, 35-13, for their first victory in a season of high expectations, but the score hardly reflected the drama of the occasion.
The kickoff return by Desmond Howard came at the right time in a contest that had been an acute embarassment for the Wolverines.
They had been outplayed by the Eagles, 25-point underdogs, and were behind, 10-7, at the half.


Quotation of the Day
"The real working cowboys, of course, don't do much of what you see at rodeos. There is very little roping, for example. They spend most of their time cutting and stacking wheat, mending fences. But then, you couldn't draw a paying crowd for that." -- T. A. Larson, a retired professor of the American West at the University of Wyoming.  [ 20:3. ]


Insolvent Boston Suburb Faces Threat of Takeover
The small, impoverished suburban city of Chelsea, made up largely of immigrants and the elderly, is so short of money that it can no longer pay for its own basic services, leaving political leaders and financial experts unsure how to save it or whether it can survive at all.
Gov.
William F. Weld on Friday proposed legislation that would put the city of 28,000 people north of here into receivership.


Burial for Unidentified Victims of Air Crash in Thailand


Eagles Set Out to Prove They're Not Grounded Yet
Down he went. But they just knew he would get up. Randall Cunningham always had.
"I've seen Randall take and give some punishing hits and that's one of the things we've all always admired about him," said Ron Heller, the Eagles' veteran offensive tackle.
"I was shocked, everyone here was, when he was wheeled off the field in that cart."


Ticket Rules In Amsterdam
To avoid long lines and overcrowding, Amsterdam's Rijksmuseum has introduced a block system for tickets to the special exhibit of Rembrandt's paintings running from Dec. 4 to March 1 and of drawings from Dec. 4 to Jan. 19.
In addition to 50 Rembrandt paintings from museums in several countries, the show will include 40 drawings and paintings by the artist's students as well as some etchings by Rembrandt.
Visitors must purchase tickets in advance for a set date and entrance time.
Tickets for individuals are $15 each, plus $2.50 for shipping and handling, by credit card only, from the Netherlands Board of Tourism, 225 North Michigan Avenue, Suite 326, Chicago, Ill. 60601; phone: (312) 819-0300.


Arrests in a Killing Police Say Was Revenge
Revenge for a rape last year was the motive for the killing of a photographer in January, the police said last week, after they arrested two men and charged one of them with the shooting.
In announcing the arrest of John Valverde, 21 years old, the police said that the photographer, Joel Schoenfeld, had a history of abusing female models who posed for him, regularly luring young women to his studio through newspaper advertisements that promised a career in fashion modeling.
He was found dead in his Greenwich Village studio on Jan. 5, shot once in the head.


As the Season Grows, Horses Can Get Tired
Do race horses grow wearier as the year grows longer?
As the thoroughbreds turn into the homestretch of the season, with championships still wide open in every division, the racing year is certainly growing longer, and many of the star horses seem to be growing wearier.
At least, they're beating one another with regularity.


Colleges Aim Courses at Older Students
SCHOOL BELLS start ringing this week for 12 million students older than 25 returning to school, and thereby helping themselves and their colleges.
College enrollments for traditionally aged students have fallen.
Last year, the number of 18-year-olds entering college fell 44 percent compared with those entering college in 1979.
So colleges have been forced to seek other sources of students, particularly older ones, said Joseph Cullen, director of public relations at Iona College in New Rochelle.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 11 about some of the major bank and savings and loan fraud cases prosecuted by the office of the United States Attorney for New Jersey misstated Neil F. Cohen's involvement with the Ritz nightclub in Manhattan.
He was an employee, not a part owner.


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
Elizabeth Swados's article "The Story of a Street Person" (Aug. 18) was one of the most moving I've read on the joys and agony of loving, living with and, ultimately, losing a family member to schizophrenia.
These impossible but wonderful people are never "just" crazy, and their stories are never simple.
There are no easy solutions, and there are times when there is no choice but to let them live their lives as they insist upon living them, wrenching as that may be.
And while there is no one to blame, there is no way to protect oneself (or one's family) from the feelings of guilt and shame that come from watching these souls deteriorate.
When you've lost a loved one to the street or to the ravages of mental illness, it becomes impossible to think of "them" and "us." As Swados makes clear, these tragic circumstances bring us closer to our humanity.
ARIETTA SLADE
Roxbury, Conn.


Talking: 2d Homes; Marketing A Vacation Getaway
BROKERS offering vacation homes in mountain, lake and beach areas have long been aware that the first nip in the fall air brings out the serious buyers, even in a dreary market.
"About 50 percent of all our sales are made from September through November," said Ray Roberts, supervising broker with Country Cousins Realty of East Stroudsburg, Pa.
This is as true for summer homes as for those that appeal primarily to skiers, observed Mr.
Roberts, who has been selling vacation homes for nearly 30 years.


Tech Notes; Sometimes See-Through
Drapes, accordion-pleat walls and blinds -- the typical methods of controlling light and gaining a little privacy -- are not exactly cutting-edge technology.
They do not always work, they collect dust and they often do not go with the sleek look of modern corporate architecture.
Enter the Taliq Corporation with its Varilite Vision Panel, a window that can also function as a divider.
Taliq, a Raychem Corporation subsidiary that is based in Sunnyvale, Calif., uses advanced liquid crystal technology to form slabs of glass that can be either clear or translucent.
Zap the panel with electricity and it clears; switch the current off and the glass goes cloudy.


An 'Off-the-Boat' Look of Romantic Thrift
In the language of women's fashion, what is commonly called the peasant look entails bright colors, billowing skirts and festive off-the-shoulder blouses.
But for men, a peasant look, or in some cases, an "immigrant" look, that has emerged is more subdued, with more of a grandfather's hand-me-down attitude.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Hopatcong 174,000
15 DiVito Terrace
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old colonial; pool, fireplace, w/b stove, lake rights; taxes $3,922.
Jefferson Township 115,900
39 Winona Trail
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dock, landscaped yard, lakefront, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,493.
Mount Arlington 155,000
616 Sandra Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old split level; 2-zone heat, new windows, full basement; taxes $4,039.
Oakland 170,000
87 Hiawatha Boulevard
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 29-year-old ranch; h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,991.
Waldwick 158,000
23 Lincoln Place 4-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; natural woodwork, new hot water heater, new windows; taxes $3,293.
Wayne 300,000
111 Timberline Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen, fireplace; taxes $5,798.
OTHER AREAS Chappaqua, N.Y. 397,500
75 Seven Bridges Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, den, deck, screened porch; taxes $7,450.
Torrington, Conn. 124,000
89 Blake Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 90-year-old Victorian; front porch, updated kitchen, 0.33 acre; taxes $1,882.
Levittown, L.I. 127,500
214 North Bellmore Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, l-car garage; taxes $3,200.


Men Deserve Tennis Riches
To the Sports Editor:
Recent articles have discussed the unequal distribution of prize money between men and women in Grand Slam tennis tournaments.
The claim is that women's tennis is as entertaining as that of the men, so the prize money should be distributed equally.


Entrepreneurial Center Helps With Franchising
I thought I'd tell you just how helpful the article on franchising  [ "Franchises Lure Seasoned Executives," Aug. 11 ]  was to me in my work as director of the Entrepreneurial Center at Manhattanville College.
We're experiencing a phenomenon of sorts.
For the last several months many former and current corporate executives have turned to us for advice on franchising or buying a business.
As a result, we are hosting our annual daylong conference with a special feature, "The Entrepreneur's Marketplace," which will spotlight franchisers, distributors and business brokers to accommodate the "shopping" needs of our registrants.


Margaret Carpenter Is Wed on L.I.
Trinity-St.
John's Episcopal Church in Hewlett, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Margaret Miles Carpenter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward N. Carpenter of Lawrence, L.I., to Arthur Raymond Fantaci Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Fantaci of Rochester.
The Rev.
Dr.
Earle Pratt performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Fantaci, 25 years old, graduated from Miss Porter's School and Hamilton College and received a law degree from Union College.
Her father, a former partner in the brokerage firm of Jessup &amp; Lamont, is a writer.


Seles Bolts Past Navratilova to Win U.S. Open
The chance for a fifth United States Open women's title for Martina Navratilova passed yesterday in the form of small yellow blurs off the oversized racquet of Monica Seles.
They moved with the force of express subway trains while Navratilova, from her preferred station at the net, awaited the local.
"She was not only hitting it hard, but she was hitting it accurately," the 34-year-old Navratilova said after losing to an opponent half her age, 7-6 (7-1), 6-1 in 1 hour 6 minutes at the National Tennis Center.
"I was covering the lines and they still got by me."


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Hartford, Conn.  84,500 195 Sherbrook Avenue 2-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old colonial; aluminum/vinyl siding, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $1,499.


Shevardnadze Blames Himself
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, a former Soviet Foreign Minister, said today that he blamed himself partly for the rapid crumbling of the union, saying the republics should have been offered autonomy earlier.
"Perhaps I, above all, should have understood since I should have known what the nationalism problems might lead to," Mr.
Shevardnadze said in a BBC radio interview.


An 81-0 Mauling by the Nittany Lions
Tony Sacca threw for two touchdowns, and four players scored two each in fifth-ranked Penn State's 81-0 thrashing of Cincinnati today, the Bearcats' worst defeat ever.
Penn State is ranked fourth in The New York Times Top 20.
Penn State (2-0) ran for 484 yards and passed for 222 while limiting the Bearcats to 229 over all, with only 161 on the ground.
It was the most yardage ever by a Penn State team, surpassing the 632 against Texas Christian in 1971.


Camp a Respite for Children With Cancer
SOME of the children walked up the hill clutching their teddy bears.
Others dribbled their favorite basketballs or held tightly to photographs of their favorite music idols.
Several just clung to their parents.
It was like any other first day of camp, filled with excitement, trepidation and tears.
But there was also a long line of parents checking in their children's medicines with the camp nurses.


The Region; On the Mean Streets, A Greater Sense Of Alienation
IN courageously walking the streets of Crown Heights, Brooklyn, last month to quell racial unrest, Mayor David N. Dinkins was following in the larger-than-life footsteps of a predecessor, John V. Lindsay.
Mr.
Lindsay's symbolic forays into New York City's ghettos a quarter century ago demonstrated commitment and compassion that contained, obscured and sometimes even discouraged the violence that gripped urban America in an era when the long hot summer was a sociological phenomenon, not merely a meteorological one.
"Many have read far too much into these visits to ghetto areas," Mr.
Lindsay later wrote.
"They have been credited with single-handedly stopping riots, which is not true, and they have also been regarded as symbolically 'buying off' black communities by promising to be permissive with law breakers and criminals, which is not true either. I think these visits did, however, offer some signs that the city government cared."


A Price for Security
THIS MORNING DR.
GRISHA TZIRKIN IS ANGRY.
IT is his first day on the job, manning the gate at one entrance to Ben-Gurion University in Beersheba, standing in a tiny glass booth punching the buttons.
A Toyota pulls up, and he hits the red one.
The heavy electric door slides slowly open.
A moment later, he stabs the black button, and the door groans as it slides closed.
With a cold grimace, the doctor sits down to await another car.
For 38 years, Tzirkin practiced medicine in the Soviet Union.
But after 10 months in Israel this is the only job he has found, and it is only a fill-in position.
In another week he'll be unemployed once again.


2 Men Impaled After Leap From Window
Two men who leapt from a fourth-floor window in Washington Heights early yesterday landed atop a fence of spires that badly impaled them, the police said.
The men, Bravillo Morillo, 23 years old, and Manuel Berrillo, 27, had to be lifted off the old iron fence on West 160th Street by friends, said Detective Sgt.
Angel Flores of the 34th Precinct in Manhattan.


So Many No-Hitters, So Few Reasons Why
One hundred fifteen years after George Bradley pitched the first one, a major league baseball committee last week defined, for the first time, a no-hitter.
But while saying what a no-hitter is and what it is not, the committee did not offer any explanations for the sudden surge of such pitching masterpieces.
With four weeks' worth of opportunities remaining, in only two seasons in the 90's pitchers have matched the number of no-hitters that were thrown in the 80's, using the committee's restrictive definition (13) or the broader definition that others still prefer (15).
A no-hitter, the committee decided, is a game in which a pitcher or pitchers complete a game of nine or more innings without allowing a hit.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
In J. Madison Davis's thoughtful new novel, BLOODY MARKO (Walker, $19.95), we meet the central figure, Marko Renovich, as an 82-year-old Yugoslav on trial as a war criminal.
Then we start going backward in time, from 1990 to 1978 to 1968 to 1944 and, finally, to 1915.
The idea is to trace the development, by increments, of the strange man called Bloody Marko, to explain how he came to be what he is.
But instead of starting in 1915, when the young Marko stands up to Austrian soldiers, the author gets a powerful and suspenseful kick into his narrative by reversing normal procedures.


The Artistry of African-Inspired Braids
African-inspired braids, which have long been confined to a few simple variations on cornrows worn mostly by the very young, have not only become almost commonplace among women in business and artistic settings, but are being seen in increasingly intricate variations.
Stylists have turned braiding into an art form requiring great skill and endurance, combining Western styling and traditional techniques to create styles with names like the Senegalese Twist, Nu-lock braids and African locks that take advantage of the texture and properties of black hair.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 8
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams had the day off.


Sitcom Persona Wins Out
To the Editor:
While Roseanne Barr Arnold's raucous antics may be, as John J. O'Connor calls them, "calculated affronts to middle-class propriety," her sitcom "Roseanne" serves as a role model for old-fashioned middle-class family values  [ "By Any Name, Roseanne Is Roseanne Is Roseanne," Aug. 18 ] .
She loves her children and deals with their problems in an open and ultimately wise fashion.
She allows them to make mistakes and to learn from them.
She encourages independence but retains a strong loving rope.
She sympathizes with their various stages of emotional growth.


TELEVISION
Here is a selective guide to cultural events in New York and beyond in the months ahead.
Programs may change.
Dates and locations for some events have not been made final; other events are sold out.
Unless indicated, all dates listed are openings, all addresses are in Manhattan, and all telephone numbers have a 212 area code.
Addresses for locations in New York City cited more than once are on Page 49.
New Series ABC


Boom Times for Rodeo, Broken Bones and All
At sunset on the High Plains, a roar from the crowd swept the rodeo grandstands.
Behind the chutes, near the pens of snorting bulls and stomping broncs, the cowboys pulled on their chaps.
After a night's sleep in the back of his pickup truck, Scoobe Halterman, a lanky cowboy who had driven 400 miles here, was ready to climb aboard an ornery 2,000-pound bull.
In his career of almost 10 years, this 27-year-old professional bull rider has broken both legs, a shoulder, two fingers and some teeth.


An Icon Maker For Excessive Times
Annie Leibovitz, who has created such cultural artifacts as a naked John Lennon abjectly clinging to a fully clothed Yoko Ono and Roseanne Barr merrily mud-wrestling with her husband, says she never thinks about shock value but only wants her pictures to feel more real.
"I think life is much stranger than my photographs," she says.
"You see many more shocking things just walking down one block in New York City." She has a point.
After she persuaded Keith Haring to paint his nude body to match the furniture he'd just decorated, making it hard to distinguish him from the sofa, Haring felt all dressed up with nowhere to go, so she took him to Times Square.
Nervous about being thrown in jail, she moved fast, but glimpsed two cops across the street.
They never batted an eyelash.
A painted, naked man in Times Square is not news.


CRITIC'S CHOICES


Lisa Shook Wed To Lloyd Lipsett
Lisa Ann Shook and Lloyd Lipsett, graduates of the University of Virginia School of Law, were married yesterday at the Blessed Katherine Drexel Roman Catholic Church in Mechanicsburg, Pa.
The Rev.
James O'Brien and the Rev.
John Backes officiated.
Mrs.
Lipsett, 25 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Merrick C. Shook of Mechanicsburg.
A magna cum laude graduate of Fairfield University, she is to become an associate this fall at the law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts in Stamford, Conn.
Her father is the national distribution operations manager for I.B.M. in Mechanicsburg.
Her mother, Linda Shook, is a computer systems programmer for the fleet material support office of the Navy Department in Mechanicsburg.
Mr.
Lipsett, 26, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd Lipsett of Hooksett, N.H.
He is an associate in the New York law firm of Rogers &amp; Wells.
His father is the president and chief executive of the AI Network and a senior vice president of the New Hampshire Group, insurance companies in Manchester, N.H.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Both the sink and counter top in my bathroom are made of composition material in an off-white color.
A black ring about an eighth of an inch wide has developed around the basin drain.
Is there any way I can get rid of the ring?
A.
The black ring may be either dirt mixed with soap residue, or mildew or a combination of both.
Either way, I suggest using an old toothbrush to scrub it off.
If it is mostly dirt and soap curd, then you should be able to scrub it off with a scouring powder like Comet or Zud.
If it is mildew or mold, you will have to also use a mixture of Clorox and water (about one part bleach to three parts water).
Allow this to soak about five minutes and then flush with water.


Social Events
Masur at the Philharmonic
Sept. 11 -- Kurt Masur takes up his baton as the new music director of the New York Philharmonic with the opening concert of the season at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The evening, which will benefit the Philharmonic-Symphony Society, begins with cocktails at Avery Fisher at 6:30 and ends with a black-tie dinner and dancing to Peter Duchin's orchestra under a tent in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
Tickets, $150 for reception and concert; $350 for reception, concert and dinner, and $500 and $1,000 for reception, preferred seating at concert and dinner, from (212) 875-5758.
Twilight Cruise
Sept. 11 -- Citymeals-on-Wheels, which provides food for the city's homebound elderly, will benefit from a two-hour Circle Line cruise around New York harbor.
Tim and Nina Zagat, publishers of the restaurant and food guides, will talk about restaurants.
Boarding at Pier 83, 42d Street at the Hudson River, at 6:30 P.M.; departure at 7.
Snacks will be served.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 563-3200.
Alfresco at Austen House
Sept. 12 -- The front lawn of the Alice Austen House in Rosebank, S.I., overlooking New York harbor, will be the setting for a buffet supper and preview of the Staten Island Civic Theater's production of "The Music of the Night." Drinks at 6:30 P.M.
The restored Victorian Alice Austen House Museum and Garden, onetime home of the photographer, will benefit.
Rain date is Sept. 13.
Directions and tickets at $35, from (718) 816-4506.
Antiques Preview
Sept. 13 -- A preview of a fall antiques show benefiting the Caramoor Garden Guild will be held at the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah, N.Y.
Forty dealers will exhibit at the preview and at the two-day show, Sept. 14 and 15.
Preview events will include a reception at the home of Alastair B. Martin, a prominent art and furniture collector.
Preview hours, 6 to 9 P.M.
Show hours Sept. 14 from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sept. 15, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Preview tickets from $75 to $200.
Weekend admission $6.
Call (914) 232-3681.
Harlem Choir Benefit
Sept. 14 -- The Boys Choir of Harlem and other community music groups will perform at a benefit for the choir, sponsored by the Minority Management Association of Nynex/New York Telephone, at 7 P.M. at Lehman College, 250 Bedford Park Boulevard West in the Bronx.
Tickets, $15, from Ticketmaster, (212) 307-7171, or the Lehman box office, (212) 960-8833.
Dinner Dance for Kingsbrook
Sept. 15 -- The Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center will celebrate its 66th anniversary with a dinner dance at the New York Hilton.
Cocktails at 5:45 P.M. and dinner at 7; black tie encouraged.
Proceeds will be used to equip the new $30 million building in the center's rehabilitation institute in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn.
Tickets, $250, from (718) 604-5201.


BEST SELLERS: September 8, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war, and a floundering President may not be able to cope.
2
2
26
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
3
11
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
4
1
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older brother.
5
7
18
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
6 *
4
6
MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) A woman probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck Florida judge. (LP)
7
6
16
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
8
11
76
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
9 *
5
7
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
10
9
11
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
11
15
18
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
12
10
7
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye Spenser learns much about his own past while helping a young man track down his mother, who has disappeared.
13
1
FLOWERS IN THE RAIN, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $20.) Short stories, many of them set in Scotland and dealing with family relationships.
14 *
8
11
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple off Bermuda raises a question: is a creature from the deep responsible?
15
1
THE GARDEN OF RAMA, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $20.) For the third time in the 23d century, astronauts from Earth contend with alien forces.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
5
2
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
2
2
12
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
3
4
42
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
4
1
7
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
5
3
12
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
6
6
10
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
7
7
17
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
8
1
ANNE SEXTON, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The life of a poorly educated, mentally ill woman who was a gifted poet.
9
10
10
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
10 *
12
10
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
11
11
17
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How President Bush and his commanders have made military decisions.
12
8
11
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
13
9
9
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The downfall of the mobster Paul Castellano.
14
1
THE MANSIONS OF LIMBO, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) A collection of pieces about currently celebrated people.
15 *
13
14
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
16 *
14
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
4
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
2
9
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
3 *
48 HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
4
3
123
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice.
5
86
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
REFLECTIONS OF AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION BABY, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $23.) A Yale law professor, himself a beneficiary of affirmative action programs, argues that what we say we want -- diversity -- won't be attained by enforcing orthodoxy, on this subject or on others.
MAKE NO LAW: The Sullivan Case and the First Amendment, by Anthony Lewis. (Random House, $25.) A New York Times columnist's splendid account of a libel suit against The Times that resulted in one of the most significant of all press-freedom cases.
ZELDA FITZGERALD: The Collected Writings, edited by Matthew J. Bruccoli. (Scribners, $24.95.) All the literary work of this tragic figure, the wife and muse of F. Scott Fitzgerald, showing an offbeat intelligence and a free-flowing wit.
A FOREIGN WOMAN, by Sergei Dovlatov. (Grove Weidenfeld, $17.95.) A wild and, alas, posthumous novel whose Soviet yuppie heroine ends up in the brightly evoked emigre world of Queens.
CHILDREN OF WAR, CHILDREN OF PEACE: Photographs by Robert Capa, edited by Cornell Capa and Richard Whelan. (Bulfinch Press/Little, Brown, $50.) Photographed in China, Spain and other harsh places in the 1930's and 40's, Capa's children have the look of crushed adults baffled by the world around them.
THE STARCHED BLUE SKY OF SPAIN: And Other Memoirs, by Josephine Herbst. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) Autobiographical fragments from the Spanish Civil War and other scenes.
THE GOLD BUG VARIATIONS, by Richard Powers. (Morrow, $25.) With stunning virtuosity, Mr.
Powers's novel employs every trick of structure, metaphor and pun to inspect the career of a young scientist who ends up a dead-end computer programmer.


Corey Kupersmith Marries Tara Payne
Tara Katherine Payne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Payne of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Corey Alexander Kupersmith, a son of Mrs.
Carl Jaeger of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Harold Haskell Kupersmith.
The Rev.
William V. Reynolds, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Church in Larchmont.
Mrs.
Kupersmith, who is 26 years old, graduated from Duke University and is studying for her master's degree in education at Columbia University.
She teaches first grade at the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Greenwich.
Her father is a vice president at Siemens Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Jane Payne, is a substitute teacher at Sacred Heart.


Data Bank/September 8, 1991
Construction Spending
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
1.6
--0.1
--1.7
Auto Sales
August
July
June
In units
421,977
355,875
479,635
Employment
In thousands
116,416
116,712
116,884
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
8,488 (6.8)
8,501 (6.8)
8,745 (7.0)
Economic Activity
Purchasing Managers' Index
54.8
51.8
50.9
Electric Power
Aug. 30
Aug. 23
Aug. 16
Millions of kilowatt hours, weekly total
65,905
62,667
62,775
Weekly Jobless Claims
Aug. 23
Aug. 16
Aug. 9
In thousands
421
421
430
Coal Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
20,888
20,443
20,638


Jonathan Lurie to Wed Elizabeth Hackl in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
George C. S. Hackl of Stockton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Winslow Hackl to Jonathan David Nord Lurie, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold D. Lurie of Baldwin, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Hackl, 29 years old, is an account representative for Sequoia Analytical Labs, an environmental concern in Redwood City, Calif.
She received bachelors' degrees from Princeton and Rutgers Universities.
Her father is a pharmaceutical licensing consultant.
Her mother, Ann Hackl, is a real estate broker in Stockton.


Joseph P. Scorese Wed to Ms. Miller
Dianne Elaine Miller, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Gordon Miller of Northampton, Mass., was married yesterday in Saddle River, N.J., to Joseph Patrick Scorese, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick E. Scorese of Saddle River.
Msgr.
Edward F. Kavin performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Gabriel the Archangel.
Mrs.
Scorese, 32 years old, is an associate in the Newark law firm of McCarter &amp; English.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in teaching from the University of Massachusetts and a law degree from Columbia University.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her father, who is retired, was a loan officer at the United Cooperative Bank in West Springfield, Mass.
Her mother, Alice Miller, retired as the assistant city treasurer of in Northampton.


Ms. Wong Weds Hui-Wen Shiau
Pui Y. Wong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fon Haw Wong of New York, was married yesterday at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York, to Hui-Wen Shiau, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chuen Her Shiau of Convent Station, N.J.
The Rev.
Gordon MacDonald, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Shiau, 25 years old, is a real-estate agent for Spencer Realty in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in East Asian studies from the University of Chicago.
Her father is the president and owner of Cholshung Realty, a real estate management company in New York.
Mr.
Shiau, 27, is an associate of the Tribeca Group, a private investment and merchant banking firm in New York.
He graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth University.
His father is a senior mechanical engineer at the Military Sealift Command, Atlantic in Bayonne, N.J.


Heidi Farrish Is Married
Heidi Farrish, a daughter of Gail Farrish of Boston and Dr.
Grover Farrish of Hyannis, Mass., was married yesterday to George Turver Laub, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Laub of Buffalo.
The Rev.
John Shule, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Federated Church of Edgartown, Mass.
The couple both received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Virginia.
Mrs.
Laub, 28 years old, is a sales manager for IMRS, a software company in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
The bridegroom, 29, a graduate of Colgate University, is a mergers and acquisitions manager in New York at the Toronto Dominion Bank.


Nasty Boy
MEMOIRS
By Kingsley Amis. Illustrated. 346 pp. New York: Summit Books. $25.


Jean-Marie Simon, a Lawyer, Is Wed
Jean-Marie Simon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick W. Simon of Chapel Hill, N.C., was married yesterday in New York to Kenneth Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth H. Anderson of Claremont, Calif.
Judge Shirley Fingerhood of New York City Civil Court performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Aryeh Neier.
Ms.
Simon, who is 37 and keeping her name, is to become an associate next month with the New York office of Morrison &amp; Foerster, a San Francisco law firm.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was a marketing manager for Walter Kidde, a manufacturing conglomerate in Mebane, N.C.
Her mother, Violet Simon, also retired, was a foreign language teacher in the Cedar Grove, N.J., public schools.


Cari Shane Wed To Scott Parven
Cari Meredith Shane and Scott David Parven were married last evening at the Union Club in New York.
Rabbi David Posner officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, is the daughter of Corinne Shane and Nathan Shane, both of New York.
A graduate of Vassar College, Mrs.
Parven is a news anchor at WPOP-AM radio in Hartford.
Her father is the president of Money Centers, a check cashing company in New York.


Florence
To the Editor: My wife and I recently returned from a stay in Florence, where we had reserved a room, and made a deposit of 74,500 lire for the first night, at a simple pension.
We learned that breakfast was included in this charge and that the room alone cost 54,500 lire.
We also learned that the breakfast charge was obligatory.
As this conflicted with the information in our guidebooks, we asked the tourist information office to clarify the situation.
There we learned that hotels prefer to let their rooms to guests who pay for breakfast, though it was not obligatory.
This last bit of information was divulged reluctantly.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Both the sink and counter top in my bathroom are made of composition material in an off-white color.
A black ring about an eighth of an inch wide has developed around the basin drain.
Is there any way I can get rid of the ring?
A.
The black ring may be either dirt mixed with soap residue, or mildew or a combination of both.
Either way, I suggest using an old toothbrush to scrub it off.
If it is mostly dirt and soap curd, then you should be able to scrub it off with a scouring powder like Comet or Zud.
If it is mildew or mold, you will have to also use a mixture of Clorox and water (about one part bleach to three parts water).
Allow this to soak about five minutes and then flush with water.


Chrysanthemums Add to Fall's Brilliance
CHRYSANTHEMUMS are synonymous with fall, which arrives on the morning of Sept. 23.
Yet these daisylike flowers never go by the calendar and bloom when they want to.
Some are in bloom now; others are showing promise with fat buds.
Most of the flower colors will match those of the trees' leaves in assorted shades of yellow, bronze and maroon.
One relatively new chrysanthemum caused a sensation among gardeners last year.
It is the tidy little groundcovering species Chrysanthemum pacificum with silver-edged leaves and a flat spreading habit.
Its only drawback is its habit of flowering late in the season.
The little yellow buttons are somewhat shy in appearing and often wait until early September.
Although tardy in this respect, once this mum's roots take hold, it becomes a showpiece.


QUESTION BOX
Besides Maris and Mantle
Q.
The New York Yankees' major league record of 240 home runs in the 1961 season still stands.
Roger Maris hit 61 of those homers (another record still standing) and Mickey Mantle hit 54.
Who hit the rest?


Billy Conn to Be a Guest of Honor at Benefit
Fifty years ago Joe Louis finally caught an elusive BILLY CONN in the 13th round and knocked him out in a memorable bout.
When the two met again five years later, someone asked Louis, "But suppose Billy runs again?" The champ replied, "He can run, but he can't hide."
Louis's words rang true, but Conn's effort in that first fight made him a national figure.
Now, on the bout's 50th anniversary, and in an effort to raise money for the Police Athletic League, Conn will be honored and an array of boxing notables will appear at the Downtown Athletic Club on Sept. 19.


Moscow Saving Great Brains
The Soviet Government has amassed a collection of preserved brains that includes those of dictators, poets, scientists and painters, in a 67-year- old project intended to determine the anatomical roots of greatness, the CBS News program "60 Minutes" reported from Moscow last night.
The brains -- stored in jars and on slides in Room 19 of the Brain Institute in Moscow and reportedly closely guarded by the K.G.B. -- include historical figures such as Stalin and Lenin, the early film director Sergei Eisenstein, the writer Maxim Gorky and the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky, the program reported.
It also said the collection included the brain of Andrei D. Sakharov, the nuclear scientist who became a pivotal critic of the Soviet system.


Interactive Media Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


What Can a New Yorker Do to Ease Tensions in Crown Heights?
To the Editor:
Picking up the paper each day to read about the rioting in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn makes my heart sink.
I feel depressed and angry, but most of all helpless.
I fantasize about hitting the streets of Crown Heights with a bullhorn and screeching: "Stop it! Please, for God's sake, just stop it!" But chances are my cries would go unheeded.


Grateful Dead: Alive and Thriving
In a recessionary pop music environment in which tours keel over and die and radio and MTV stars hit the road only to cancel their tours, the Grateful Dead, 26 years old and counting, are doing better than ever.
So far this year, their gross for live shows has been higher than any other band's.
For the first six months of the year, the Dead earned $20 million.
Playing stadium-size venues -- something no other tour has dared do this summer -- the band has sold out virtually every show it has played, and the prediction is that for the rest of the year, it will sell out everything that's left.
Yesterday the Grateful Dead arrived in New York to play nine sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden.


Raters Slept Through Downfall of Insurers
To the Editor:
"Insurers' Raters Are on the Spot for Inaccuracy" (front page, Aug. 4) accurately describes the cozy relationship between the insurance industry and those responsible for rating them for the public.


World Economies


ATS Money Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


City Opera Presents 'Figaro.'


Adtec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Enstar Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Anna Pegler Is Married to Neil Gordon
Anna Pegler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Pegler of Billericay, England, was married yesterday to Neil David Gordon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Gordon of Princeton, N.J.
Rabbi Seth Kunin performed the ceremony in the gardens of Newnham College at Cambridge University, the bride's alma mater.
Mrs.
Pegler Gordon is 23 years old, and until recently was the director of a residential home for handicapped children in Salt Lake City.
Her father is a civil engineer with Peter Kelsey &amp; Partners, an engineering consulting concern in Brentwood, England.
Her mother, Maggie Pegler, teaches primary school in Basildon, England.


Soviet Georgia Chief, In Quest of Freedom, Sees Only Enemies
For the beleaguered and increasingly insecure leader of Soviet Georgia, who has struggled for decades to get the Soviet Union and the world to recognize the independence of his fiercely proud republic in the Caucasus Mountains, the victory in Moscow of the forces of democracy after last month's failed coup was nothing to cheer about.
President Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia says he wants nothing to do with the Soviet Union any more, whether it is a democracy or a dictatorship.
All he wants is real autonomy for Georgia, which he rules like a freely elected despot, preoccupied with plots, real and imagined, to do him in and keep his land under Moscow's domination.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Momentum is building in Congress and among regulators to repudiate and rewrite laws and economic regulations that were pillars of the New Deal in the 1930's.
The changes, advanced by the Bush Administration and moving quickly through Congress, represent a fundamental shift in the philosophy of regulation.  [ Page D1. ]


Maxwell May Expand
The British publisher Robert Maxwell says he is interested in acquiring more American media companies.
He already owns The Daily News in New York and the Macmillan publishing house.
"There are many other properties in the country," Mr.
Maxwell said Friday at a luncheon sponsored by the New York Financial Writers' Association.
Mr.
Maxwell, who heads the Maxwell Communication Corporation and Mirror Group P.L.C., said an edition of his weekly English-language newspaper, The Europea, would soon be printed at a Gannett Company plant near Boston.
He also said The Daily News could turn a profit by the end of the year.


Facelifters Home Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On the Outside Looking In at the Metropolitan Museum


Scheib (Earl) Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Hallwood Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Islander Takes Time Out as Negotiator
For the first phase of training camp, the 64 Islanders on hand here are divided into four teams that play one another in a round-robin scrimmage tournament.
One of those teams is called "Baumgartner's Heavy Metals." The captain is Ken Baumgartner, a veteran with a shaggy blond mane.
The team is called "Heavy Metals" because he enjoys that brand of rock music and a rugged style of play.
On an as-yet unspecified day later this week, Baumgartner will travel to an as-yet undisclosed city in Canada to play yet another leadership role among another group of co-workers.
The Goal Ahead
He is one of nine players on the committee of the National Hockey League Players Association that is trying to negotiate a new collective- bargaining agreement with team owners to replace a five-year pact that expires next Sunday..


Awaiting Congress in Capital: Soviet and Israeli Aid Questions
Congress comes back from vacation this week to face all the domestic problems it left behind five weeks ago and two major foreign policy questions it had not seen coming.
Hearings on the nomination of Clarence Thomas to be a Justice on the Supreme Court will begin Tuesday morning.
Floor action on issues like abortion and unemployment will soon follow.


Review/Pop; Caetano Veloso's Smooth Sounds
In some ways, live pop music's mission is to create drama, to convince an audience that it is experiencing a unique historical moment.
The Brazilian singer Caetano Veloso, who performed at Town Hall on Saturday night is good at it.
Mr.
Veloso is absolutely understated, and charismatic, and has figured out how to turn a large hall into a living room, as if his performance were improvised.
Backed by two percussionists and another guitarist, Mr.
Veloso made the sold-out show seem offhand.
When a percussionist was soloing, he would look at him, chin resting casually on the neck of his guitar.
At times he would roll his eyes or raise his eyebrows, or crack his voice to indicate irony or clue in the audience on the humor of a tune.
The audience, mostly Brazilian and clearly infatuated, quietly sang along with a handful of Mr.
Veloso's best-known tunes, including "O Leaozinho," "Menino do Rio" and "O Estrangeiro," and yelled requests.


PC Quote Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dividend Meetings


Hotelecopy Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31


LDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Spinnaker Software reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Icot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Midwesco Filter Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
A semantic dispute between wordsmiths has erupted in London.
LADY ANTONIA FRASER, the historian, biographer and novelist, and MICHAEL HOLROYD, the biographer, have become embroiled in a debate over the differences between the terms "author" and "writer."


Armani Bets on New Chain With a Casual Apparel Line
In that corner of fashion where Keds, Levis and Hanes are ascendant, enter Giorgio Armani.
The Milanese designer ranks among the most revered icons of the 80's.
But the 90's have thus far put an emphasis on value, and for many people the uniform of choice has become a pair of jeans and a T-shirt.


Ocean Bio-Chem reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SOVIET TURMOIL: Reporter's Notebook; St. Petersburg Remembers the Siege of Leningrad
They came by the hundreds to the Piskaryevskoye cemetery today, to commemorate those who died by the hundreds of thousands.
The 900 days of the siege of Leningrad began 50 years ago when pilots of the Luftwaffe bombed the food warehouses.
The city's survival -- with the loss of more than one in four civilians -- gave both the survivors and the city a place in history.
With the world changing around them, the residents of what until two days ago was Leningrad came today to the cemetery where thousands of corpses were once flung into mass graves by starving survivors.
Holding wreaths, escorted by goose-stepping soldiers, they filed by an eternal flame.
As history becomes difficult to hold onto, the siege is an anchor in the city's collective memory.


CHRONICLE
Across the Atlantic the literary debates are less lofty.
In New York, the new autobiography by GERALDO RIVERA, entitled "Exposing Myself," already has people talking about steamy descriptions of sexual liaisons with a variety of women.


What Can a New Yorker Do to Ease Tensions in Crown Heights?; Criminal Accidents
To the Editor:
A Brooklyn grand jury has decided against criminal charges in the death of a black child hit by a car driven by a Hasidic man in Crown Heights (news article, Sept. 6), yet as a criminal defense lawyer, I found "Auto Accidents Are Seldom Criminal" (editorial, Aug. 29) disconcerting.
You acknowledge that prosecutors, before submitting charges to a grand jury, must first determine if the driver's actions are criminal negligence, but you seem to equate criminal negligence with intent, and suggest only intentional acts should be prosecuted.


Southern Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Essay; Bush Takes Hostages
George Bush's Rosh ha-Shanah message to Jews around the world: Until Israel signals its willingness to give up the West Bank before direct negotiations begin, the United States will deny credit guarantees needed to prepare to receive one million more Jews in their exodus from Russia.
Nobody puts it so baldly, of course.
Americans would take offense if their President admitted holding the lives of a million harried and worried people hostage to his demand that Israel surrender its most cherished position beforehand.
To demand a ransom of land for humanitarian aid would be diplomatic blackmail, never the way the U.S. has done business.


Review/Dance; An Illusion of Bewitchment
The program notes for Young Soon Kim's dances promised works about mighty conflicts.
But the choreography that White Wave Rising: Young Soon Kim Dance Company offered Friday night at Gould Hall possessed surprisingly little urgency.
"Moon Nyah Do" featured curving gestures and circular patterns for the troupe's nine members.
Yet this was more than a study in design.
According to the program note, "Moon Nyah Do," which means "Painting of an Exorcism," was based on a Korean novel about a struggle between Shamanism and Christianity.
Unfortunately, the choreography never conveyed any sense of spiritual confrontation.


Prosperity Is Not Part Of Yankees' Playbook
The hit was inevitable and so was another loss.
The Yankees had a two-run lead in the sixth against the Twins, but they never felt safe.
How could they?
Not with the way Minnesota has dominated them and everyone else this season.
Their fears were realized when Pedro Munoz ripped a three-run home run off Jeff Johnson to help lift the Twins to a 6-5 victory over New York today at the Metrodome.
The scene was familiar in many ways.
It was the second straight game that Munoz had delivered a winning hit and the second time he had crushed a pivotal homer off Johnson.
Recalled from Class AAA Portland on Saturday, Munoz has already won two contests with crucial base hits.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 9


Detmer Excels in B.Y.U.'s Loss As Top Teams Sweep Past Foes
Penn State's 81-0 defeat of Cincinnati -- were the Nittany Lions out to run up a score? -- and Ty Detmer's performance deserving of a Heisman Trophy holder were two of Saturday's college football highlights.
Although his team, Brigham Young, lost to U.C.L.A., 27-23, Detmer broke the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-A career record for passing yards as he completed 29 of 46 passes for 377 yards and two touchdowns.


A Second Apple-I.B.M. Tie Expected
As part of their broad alliance, Apple Computer Inc. and I.B.M. are expected to establish a second joint venture to concentrate on multimedia computing and to cooperate on radio communications for computers, industry executives and trade reports said over the weekend.
In announcing their alliance in July, the two companies said they would form a jointly owned but independently managed company to develop advanced operating-systems software.
They also said they would cooperate on multimedia, which means the ability of computers to display video images and reproduce sound.
But they never gave specifics about the form of their multimedia cooperation.


New York City to Start School With Fiscal Ills and Hope
New York City's schools are bracing for one of the most unpredictable, and, some fear, clumsy openings in memory, with many schools facing crowded classrooms, shortages of teachers and an unprecedented turnover in principals.
"This will be the toughest year since the fiscal crisis," of the mid-1970's, said Jeanne Frankl, executive director of the Public Education Association, an advocacy group.


Japan Disregards Its Historical Heritage; In the Case of Lawyers
To the Editor:
One has to thank Mark A. Levin, a Seattle lawyer, for making clear the differences between our legal system and that of the Japanese in "What Statistics on Japan's Lawyers Mean" (letter, Aug. 23).
It appears (1) that we pay our lawyers excessively for work that clerks handle in Japan, and (2) that people in government and the business world are so well trained in law that they have a kind of legal standoff, and thus no one sues anyone.
Could be worse.


Courier Caps His Summer As Best American Player
Jim Courier may not have won the United States Open, but by reaching the final he at least secured the unofficial American intramural singles title for 1991.
Forget Stefan Edberg (Boris Becker, Michael Stich and Ivan Lendl, too) for the moment.
Courier went into the Open as the top-ranked (No. 5) and highest-seeded (No. 4) American and he emerged unquestionably as the sturdiest of America's list of aging former champions and emotionally fragile young stars.


Radio Outlet In Boston May Be Sold
The Emmis Broadcasting Corporation, whose seven radio stations include WFAN-AM and WQHT-FM in New York, may sell its Boston jazz station to help pay off $150 million in debt, its chairman, Jeffrey H. Smulyan, said yesterday.
Mr.
Smulyan, who bought the Seattle Mariners baseball team with partners in 1989 for $75 million, also said he was considering selling the team.
"Baseball has never been successful in Seattle," he said yesterday in a telephone interview.


Television Coverage of the Hearings
The confirmation hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court will dominate television this week on three cable channels and the Public Broadcasting Service beginning at 10 A.M.
Tuesday.
The most complete live coverage will be PBS's gavel-to-gavel broadcast.


TCS Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Pricor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Geographics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Republic Gypsum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Apple Verdict Is Reversed
A Federal judge has reversed a jury verdict that found the former chief executive of Apple Computer Inc. and another former executive liable for some $100 million in damages in a shareholder lawsuit.
Judge James Ware of the United States District Court in San Jose, Calif., ruled on Friday that there was no evidence that the two executives had violated securities law, an Apple press release said.
But Judge Ware ordered a new trial to determine whether Apple had itself violated the law.
The jury had exonerated Apple.


Black Catholics In Splinter Sect Ordain Woman
First came the rush of African drums, rattles and bells, introducing a procession of brightly garbed dancers and a pulsating chant.
Then came a solemn Catholic ordination rite, though with a difference: swaying, clapping, shouting, gospel-singing interludes that would have been familiar in a black Baptist church.
Blending traditions of worship and proclaiming that his movement had "shaken Rome," Bishop George A. Stallings Jr. ordained a woman today to serve as a priest in the African-American Catholic Congregation, the breakaway church he founded two years ago.


BIG FIRE DESTROYS TERMINAL OF FERRY TO STATEN ISLAND
A spectacular fire of suspicious origin destroyed the ceiling and roof of the Staten Island ferry's cavernous Manhattan terminal yesterday morning, disrupting service for thousands of riders on a commuter workhorse that is one of New York City's most glamorous sightseeing attractions.
As flaming chunks of asbestos-laden ceiling debris cascaded onto the passenger concourse and dense clouds of dark smoke billowed over New York Harbor just after 8 A.M., scores of early-morning riders and shopkeepers fled the terminal in panic, and a quiet Sunday amid the ghostly empty skyscrapers of lower Manhattan was turned into a war zone of wailing sirens and firefighting apparatus.


In Corner of Tibet, Chinese Now Predominate
As the smoke from his cigarette whirled around the deep lines in his face, tan and textured like the old leather saddles on the horses grazing behind him, Namshin remembered the days when the plateau was inhabited only by fellow Tibetans, so that he lived his first 35 years without ever seeing a single Chinese.
"Now look at those villages over there," said the 68-year-old Mr.
Namshin, who possesses 150 sheep but only one name, and he waved his hand beyond a herd of yaks at some hamlets on the prairie.
"They're all Chinese. Now there's no place to raise our livestock down here, and we must go into the mountains to graze our sheep."


Heico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


FCS Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dianon Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metro Matters; Budapest Official Shares Concerns Of Counterparts
"Tribalism," Dr.
Gabor Nagy said, shocked by the growing Balkanization of the New York City Council.
Dr.
Nagy is one of eight municipal officials from Eastern Europe who have been observing New York City government this summer under the auspices of Freedom House, a New York-based human-rights organization.
He spent two weeks in the office of the Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, and, after Thursday's Council primary elections, returns to Budapest where he is chairman of the City Council's Commitee on Human Rights and Minorities.
In Budapest, the major minority group is the city's gypsies, who make up less than 10 percent of the population.


Edberg Wins Open


A New Look For the 1990's
It would be nice if a grass-roots movement, so to speak, had a hand in picking the ambience of all these new ballparks that are in the works.
This will be the decade of the ballpark: It began this season with a new home for the White Sox (real grass), while teams over the next few years will be moving into new parks in Denver, Texas, Cleveland, Baltimore, Atlanta, and possibly Milwaukee.


Westbridge Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Edberg Is Perfect, Courier Is Pummeled
Stefan Edberg, all flawless finesse in the pursuit of his first United States Open championship, was the player who did all the pouncing in a high-stakes game of cat and mouse with French Open champion Jim Courier yesterday at the National Tennis Center.
In a lopsided final beneath a pastel haze on the Stadium Court, Edberg won his fifth Grand Slam title in eight Grand Slam finals.


Salem Journal; 'The Witch City' Dusts Off Its Past
For the last three centuries, this tiny seaport 15 miles north of Boston has struggled to make the most of its reputation.
The city was home to the witch trials of 1692, a murky period in American history when more than 200 people were accused of witchcraft; 19 were hanged, 1 stoned to death and 3 died in prison.
Sometime after its heyday as a port ended in the mid-1800's, Salem took "The Witch City" as its unofficial name.
It opened a "Salem Witch Museum" and a "Witch House." The uniforms of the city's police officers and fire fighters now include patches with the silhouette of a witch on a broomstick.
Even the city's newspaper, The Salem Evening News, put a witch on its masthead.


American Body Armor &amp; Equipment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


42 Are Killed in a Day of Clashes In Townships Near Johannesburg
Gunmen opened fire on a crowd this morning in a black township near here, starting a day of violence that left 42 people dead just days before the Government, the African National Congress and the rival Inkatha Freedom Party are to sign a peace plan intended to end violent clashes between the black opposition groups.
The shooting began as about 300 supporters of the Zulu-dominated Inkatha Freedom Party were on their way to a rally at a stadium in the township of Thokoza, about 12 miles south of Johnannesburg.
At least 23 people were killed and 18 others wounded, police officials said.


Homeless Children Challenge Schools
Betty A. Lewis, who lives in a hotel for the homeless seven blocks from the White House, spends $6 a day to take her two children on a regular commuter bus to a public elementary school several miles across town.
The school is the one the children were attending before the family lost their home in July, and the city does not provide school buses to take the children there.
The alternative, chosen reluctantly by many homeless families, is for the children to switch schools when they move from one temporary residence or shelter to another.


John H. Lawrence, 87; Led in Radiation Research
Dr.
John H. Lawrence, a discoverer of the dangers of nuclear radiation who went on to pioneer its use in diagnosing and treating cancer and other diseases, died Saturday at Alta Bates Hospital in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 87 years old.
His family said he died of complications from a stroke that he suffered two weeks ago.


Baker Arrives in Mexico for Annual Talks
Flying to Mexico with other Cabinet-level officials for wide-ranging talks on trade and other issues, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d told reporters today that the United States hoped that the Soviet Union would follow the example of Mexico's economic development strategy.
Mr.
Baker also praised the administration of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico, saying that "there have been dramatic changes in three major areas: politics, economics and United States-Mexico relations."


A New Jewish Press Flourishes in Moldavia
Ale-ksandr M. Brodsky recognizes that what he's doing is a paradox.
Though hundreds of thousands of Jews have left the Soviet Union in the last few years and more are leaving every day, Mr.
Brodksy last year opened a Jewish newspaper here in the Moldavian capital.
"Of course I understand that we are losing our readers and that in the end we will lose the newspaper," Mr.
Brodsky said in a recent interview in Romanian.
"But we have to work for today. If we don't have any readers, then it means that they're all in free countries."


Women Managers Don't Aim for Queen Bee; When Job Is Second
To the Editor:
Suzanne Gordon's characterization of female fast-trackers' management philosophy as "every woman for herself" (Op-Ed, Aug. 19) is so crude as to be just plain wrong.


Twins Find Success In the Joy of Working
If the Twins showed up at the Metrodome with lunch pails, no one would question them.
In fact, it is amazing that the best team in baseball has not done that yet because it would fit the players' style.
Four hours before a recent game against the Yankees, there were Twins running sprints, fielding grounders and taking batting practice.
Twins and more Twins scattered throughout every nook and cranny of the Metrodome.
They were not playing cards, watching television or chomping on a pre-game buffet in the clubhouse.
They worked feverishly, while their opponents had not even arrived.
Revealing?
Very.
This team comes to play and to win.


Immunogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Once, Thin Look Is Out at Fashion Magazines
As the recession hits home in the fiercely competitive world of fashion magazines, the buzzword is now "partnering."
"You become involved in your clients' business and become partners with them more so than ever before," said Julie Lewit-Nirenberg, publisher of Mirabella.
"The attitude is very different now. It's no longer selling the page; it's selling the relationship and saying to them, 'What can we do for you?' "


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; Dow Jones Plans to Tighten Foreign Policy for Workers
WHILE working as a foreign correspondent at The Wall Street Journal may be a glamorous job, it is about to become a significantly less rewarding one financially.
Dow Jones &amp; Company, owner of The Journal, has notified foreign correspondents and other expatriate employees that on Jan. 1 1992, the company will cease paying allowances for housing, goods and services under its old formula.
The new rules will apply to those posted abroad after Jan. 1, but will not apply to expatriates now in place until June 30, 1993.


In Japan, Mostly Mozart Plays Well, or Even Better
Mozart in the department stores.
Mozart coins.
Mozart on television and radio.
Even a Mozart brand of rice wine, or sake, has been produced in this bicentennial year of the great composer's death, as Japan has taken what in other countries was a preoccupation and made it an obsession.
Last week Japanese audiences flocked to a nine-concert version of the Mostly Mozart Festival, imported direct from Lincoln Center, the first time that the popular New York City ensemble has traveled abroad.


Stop Trifling With the Jobless
Almost two million out-of-work Americans have exhausted their unemployment benefits during 1991.
For them, the recession, mild by historical standards, is a personal horror.
Before adjourning in August, the Democratic leadership pushed a bill through Congress that would extend benefits for as many as 20 additional weeks, depending on a state's unemployment rate.
That might seem a humane response.
But the bill was a hoax.
Congress refused to raise taxes to pay for the promised benefits, making it impossible to provide the promised relief without violating last year's budget law.
The new benefits could be released only if President Bush declared a budget emergency.
And Congress knew that Mr.
Bush, to his credit, would commit no such chicanery.
So the unemployed remain hungry.


As Publishers Cut Costs, Book Packagers Thrive
Book packagers have traditionally had an image problem.
Their role has been dimly seen as having something to do with mail rooms and wrapping works of literature.
"We have labored under our tawdry and non-literary name," said Carter Smith, the president of Media Projects Inc., a New York packager.


Abroad at Home; A Royalist Court
A great misunderstanding a great irony -- underlies the political debate about the Supreme Court.
It needs illumination as Senate hearings on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas get under way.
President Bush and others on his side say they want a "conservative" Court, one that will merely interpret the law and not "legislate." They cheer the extent to which the present Court already fits their model.
They want more of the same, and expect it from Judge Thomas.


Review/Theater; 'Sarrasine': Sexuality and Illusion
The notion that sexuality and gender, and not just beauty, are theatrical illusions projected in the eye of the beholder has animated a lot of recent popular theater, from "La Cage aux Folles" to "M. Butterfly." But it has rarely been explored with the richness and depth of feeling that can be found in "Sarrasine," a two-and-a-half-hour musical theater work that is being performed at Dance Theater Workshop through Sunday.
Based on a Balzac story that tells of the obsessional passion of Jean Ernest Sarrasine, a Frenchman, for La Zambinella, a young castrato singer, "Sarrasine" is the work of an English production company called Gloria.
The Balzac story was also the focus of a well-known essay by Roland Barthes, of which the creators of "Sarrasine" seem to be aware.
For in adapting it for the stage, the show's librettist, designer and director, Neil Bartlett, and its composer, Nicolas Bloomfield, have created a sprawling, post-structuralist music-theater elaboration that is part chamber opera, part music-hall revue.


What Can a New Yorker Do to Ease Tensions in Crown Heights?; What Blackness Is Not
To the Editor:
The National Association of Black Journalists is outraged by the Aug. 23 headline "No Black Magic in the Mayor"  [ some editions ]  and the editorial it accompanies.


PERONISTS AHEAD IN MIDTERM VOTING
Five months of economic stability and the lowest inflation rate Argentina has seen in 25 years appear to have given the Peronist party of President Carlos Saul Menem a decisive victory today in midterm elections.
Based on early returns, the opposition Radical Party of former President Raul Alfonsin retained the governorship in the province of Cordoba, and Peronist candidates appeared to be winning in 10 other provinces.


Viedma Journal; Governor Meets Payroll, by Plundering the Bank
He is called the Robin Hood of Patagonia.
Some say he stole from the Central Bank and should be put in jail.
He says he "appropriated" money that the federal Government owed the people of his province.
What is not in dispute is that on Friday, July 5, Horacio Massaccesi, the 42-year-old Governor of the province of Rio Negro, issued an executive decree by which he commandeered $16.6 million of federal Government funds and distributed it to 30,000 Rio Negro government workers so that they would be paid on time.


Optelecom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Day's Highlights
Economic Chaos Across the Land
Soviet Officials Predict Leap In Prices: With no indication of any economic plan by the new governing State Council, Soviet officials estimated that budget deficits could double and the inflation rate could jump tenfold.
Political developments proceeded apace, with the leader of the Azerbaijani republic running unopposed for President and opposition members boycotting the ballot.
Page A1.
Georgian Leader Cries Conspiracy: President Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia says all he wants is real autonomy for the Georgian republic, which he rules like a freely elected despot.
Preoccupied with plots to do him in, he has let the republic's economy go to ruin.
Page A1.
Pockets of Euphoria, or Cautious Hope
Paradox In Newspaper's Prosperity: More Jews are leaving the Soviet Union every day, but a newspaper for Moldavian and Ukrainian Jews is thriving as it becomes more widely known.
"If we don't have any readers, then it means that they're all in free countries," the paper's founder says optimistically.
Page A9.
Soviet Convoy Leaves Lithuania: A convoy of Soviet trucks and armored vehicles left Lithuania as the newly recognized state prepared for negotiations on a permanent troop withdrawal.
In a joyous celebration at a religious shrine, the Lithuanian President told a crowd of thousands that Sept. 8 would be a holiday of thanksgiving for independence.
Page A9.
To Reject the Past, and Honor Its Victims
'I'm Not Your Comrade': "Comrade" just won't do anymore, so one of the things bothering Soviet citizens is what to call each other.
Page A8.
St.
Petersburg Anchors Its Memory: The 900 days of the siege of Leningrad began 50 years ago when pilots of the Luftwaffe bombed the food warehouses.
The city's survival gave it a place in history.
Page A8.


Cableshare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Pizza Version of Dialing '911'
A.T.&amp; T. and Domino's Pizza are testing a new service that could revolutionize how consumers obtain a wide variety of goods and services by telephone, from ordering fast food to getting emergency road repairs.
The service is a toll-free nationwide telephone number that does not require a caller to dial an area code.
Calls are routed to the most convenient branch office or franchisee of a national chain, just as if the caller had dialed the local office directly.


Northstar Computer reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Public Advocate Troubling To New Jersey's Privileged
When Wilfredo Caraballo was a young man plying the rough turf of the South Bronx, he, like many other Hispanic men, had a lot of trouble with the police, he said.
"In 1973, a cop put a gun in my face and said: 'I know that face! I know that face!' "


11.6% Decline Is Expected For Corporate Campaigns
CONFIRMING the belief that corporate advertising has fallen victim to the recession, an annual survey of members of the Association of National Advertisers has found that budgets this year are expected to drop 11.6 percent from 1990.
The consultant who conducted the survey says the decline is the largest since he began tracking spending on such campaigns during the 1975 recession.
Executives participating in the survey, which is known as the association's corporate advertising practices study, reported that they intended to spend $404.4 million this year, compared with $457.4 million last year.
Another sign of the spending slowdown was a finding that only 52.8 percent of the respondents sponsored corporate ad campaigns within the last three years, compared with 62.8 percent who did so from 1988 through 1990 and 70.4 percent who did so from 1987 through 1989.


Koala Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


INSIDE
A Guide to Contests For the City Council
What could be one of New York City's most important municipal primary elections in years will take place on Thursday.
The Council will expand to 51 members from 35, with the goal of increasing minority representation.
A look at the races, the candidates and the issues.
Pages B4 and B5.
Scores Slain in South Africa
Black factional clashes around Johannesburg left 42 people dead days before the two main rival groups are to sign a peace plan.
Page A2.
For Schools, New Faces
Unprecedented turnover in teachers and principals may make for an unpredictable opening day for New York City's schools.
Page B1.
Judge Thomas in Rehearsal
Judge Clarence Thomas goes before the Senate Judiciary Committee Tuesday after a summer of preparation for the questioning.
Page A12.
Plutonium's Discoverer Dies
Edwin Mattison McMillan, a pioneer in modern chemistry and physics, died at the age of 83.
Page B10.


Regulatory Overhaul Advancing
Momentum is building rapidly in Congress and among Federal regulators to repudiate and rewrite many laws and economic regulations that were pillars of the New Deal of the 1930's.
The changes, advanced by the Bush Administration and moving quickly through Congress, which returns from its summer recess on Tuesday, represent a fundamental shift in the philosophy of regulation.
Earlier in this century, rules were formulated to restrict the growth of financial powerhouses; the new view holds that conglomeration is better for the economy and helps the nation to compete internationally.


A Mirror to America: Musicals Since 1866
Mary Martin's sailor costume from "South Pacific." Andrea McArdle's red dress from "Annie." George Gershwin's silent practice keyboard.
Those are among the more than 300 items on view in the exhibition "Broadway! 125 Years of Musical Theater," which has reopened at the Museum of the City of New York after a spring and summer run at the I.B.M.
Gallery.


Giants Need a Flat-Tire Kit
WHEN asked once to define coaching a National Football League team, Bill Parcells said, "Give 'em a good design and get 'em to play hard."
Yes, get 'em to play hard.
Not just in the big games, such as a Monday night season opener against the 49ers but more important, in the in-between games.


Mets Are Welcome Mats for Braves
The baseball disappeared over the wall in left, and the beat of a single war drum went up.
The remnants of a depleted crowd stood in the dying sunlight and thrust their fists at the sky, a couple of dozen impromptu tomahawks saluting Brian Hunter's ninth-inning homer.
And so for one final, modest moment this season, Shea Stadium, for weeks a place of exhausted excuses and walking wounded, was transformed into the sight of a pennant race, the scene of a game of character and drama.


Conde Nast Is Planning Big Campaign for Fall
To greet the fall advertising sales season, Conde Nast Publications is introducing an unusually extensive trade ad campaign for its 12 magazines.
A total of 112 ad pages are scheduled to appear at different times during the next eight weeks in four trade publications: Advertising Age, Adweek, Inside Media and Mediaweek.
Each time the ads run, they will appear on seven consecutive pages of each publication.
For instance, in this week's Advertising Age, there will be ads for Allure, Bride's, Glamour, Mademoiselle, Self and Vogue, plus a corporate Conde Nast ad.
On Sept. 23, Ad Age will carry ads for Conde Nast Traveler, Details, GQ, Gourmet, HG and Vanity Fair, plus a corporate ad.


Benihana National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 21


India's Communists Reel in Soviet Upheaval
With his seemingly endless shelves of primly aligned works of Lenin, Harkishan Singh Surjeet brandishes with considerable pride, if evident historical dissonance, his membership in India's largest Communist Party.
"When I came out of prison in 1934 I joined the Communist Party," he said, sitting beneath portraits of Ho Chi Minh, the founder of Vietnam's Communist Party.
"At that time there were only a small number of people. Now there are many more of us, as you can see. We are committed to an ideal."
The last few weeks of history in the Soviet Union, the birthplace of the Communist ideal in Leninist theory and practice, have thundered down upon India, a country long wedded to notions of socialist development and eternal friendship with the Soviet people.
The events to the north have especially shattered India's Communists, Mr.
Surjeet's party in particular.


Hoover: Still a Shadow Not to Be Stepped On
Officially, the J. Edgar Hoover era at the Federal Bureau of Investigation ended with the Director's death on May 2, 1972.
But as Curt Gentry learned when he was researching his new biography, "J. Edgar Hoover: The Man and the Secrets," his power to intimidate reached well beyond the grave.
Years later F.B.I. officials remained reluctant to discuss Hoover, Mr.
Gentry said in a recent telephone interview.
"I don't think that all of them believe he's going to rise from the dead," said Mr.
Gentry, whose book is to be published on Sept. 16 (W. W. Norton, 846 pages, $29.95).
"But there are a lot of people who are very scared of the bureau and what may be in the files."


Giants Seem to Be Deflated But Rams Get Welcome Lift
The Giants were all together again today.
On Monday night, when they beat the San Francisco 49ers in their season opener, all the Giants seemed to play well.
Today, against a Los Angeles Rams team struggling for respectability, all the Giants played inconsistently and often without fire.
The result was a 19-13 loss at Giants Stadium to a Rams' team that could have easily won by more.
The Giants were 7-point favorites.


Toward Healthy Women
The average American woman can expect to live longer than the average man.
She can also expect to feel miserable a good part of that time.
The reason isn't necessarily her age.
Often it's because she has an ailment that might have been prevented and could surely be treated -- had men not been used as the normative standard in medical research.
Coronary heart disease, for example.
Two recent studies showed that doctors treated women with heart disease less aggressively than they treated men -- even though in the women the disease tended to be further advanced.
The women were half as likely to undergo cardiac catheterization and much less likely to have bypass surgery or a procedure to unclog blocked arteries.
One reason is a woeful ignorance about heart disease in women; most of the studies have been carried out in men.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-9
Work on the crippled Soviet economy is the next challenge for the national transitional government.
Plummeting deficits and soaring inflation are dampening plans for a rapid move toward a free market.
Page A1
The President of Soviet Georgia, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, has struggled for decades to get the world to recognize independence for his fiercely proud republic.
But now his power seems to be waning.
A1


New York City to Start School With Fiscal Ills and Hope
New York City's schools are bracing for one of the most unpredictable, and, some fear, clumsy openings in memory, with many schools facing crowded classrooms, shortages of teachers and an unprecedented turnover in principals.
"This will be the toughest year since the fiscal crisis," of the mid-1970's, said Jeanne Frankl, executive director of the Public Education Association, an advocacy group.


Japan Disregards Its Historical Heritage
To the Editor:
For many years I have wanted to make a public appeal to the Japanese Government to stop the desecration and destruction of its historic towns and cities.
I was very moved, therefore, by the Kyoto Buddhist Association's full-page advertisement (Aug. 15) appealing to the American people to help save Kyoto from thoughtless development.


Where Croats and Serbs Still Mingle: In the Trauma Wards With Wounds
As the conflict in the Yugoslav republic of Croatia has deepened, Serbs and Croats have retreated to their own communities.
Now the trauma wards of hospitals are virtually the only places where members of both groups can be found together, as they are treated for gunshot and shrapnel wounds.
In a simple but bright surgical ward here, a 25-year-old Croatian farmer tells how he was shot while defending his farmhouse from the attacks of marauding Serbian guerrillas.


U.S. to Sell Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late in the day Friday the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.30 percent and the six-month bill at 5.33 percent.


Lectec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Coca-Cola Co., Atlanta, is offering $250 million in 7 7/8 percent notes due in 1998 at 99.692 to yield 7.933 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable notes are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and AA by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Mail Boxes Etc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Chief Consolidated Mining reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ferry Terminal a 'Banal Portal to Joy'
The American Institute of Architects calls it "the world's most banal portal to joy," a squat, pale sea-green hulk that is "a blight on the celebration of arrival and departure at a great city."
The South Ferry terminal of the Staten Island ferry has over the years endured decay, derision and, most recently, the collapse of a development project that would have seen it topped with a 60-story, pink and gray granite and glass tower.


P.R. Images Spread, Via Satellite
The classic image of public relations was created in the 1957 film "Sweet Smell of Success," in which Sidney Falco, a sniveling flack played by Tony Curtis, would do anything short of murder to plant his clients' names in the press.
The modern impression of public relations is being fashioned 23 flights above Third Avenue and West 44th Street in Manhattan.
There, Laurence Moskowitz and 39 colleagues ply their promotions not by telephoned tips and typewritten press advisories, but with the newest tool of the public relations trade: the satellite dish.


Insider Distribution Upheld
A Federal appeals court has approved a plan by the Securities and Exchange Commission to distribute $19.2 million recovered from an insider trading scheme.
The fund was collected in a 1988 civil action against Fred C. Lee, a Taiwan citizen, and Stephen Sui-Kuan Wang, a former analyst at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


U.S. Agency Acts to Prevent Jet Engines From Reversing
The Federal Aviation Administration is taking new steps to prevent aircraft engines from suddenly going into reverse power during flight.
The aviation agency is acting based on laboratory tests that suggest the dangers of the reversers' deploying unintentionally might be greater than previously believed.


Galagraph Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Family Of Builders, Brick Walls
Joshua and Stephen Muss may not be the closest of cousins, but they do have several things in common.
Each is part of a legacy of builders in the New York area, and each feels frustration over separate construction projects planned for Brooklyn.
Joshua, the head of the Muss Development Company, is trying to build a 31-story office building and hotel complex in downtown Brooklyn, while Stephen, the head of Alexander Muss &amp; Sons, has plans for a five-building, 1,600-apartment complex in Brighton Beach.


Alfa International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Creative Team Changes Agencies in Atlanta
An advertising team in Atlanta is changing addresses, moving to Austin Kelley Advertising from Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising.
Ralph McGill Jr., 46 years old, a senior copywriter at Babbit &amp; Reiman, and James Spruell, 35, a senior art director, are becoming senior vice presidents and creative directors at Austin Kelley.
Robert K. Warren, who was previously Austin Kelley's senior vice president and creative director, left in July to become a partner at Lewis Clark &amp; Graham, Atlanta.


Gish Biomedical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Washington Heights Journal; It's Bingo, But Game Is Played In Depths
Bingo is bingo the world around, and so, for the most part, are bingo halls.
But not in Washington Heights, where two games have gone underground.
One is literally under the ground: It is held every day in the IRT subway station at 181st Street.
The other takes place a few blocks away on weekends under a cluster of trees in the open air of J. Wright Park, where its unlicensed operators furtively toss around their cash in a manner reminiscent of Nathan Detroit and the oldest established permanent floating crap game in New York.


Consulier Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alcide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Summit Health Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


STOR Furnishings International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 19


Fidelity Medical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Works by Chamber Music Society
The premieres of works by Bruce Adolphe, Richard Danielpour and Oliver Knussen are among the highlights of the 1991-92 season of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, which begins on Oct. 20.
Newly appointed artists of the society this season include the flutist Ransom Wilson and the oboist Stephen Taylor.
The violinist Joseph Silverstein is to join members of the society for the opening concert, which is to include performances of Schoenberg's "Verklarte Nacht" and the Mendelssohn Octet, as well as works by Wolf, Shostakovich and Telemann.


Quotation of the Day
"The building has never had much esthetic appeal. But it does function." -- Joseph De Plasco, Transportation Department spokesman, on the South Ferry terminal.  [ B2:1. ]


No Buffalo Gig For Alice Cooper
ALICE COOPER thought he had a gig before the Bills-Steelers game at Buffalo yesterday.
He expected to appear in the parking lot plugging his "Hey Stoopid" album.
He even was told that the Bills had given him permission to see his fan, RAY BENTLEY, the linebacker who wears Cooper-like eye-shadow, on the field before the game.
But the Bills' football people say they didn't know about the deal until Thursday; they canceled that night.


Ultra Pac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


International Pursuit reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A New Assertiveness at the U.S. Health Institutes
Dr.
Bernadine P. Healy sat at the green hearing table before the House Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigation, her head cocked defiantly.
She told Representative John D. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who is chairman of the panel, that his description of her actions as director of the National Institutes of Health was "preposterous."
She also took a shot at Representative Norman F. Lent, a Republican from Nassau County who is his party's ranking member on the committee.
Later, she told a reporter from Science magazine that the whole hearing was "misguided" and that Mr.
Dingell's remarks were "filled with innuendos, misstatements and, sad to say, falsehoods."


International Epitek reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


Reviews/Music; 'Figaro' Mirrors a Battle of the Sexes
A great deal can be conveyed in a good performance of Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro." A work of extraordinary depth that emerges sneakily from behind a comic veneer, it is as telling an exploration of the war between the sexes as can be found on the opera stage.
In a single, deft phrase from the long-suffering Countess in the finale, it offers an eloquent lesson in the power and beauty of forgiveness.
It tells a great deal about the power of music, too, for in those final moments it is not the libretto but Mozart's sublime setting of it that rings emotionally true.
And on purely musical terms, the score is a marvel in which there is not a superfluous or uninspired note.
It runs nearly four hours (even without Basilio's and Marcellina's fourth-act arias), but seems to go by in a flash.


Intek Diversified Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Women Managers Don't Aim for Queen Bee
To the Editor:
We have just completed a study of women's friendship in the corporate working world.
The data our research team collected from more than 200 questionnaires and 25 taped in-depth interviews do not accord with Suzanne Gordon's anecdotes about the "Queen Bee syndrome" among managerial women in "Every Woman for Herself" (Op-Ed, Aug. 19).


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are scheduled for this week:
&lt;biComputer Network Technology Corp., 2 million common shares.
Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.


Shamir, in Defiant Gesture to U.S., Vows to Build More Settlements
In a defiant gesture that seems likely to increase tensions with the United States, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir pledged today that Israel would continue to build more settlements in its occupied territories.
Mr.
Shamir also warned the Bush Administration that the connection it had made between a planned Middle East peace conference and an Israeli request for American loan guarantees put the entire peace process at risk because it would encourage Arab states to make tough new demands.


Cardiac Control Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Jewish Year 5752 Begins


Need Is Seen for the Fed To Consider Consumers
Private economists say that now that the Federal Reserve has engineered a turnaround in the manufacturing sector, it should devote its energies and attention to consumers.
Unless relief comes soon and demand picks up, the production gains recorded so far in the third quarter could taper off in the final three months of the year and into 1992, they say.


Regulation, Japan Style
For American trade negotiators and other outsiders who complain that Japan's economy is closed and indecipherable, two weeks of parliamentary hearings here about the continuing stock market scandals have offered fresh evidence of how difficult it can be to figure out what is permitted or prohibited in Japan and how foreigners might compete on equal terms.
In their testimony, the barons of Japan's securities industry offered no new bombshells about the unfolding financial scandals, in which 21 securities firms have acknowledged that they compensated their largest customers for trading losses.


What Can a New Yorker Do to Ease Tensions in Crown Heights?; Preventing Violence
To the Editor:
"As Blacks Clash With Hasidic Jews in Crown Heights, Who's in Control?" (Week in Review, Aug. 25) says local residents in Crown Heights called me a demagogue and say I stirred up a crowd and then departed.


Skyline Chili Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4


Servotronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Canadian Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Warning to Champs: No Whining Allowed
THE dreadful burden has been passed to two more sets of shoulders.
For the next 12 months, two new champions must bear the weight of the United States Open title.
Michael Chang confessed that he felt the 1989 French Open title was like a "knapsack full of bricks." And before he was mercifully eliminated from further agony, Pete Sampras shortened the 1990 United States Open title to "a bag of bricks."


Who Will Speak for Hong Kong?
Britain's Prime Minister, John Major, owes the world no apologies for his ice-breaking visit to Beijing last week, the first by a major Western leader since the killings in Tiananmen Square.
With direct political responsibility for the fate of 5.8 million residents of Hong Kong, he has every reason to talk directly with the Chinese leadership.
But he does need to dispel the impression that Britain is more interested in its own smooth relations with China than in the freedoms it is pledged to protect in Hong Kong.
Despite Mr.
Major's reassuring words, the airport agreement he signed with Chinese leaders gives new cause for concern.


Little Waste in the Dinkins Trash Plan
Mayor Dinkins demonstrates courageous leadership in his apparent decision to move forward with a plan to develop three state-of-the-art incinerators to deal with New York City's mounting trash problem.
The decision will surely bring abuse from those who mistakenly believe that incineration of garbage is both dangerous and unnecessary.
They are wrong, and the Mayor is right.
New York produces about 25,000 tons of solid waste every day.
The Sanitation Department picks up 14,000 tons, mainly from apartment buildings.
The rest is scooped up by private contractors who handle commercial, construction and hazardous wastes.


Insituform Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Price's Birdie Streak Makes Him a Winner  Nick Price put together a string of five consecutive birdies yesterday and went on to a one-stroke victory in the Canadian Open in Oakville, Ontario.
Price, who had a bogey-free final-round 66, won $180,000 and scored his second victory of the season and the third of his nine-year PGA Tour career.
He finished at 15-under-par 273 on the Glen Abbey Gold Club Course.
David Edwards, who had an eagle on the 16th, was second at 274 after a 68.
Ken Green, with a 70, and Fred Couples, with a 69, tied for third at 275. (AP)


Rams Borrow a Page, or Two, Or Three, From Eagles
The Giants' offense was confronted by a Philly defense with a Los Angelese twist here today and once again came up short.
Jeff Fisher, the Rams' new defensive coordinator, spent five years with Philadelphia, studying at the elbow of former Eagles coach Buddy Ryan, the master of the 46 defense.
In the last three years that Fisher was with Philadelphia, two of them spent as defensive coordinator, the Eagles beat the Giants five of six times.


Imperial Metals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Immulogic Pharmaceutical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Books of The Times; From the Lore of Tea, A Multi-Course Feast
A Time for Tea Travels Through China and India in Search of Tea By Jason Goodwin  287 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
Was it that in his boyhood dreams of glory he imagined himself to be one Captain Hawkeye (until spectacles were prescribed), who "owed a lot to a cherished line of English traders and pirates"?
Or was it simply because among his two grandmothers' cluttered possessions he had found Chinese tea caddies from their British imperial pasts?


Cardinals Get Some Respect After Second Victory in Row
The signature play of this awful day for the Philadelphia Eagles came on their drive toward respectability against the Phoenix Cardinals, a drive that ended in the end zone with 4 seconds left when Thomas Sanders fumbled on a 1-yard run with Phoenix swiping the ball.
The signature play for Phoenix?


Jets Fly 3,000 Miles, And Then Go Nowhere
The day dissolved so quickly, and so unexpectedly, that the Jets almost appeared helpless today, as if the game and the momentum were no longer in their grasp.
They had them, and then they were gone.
By the finish, the Jets looked disoriented and disorganized.
They lost a lead at the end of the first half, then they lost the game in a few precious moments of the third quarter.
At the end, they were left to ponder a dizzying 20-13 defeat to the Seattle Seahawks at the Kingdome.


Russians Are at a Loss For a Respectful Word
One of the things bothering Soviet citizens now that the Communist Party is a thing of the past is what to call each other.
"Comrade" just won't do any more, it seems, although President Mikhail S. Gorbachev kept using the word -- "tovarishch" in Russian -- when he called upon members of the now-defunct Congress of People's Deputies during its last farewell this past week.


Former Giant Sells Super Bowl Ring
The ad was listed recently in The New York Times under "Jewelry, Diamonds--Etc."
Someone was selling a 1986 Giants Super Bowl ring.
The asking price was $25,000 or best offer.


Edwin McMillan, Nobel Laureate And Chemistry Pioneer, Dies at 83
Edwin Mattison McMillan, a pioneer in modern chemistry and physics who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1951 as a co-discoverer of plutonium and neptunium, died Saturday at his home in El Cerrito, Calif.
He was 83 years old.
He suffered a stroke several years ago and died of complications from diabetes, his family said.


U.S. Broadens Inquiry on Salomon Scandal
The Justice Department has expanded its investigation of the Treasury securities scandal that has shaken Salomon Brothers Inc., and prosecutors are now conducting parallel civil and criminal inquiries in Washington and New York, people involved in the case said over the weekend.
A handful of criminal subpoenas have been issued, most of them directed at individual traders, and prosecutors have asked a number of Salomon executives or their lawyers for interviews, these sources said.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has also joined the inquiry, and its agents have met with representatives of the firm.


Stars Who Are Hard to Market
JIMMY CONNORS's age-defying comebacks at the United States Open "have brought him to such a high level, they've removed the dislike for him people once had," contends a sports marketing expert, BRANDON STEINER.


Value Merchants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 17


Interpoint Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Tito Puente Brings Up the Big Band
Last Monday night's Salsa Meets Jazz double bill at the Village Gate, featuring the Japanese salsa band Orchestra de la Luz and Tito Puente and his orchestra, was meant to be an event.
The main Japanese salsa band was teamed up with Mr.
Puente, the king of salsa, for a showdown.
But the showdown never really materialized, mostly because Orchestra de la Luz generates much less heat than it might, and the band turned out to be less than a contender.
Not that they haven't been managed well.
The orchestra, which as of last year has sung in Spanish phonetically, is up to the minute; their records regularly reach the charts.
Halfway through their first set, the group's lead singer, Nora, broke out into a salsa piece in English, which is now standard practice for most orchestras who record.
For the rest of the set the orchestra performed well enough, but the experience was visual, with Nora choreographing her moves in time with the arrangements.


Accounts
*
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Co., New York, to Metzdorf Stone, New York, for what an agency spokesman called Grace's first corporate advertising campaign in several years.
Billings for the campaign, which will be introduced this week with the theme "We're Grace and proud of it," were not disclosed.


Using Books Instead of Brooms to Escape Welfare
Each weekday morning, Alica Kimble, a single mother of four, joins what is meant to be a revolution in the nation's welfare system.
She takes her 3-year-old son to a community center, where he attends a preschool class while she studies for her high school equivalency degree.
She is one of hundreds of thousands of welfare parents newly required to leave home and take steps toward self-support.
Like many others, she is hoping that the investment in education can rewrite a life story so far filled with the sad endings of dead-end jobs and welfare office waiting rooms.


First Centennial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


City Islanders Enduring Tainted Water Problem
Amber McGiver didn't brush her teeth yesterday.
And, most likely, neither did scores of others who live off the shoreline of the Bronx on City Island, where the water supply has been contaminated with bacteria from an unknown source since last Thursday.
"You really don't realize how much water you use or what you use it for until something like this happens," said Miss McGiver, who is 30 years old and a waitress at the City Island Diner.


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended today and tomorrow in New York City.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Computer Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


U.S. ASKING EUROPE TO LEND SATELLITE
The United States is borrowing a European weather satellite to fill a potential gap in photography from space that would leave American forecasters without vital pictures to track storms and hurricanes.
It is the first time that an operating spacecraft has been lent to avert a possible crisis, and paradoxically, it is the United States, which pioneered weather satellites, that is asking others for help.


Candidates Crowd the Field in Primary for Council
MANHATTAN 1st DISTRICT
MANUEL S. CAVACO Jr. (D) -- Truck driver, rock musician and artist; Democratic county committee member.


Bridge
For the last 60 years, American teams and European teams have done battle on many major occasions.
The earliest were the three visits to England by Ely Culbertson, when he and his cohorts contested the Schwab Cup.
On the last of these, in 1934, he came close to defeat at the hands of a London foursome headed by Richard Lederer.
Lederer, who like Culbertson was born in Eastern Europe, was the great figure in British bridge in that period.
His memory is preserved in the Richard Lederer Memorial Trophy, which is contested annually in London by strong teams which in principle represent various clubs.
Last year the event was won by a group of All-Stars that included the ubiquitous Zia Mahmood.
He sat South on the diagramed deal.


United Front May Make Higher Tire Prices Stick
By joining other tire producers in raising retail prices, Groupe Michelin has sent a signal that the latest round of proposed increases may actually take hold, in contrast to several previous efforts by the industry in recent years.
When it joined Continental A.G.
General Tire Company, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company and the Bridgestone Corporation in announcing plans to raise prices, Michelin created a solid front by the world's four largest tire producers, all of whom say their financial woes have made higher prices crucial.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday Consumer Credit . . .
July


A BLEAK ECONOMY DIMS SOVIET HOPES FOR A FREE MARKET
Having adopted an emergency redesign of the Soviet Union's political face, officials of the new national transitional Government face the daunting challenge posed by the crippled Soviet economy, where growing budget deficits and soaring inflation are dampening plans for rapid free-market innovations.
Officials estimate that inflation could increase as much as tenfold this year, with deficits doubling as the new, weaker union government and its newly sovereign republics contend with the bleak economic environment.


Global Ocean Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Rehearsed Thomas Is Set for Hearings
When Judge Clarence Thomas faces a bank of television lights and the sober-faced members of the Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday, the tone of his remarks and the details of his responses should be familiar to him and his White House handlers.
Judge Thomas, President Bush's choice to succeed Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court, has undergone an intense summerlong preparation for the confirmation hearings, including three mock sessions in which he has fielded aggressive questions from lawyers pretending to be senators on the committee.


Genex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Birtcher Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Energy Corp. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Wrestlers File Suit Against Yale
Athletes who came to Yale University to be wrestlers are suing the school to reinstate their team, the oldest in the country, which was eliminated by budget cuts in April.


A Shaken Navratilova Testifies at Hearing
A tearful MARTINA NAVRATILOVA testified yesterday in Fort Worth that she didn't read the property agreement between her and her former companion, JUDY NELSON, who has sued the tennis star for reneging on the pact.
Navratilova and Nelson met face-to-face yesterday for the first time since their breakup last April, during a hearing on whether Nelson's lawyer should be disqualified from the palimony case.
The hearing will resume today.


Thomas Hearings Viewed as Test for Bush and Civil Rights Groups
Judge Clarence Thomas appears before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday for confirmation hearings that may prove to be a test of President Bush's ability to cement a conservative majority on the Supreme Court for years, if not decades, to come.
The committee's hearings on Judge Thomas's fitness to serve on the Court are expected to be a hybrid of the rancorous 1987 battle in which the Senate rejected the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork and last year's hearings in which Judge David H. Souter was easily confirmed to the Court.


Soviet Forces Begin a Drill In Democracy
Three weeks after the abortive coup in the Soviet Union, 28 senior Soviet military officers entered Harvard University today for a crash course on how to help build a democracy.
At a news conference and later in interviews, the officers said the Soviet military of the future would be a smaller, professional force free from the Communist Party's control.
The central army, the officers said, will work in concert with newly created militias in the former Soviet republics.


Most Americans Are Undecided On Court Nomination, Poll Finds
Judge Clarence Thomas enjoys about equal support, and opposition, from whites and blacks, but two-thirds of the American people have no opinion on whether he should be confirmed as a Justice of the Supreme Court, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
Among those with a view, twice as many say he should be confirmed as say he should be rejected.
Judge Thomas, who is black and has been opposed by most civil rights organizations, was supported by 23 percent of blacks and opposed by 15 percent.
Among whites, 26 percent favored confirmation and 10 percent did not.
In the public generally, 24 percent favored confirmation; 11 percent did not.


Belinda Mason, 33, U.S. Panelist And Bush Adviser on AIDS Policy
Belinda Mason, a member of the National Commission on AIDS who pleaded with President Bush in a letter in August not to support proposed Federal policies that she said would further stigmatize AIDS sufferers, died this morning at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville.
She was 33 years old.
She died of AIDS-related pneumonia, a spokesman for the commission said.


Calgene Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Satellite Has Mission To Gather Urgent Data About Ozone Depletion
WITH widening concern over the steady loss of the upper atmosphere's life-protecting ozone, scientists and policy makers are awaiting with a sense of urgency the flow of data from a scientific satellite scheduled to be launched late this week.
Its mission is the first systematic study of the stratosphere, probing the causes of the vanishing ozone.
The $710 million Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite is expected to operate in high orbit for at least 20 months, observing nearly all of the planet with 10 remote-sensing instruments designed specifically to investigate the ozone problem.
Scientists hope to identify the physical and chemical processes of the upper atmosphere, determine how they are affected by natural and man-made disturbances and learn how these complex forces affect global climate.


Passion Of Open Succumbs To Power
The 1991 United States Open, a k a "The Late Night with Jimmy Connors Show," took its cue from its headliner and limped to an early close even before the sun went down on Sunday.
Given the histrionics and resurrections that caused the tournament's first 12 days to run an emotional gamut best suited to a soap opera, the final weekend almost couldn't help suffering from a bad case of the anticlimactic blues.


Glenayre Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


John Crosby, a Suspense Novelist And Former Columnist, 79, Dies
John Crosby, a novelist and former syndicated radio and television columnist, died on Saturday at his farm outside Esmont, Va.
He was 79 years old and had lived there since 1977.
He died of cancer, said a spokesman for the family, Cameron Hildreth.


Business Scene; The Annual Game Of Auto Pricing
THE 1992 model cars go on sale this month, and in advance of their debuts, the auto manufacturers have been announcing hefty price increases.
The increases amount to 3 to 4 percent for the average car, and more -- sometimes much more -- if a car is redesigned, as the Ford Taurus or the Toyota Camry have been, or is equipped with costly new devices, like the driver-side air bags in the 1992 Honda Accord.
On the face of it, such increases in a car's list, or sticker, price are likely to discourage many Americans from buying 1992 models at a moment when the national economy is weak and people are nervous about job security.
Given this reluctance to spend, the laws of supply and demand suggest that prices should fall, or at least not rise, if the industry is to sell all of the 1992 cars soon to be made.
But the auto companies -- American and Japanese alike -- do not easily give ground on prices.


The Curse of Culinary Convenience
They came first to the chicken, then to the egg.
Now, in the tradition of the best science fiction, dangerous salmonella bacteria have infected innocent cantaloupe.
Last month the Centers for Disease Control blamed cantaloupes for a nationwide salmonella outbreak.
So once again, everyone is talking about America's endangered food supply, but no one is thinking about it.
What we should be wondering, besides whether scrubbing with Joy cuts the risk of food poisoning, is why people across the country are eating cantaloupes from Texas when this is the richest time of the year for local produce.


Peace Drive Survives South Africa Strife
The leadership of the African National Congress and the rival Inkatha Freedom Party stressed today that they remained committed to signing a peace accord with the Government and each other despite this year's worst outbreak of political violence, which has left at least 57 people dead and nearly 90 wounded since Sunday.
The commitment, made by Nelson Mandela, the congress's president, and Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of Inkatha, came as Inkatha backed away from accusing the congress of Sunday's attack on a march by its supporters in Thokoza, a township 12 miles south of Johannesburg.
The ambush touched off fighting that spilled into today.


Potomac Electric Power reports earnings for 12mos July 31


Borland to Take $80 Million Charge
The software publisher Borland International Inc. said it would take a one-time charge of $80 million for expenses stemming from its planned acquisition of the Ashton-Tate Corporation.
Shareholders of the companies will consider the $439 million acquisition at meetings on Sept. 24.


Food for the Soviet People
As the Soviet economy implodes, the Soviet people are finding it harder and harder to put food on the table.
The onset of the harsh Soviet winter won't make food shipments any easier.
That's why the Bush Administration is wise to act now to assess the shortages and determine the best ways to distribute food donations.
Americans in good conscience stand ready to help.
That's the humane thing to do.
It's also prudent.
Americans have no interest in aggravating the severe economic crisis now gripping the Soviet Union.
That would only intensify popular discontent and sow disorder -- unfavorable conditions for democratic politics and a market economy.


Flanigan's Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Brad Davis, 41, a Leading Actor In 'Normal Heart' and 'Querelle'
Brad Davis, a stage, film and television actor who starred in "The Normal Heart," a polemical drama about the private and public fallout of the AIDS epidemic, died on Sunday at his home in Studio City, Calif.
He was 41 years old.
He died of complications from AIDS, said his wife, Susan Bluestein, a casting director in Los Angeles.


Estonia Seeks To Join I.M.F.
Estonia has become the first of the newly independent Baltic states to ask for membership in the International Monetary Fund, the international lending organization announced today.
A spokesman said no application had been received from Latvia or Lithuania, the two other Baltic states whose independence from the Soviet Union has gained wide recognition.
The fund said its executive directors, who represent the 155 member countries, would have to consider the application and negotiate the size of Estonia's contribution.


Forest City Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


NCH Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Fund in Offering At Morgan Stanley
The Morgan Stanley Emerging Markets Fund, a newly incorporated closed-end management-investment company in New York, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an initial public offering of up to four million common shares.


California Real Estate reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On My Mind; Absolution for Killers
All through the years I was speaking out or writing out for Lithuanian independence, three decades now, I received letters from around the world warning me that I was terribly, unforgivably wrong.
They were letters of indelible pain.
They came from Jews in America, Europe and Israel who had been brutalized by Lithuanian Nazis before and during the German occupation of 1941-1944 or whose families had been wiped out.


Oxford Energy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Super Nintendo Now Nationwide
Nintendo of America Inc. said that its new Super Nintendo Entertainment System was now available in stores nationwide.
Based on a 16-bit microprocessor rather than the 8-bit chip of the original Nintendo, Super Nintendo offers improved graphics and sound, but also requires new game cartridges.
Packaged with Super Mario World, the fourth in the Mario game series, the new system has a suggested retail price of $199.95.


Scottish Heritable Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Way to Run the Poverty Law Agency
The latest White House appointment to the Legal Services Corporation marks the 54th time in the Reagan-Bush decade that the President has smuggled in directors for the poverty law agency by appointing them when Congress is away on recess.
Instead of following the regular process of nominating 11 directors subject to Senate confirmation, President Bush engages in a cynical evasion of the advise-and-consent process.


Public Storage Properties VI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dynatronics Laser Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10
The U.S. naval base in the Philippines may soon lose its lease unless political opinion changes in the next few weeks.
Opponents of the base, the largest U.S. military installation in Southeast Asia, won a victory in the Philippine Senate.
Page A1


Citicorp Units in Europe Are Said to Be for Sale
Citicorp is considering the sale of its consumer branch-banking businesses in Italy and France as part of its efforts to trim assets and increase its financial strength, news reports and bankers say.
A trade publication, American Banker, reported yesterday that Italian bankers said that the Citicorp subsidiary in Italy had not been formally offered for sale, but that Citicorp officials had indicated they would listen to offers.
The Italian subsidiary specializes in consumer and small-business banking through a network of 52 branches.


American Locker Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tyson Indicted on Rape Count; Bout Is Still On
Mike Tyson was indicted here today on charges of rape and three other criminal counts.
But in spite of his legal troubles, the former heavyweight champion will apparently fight Evander Holyfield in a title bout in November, as scheduled.
The indictment came after a monthlong investigation by a special Marion County grand jury into allegations Tyson sexually assaulted an 18-year-old woman in his suite at a luxury hotel here during the early morning of July 19.


Greek Court Sentences 7 Newspaper Editors for Publicizing Terrorists
The editors of seven Greek newspapers were sentenced today to jail terms ranging from 5 to 10 months for violating new legislation banning unwarranted publicity for terrorist activity.
The court, ruling that a law forbidding the publication of terrorist proclamations was in accord with the Constitution, convicted the seven editors who had published proclamations sent by the far-left November 17 guerrilla group.


Commuters Face Woes On S.I. Ferry
Battalions of grumbling, shoulder-to-shoulder commuters encountered delays of up to an hour crossing New York Harbor on the beleaguered Staten Island Ferry yesterday as city officials offered gloomy assessments on recovering from a mysterious fire that devastated and closed the ferry's Manhattan terminal.
It might be two weeks or more before undamaged but asbestos-contaminated lower portions of the terminal can be cleaned up and near-normal service restored, officials said, but it could take months or years for a $40 million reconstruction of the more heavily damaged upper-level passenger concourse.


Our Towns
Jennifer Pruden and Joyce Rufolo-Trimboli are two of a growing number of soldiers in a quiet war against stubborn myths.
Just like mortal combat, this struggle has casualties and needs more recruits.
Ms.
Pruden is the administrator of the Union County Rape Crisis Center based here.
Ms.
Rufolo-Trimboli is one of the center's counselors.
These days they are confronting a remarkable surge in reports of sexual assault.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Soviet Union Is Out
Brent Sutter's goal with 5:18 left in a Canada Cup game last night gave the Canadians a 3-3 tie with the Soviets (1-3-1), which was already eliminated from the medal round by virtue of Sweden's 5-2 victory over Czechoslovakia.
Canada (3-0-2), playing in Quebec, finished with 8 points.
The United States was a 4-3 winner over Finland, which also advanced.
The Americans finished 4-1-0 for 8 points, but Canada finished first because it had earlier defeated the United States.
TENNIS Bruguera Advances
Top-seeded Sergi Bruguera of Spain eased into the second round of the Geneva Open yesterday with a 6-3, 6-2 victory over unseeded Bart Wuyts of Belgium.
Bruguera, ranked No. 9 in the world, won his opening match in 1 hour 3 minutes.
In other matches, third-seeded Goran Prpic of Yugoslavia overcame Gilad Bloom of Israel, 4-6, 6-4, 6-4, and eighth-seeded Omar Camporese of Italy was upset by Carsten Arriens of Germany, 6-3, 6-4. (AP) Leconte Loses: Henri Leconte of France, playing his first match since undergoing an operation on his back, lost in the opening round of the Bordeaux Open in France.
Leconte fell to a qualifier, Tarik Benhabiles of France, 3-6, 6-2, 7-5. (AP) GYMNASTICS Soviet Union Leads
At the world championships in Indianapolis yesterday, the Soviet Union led the women's team scoring after completion of the compulsories with 197.371 points.
The United States, with what appears to be its best team since the Mary Lou Retton-led Olympic squad of 1984, was second going into today's optionals with 196.208.
Romania was third with 195.795.
China was fourth with 195.270.
Competition in the men's optionals began later yesterday.
The Soviet Union held a comfortable lead after compulsories.
The United States team was in fifth place and without its top athlete, Lance Ringnald, who separated his right shoulder Sunday and had to withdraw from the championships. (AP) HORSE RACING World Record on Grass
Known Ranger, a 5-year-old gelding from England, matched the world record for running a mile on the grass yesterday at Belmont Park when the horse won the Snow Knight Handicap in 1:322/5 and came within one-fifth of a second of matching Dr.
Fager's world record set on the dirt 23 years ago.
The gelding, owned by Claiborne Farm and trained by Bill Badgett Jr., was ridden by Julie Krone over the Widener turf course, which was officially labeled "fast." Known Ranger won by two lengths over the favorite Fourstardave, who had four lengths on Sifting Gold.
The winner, who paid $6.40 for $2 to win, carried 113 pounds, 11 fewer than Fourstardave but 1 more than Expensive Decision carried on Oct. 8 when he set the world record for a mile on the grass at Belmont.


Ocean Floor Studied
Perhaps the most fundamental question in earth science is what happens to slabs of ocean floor after they descend along a coastal trench into the earth's interior as part of the constant, slow motion of the crustal plates.
Do they sink all the way to the bottom of the earth's mantle, making up most of its solid interior, almost reaching the liquid core?
Or do they descend only as far as a zone, 420 miles deep, where earthquake records indicate there is some sort of change, separating the mantle into upper and lower regions?


Palestinian Parley Stresses Role in Peace Talks
A group of 25 Palestinian officials, intellectuals and others who met here to review Palestinian strategies have agreed that the most viable option for the Palestine Liberation Organization is to take part in the expected Middle East peace conference, regardless of objections from P.L.O. militants.
Although the group refrained from making public comments about the peace process, individual participants said there was a consensus among the 25, many of whom live in Western countries, that the P.L.O. leadership risks being bypassed altogether in the proposed Middle East talks if it creates obstacles over Palestinian participation.


BRIEFS
*
Bass P.L.C. said it had agreed to sell 372 pubs to Enterprise Inns.
The sale price was not disclosed but is included in the $:205 million (about $352 million) that Bass has received from the sale of pubs in its current fiscal year. *
Johnson Controls Inc., Milwaukee, a supplier of facilities-management and control services and maker of automobile accessories, has acquired Lahnwerk G.m.b.H., a German maker of seat components and frames.
Terms were not disclosed.


Gladys Gage Dibble, Horticulturist, 90
Gladys Gage Dibble, a Michigan horticulturist who wrote widely on gardening, died Friday at the Georgian Bloomfield Nursing Home in Bloomfield, Mich.
She was 90 years old.
The William R. Hamilton funeral home in Birminham, Mich., where Mrs.
Dibble lived, said she died of complications from a stroke.


Review/Television; A Detective and Sci-Fi In Los Angeles Magic
Anything can happen in Los Angeles and usually does with numbing predictability, but "Cast a Deadly Spell," a new HBO Pictures production that can be seen tonight at 8 on the pay-cable service, gives the city a spin that should make even its most jaded observers sit up, chuckle and wince.
The year is 1948, and as the boom after World War II gets under way, just about everybody in town is using magic to get a piece of the lucrative action.
The most notable holdout is a private eye named H. Phillip Lovecraft, a Raymond Chandler type of guy who refuses to run with the corrupt herd, even when confronted by alien monsters and gremlins.
"Nobody's got a mortgage on my soul," says Phil, lighting a cigarette.
"I have my life free and clear." Maybe.
Phil has been hired by the richest and perhaps oddest man in town (David Warner) to recover a book of black magic, a priceless tome that holds the key to the destruction of the world.
The book has been stolen, it seems, by a chauffeur who was dismissed for trying to seduce the man's beautiful young daughter.
Time is of the essence.
The witching hour approaches and won't come around again for 666 years.


Johnson to Undergo Radiation Treatment
Pittsburgh Penguins Coach BOB JOHNSON will undergo a special radiation treatment on a remaining brain tumor, a hospital spokesman said yesterday.
Johnson, 60 years old, will be transferred from Mercy Hospital to Presbyterian-University Hospital in Pittsburgh today and undergo the procedure tomorrow, hospital spokesman FRANK RACZKIEWICZ said.


Therapy Could Prevent Foster-Care Placements
To the Editor:
"Keeping Families Off Foster Care" (editorial, Aug. 13) is right on the mark.
As a Family Court judge in Westchester County, I see women coming into my court continually to surrender their children for foster care.
These surrenders are called "voluntary surrenders" and are subject to judicial approval.
Each time I approve a surrender, I ask myself if preventive services could have stopped it.


MANILA SENATORS SHOW OPPOSITION TO U.S. BASE PACT
A majority of the Philippine Senate declared its opposition today to a 10-year extension of the American lease on the Subic Bay Naval Station, raising the threat that the United States may soon be forced to withdraw from its largest military installation in Southeast Asia.
Although today's vote was a preliminary one, it was taken seriously in Washington, where Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said, "We obviously can't stay where we're not wanted, and we won't."


Dinkins Describes Killing of Jew In Crown Heights as a 'Lynching'
For the first time since the unrest in Crown Heights erupted three weeks ago, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday equated the fatal stabbing of a yeshiva student, Yankel Rosenbaum, with the racist killing of Yusuf K. Hawkins, the black youth who was shot by a group of whites in Bensonhurst two years ago.
Echoing comments that Senator Daniel P. Moynihan made to a reporter over the weekend, the Mayor used the strongest language he has to date in condemning the slaying of Mr.
Rosenbaum in Crown Heights.
The Senator, quoted in The New York Post, called the killing a lynching.


A Puzzle On Beach Is Solved
GRAY whales feeding along the coast of northern Washington State create hundreds of small pits that dimple the beaches of Puget Sound, Washington scientists say.
The scientists, at the request of the Department of Fisheries in Washington State, began investigating the craters, some as large as 8 by 10 feet, after a call from a puzzled commercial fisherman.


THT Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dinkins's Trip to Africa: Who Will Pay?
With an entourage of several dozen city officials and black business people in tow, Mayor David N. Dinkins is to leave the daily maelstrom of New York on Monday for a whirlwind tour through even more turbulent precincts: the cities and black townships of South Africa.
But less than a week before the delegation's scheduled departure, city officials have yet to say just how or from whom they will raise the $400,000 needed for the trip, which the Mayor has said would be paid for by private contributions.
Last night, some mayoral aides said the fundraising was far behind pace and expressed concern about whether enough can be raised in time.


Therapists See Religion as Aid, Not Illusion
EDDIE, just 16 years old, had a record of nine arrests, including rape, assault and battery and drug dealing.
But something happened that set him straight: he found religion.
"One day Eddie came into our group and announced he'd been saved," said the Rev.
Wayne Muller, who ran a therapy group in Santa Barbara, Calif., for teen-age gang members on probation.
"He said he felt happy all the time. He'd given up drugs and crime, and was going to nightly revival services."


Don't Thank Romans for Decimal System
To the Editor:
While correctly attributing our seven-day week to the Babylonians in "We Owe Seven-Day Week to Babylonians" (letter, Aug. 25), Harold C. Fleming inaccurately asserts that the Babylonian base 20 numeral system was "ultimately replaced by the Roman decimal system."


Music in Review
Rhea Jackson  Alice Tully Hall
Rhea Jackson, a soprano, gave an unusual and consistently pleasing recital on Sunday afternoon.
Miss Jackson studied at Hunter College and in Paris with Pierre Bernac, and she has performed with opera companies in Germany, Austria, Norway, Sweden and Romania.
Her travels appear to have served her well, for she was comfortable in an impressive range of styles and languages.


Stateswest Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Harding Associates Inc., Novato, Calif., named Richard P. Prezio, its president and chief executive, to the additional post of chairman.
He succeeds Richard S. Harding, the founder, who remains on the board. *
International Insurance Advisors Inc., New York, which provides capital for the insurance industry, named Craig F. Schwarberg managing director.
He had been senior vice president at Lehman Brothers, a unit of American Express Co.


Bali Jewelry Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patterns
Roehm Is Closing
Carolyne Roehm, the svelte socialite designer known for her lavish evening clothes and whirlwind party schedule, is closing her fashion business, she said yesterday.


A.T.&amp; T. In Link to Armenia
In a step that could provide a model for modernizing telephone communications throughout the technologically backward Soviet Union, A.T.&amp; T. next month plans to provide long-distance service directly to Armenia, a first for a Soviet republic.
Like the rest of the Soviet Union, Armenia has received its few calls through the scarce and sternly monitored lines funneling through Moscow.
But Moscow itself is able to receive fewer calls through normal telephone channels than a medium-size Manhattan apartment building, or 91 simultaneous conversations.
And even that is a sharp increase from as few as 16 simultaneous calls as recently as 1987.
The Communist Party kept telecommunications primitive as a means of political control.
Some switching equipment, essential for completing a call, dates to before the 1917 Revolution.
First Direct Dialing
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company in mid-October will provide 200 new long-distance circuits into Armenia using A.T.&amp; T.'s flagship 5 ESS digital switching system.
That would make direct-dial calls possible for the first time.
Calls today go through a central operator in Moscow and can take three days or more to complete.


Sign of World Transformed: A Rights Meeting in Moscow
An international human rights conference in Moscow -- an idea that seemed so preposterous only three years ago that the British Foreign Secretary then, Sir Geoffrey Howe, described it as being "like a whisky-distillers' convention in Riyadh" -- is to open on Tuesday in a world transformed.
The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe brings together foreign ministers from 35 nations, including the United States, Canada and Albania, plus the Vatican, and they will admit three more -- from Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, the newly independent Baltic republics -- into their ranks, probably Tuesday morning, Soviet officials said.


A Diary of Resistance: 48 Hours in Leningrad
Arkady N. Kramerev, the police chief of this city, was awake before 7 on the morning of Monday, Aug. 19, tiptoeing through his apartment so as not to disturb his sleeping wife.
When the phone rang, he picked it up quickly and heard the voice of a journalist friend telling him that a coup attempt was under way in Moscow.
Fiddling with the radio dials, but getting nothing but music, he told his 23-year-old son what he had heard.
The young man picked up a rifle and climbed from the apartment on the 11th floor up to the 12th to see if any danger awaited his father below.


British Steel Names Chairman's Successor
British Steel P.L.C. has named Sir Alistair Frame as a director, with the plan that he will succeed Sir Robert Scholey, 70 years old, as chairman on Sir Robert's retirement next July.
The company, once state-owned, was privatized in December 1988.
Sir Alistair, 62, has been chairman of the Wellcome Foundation P.L.C., the British pharmaceutical group, since July 1990.
From April 1985 until his retirement in June 1991, he was chairman of the RTZ Corporation, formerly the Rio Tinto-Zinc Corporation P.L.C., the industrial and mining giant.
He is also a non-executive director of RTZ and of Eurotunnel.


Whittle Planning Auto Test Drives
Whittle Communications Inc. is recruiting leading auto makers for a new venture called Highway One, a chain of shopping-mall showrooms where consumers could take simulated test drives, a published report said.
The trade journal Advertising Age said the project would allow consumers to sit in cars and experience a simulated test drive using "electronic kiosks" developed by Whittle.


Robbing Voters of Their Rights
The state of Washington is toying with a pernicious proposal to limit the terms of its Congressional delegation as well as its state politicians.
Supporters are outspending opponents 10 to 1, and polls indicate that a majority of voters think it's a dandy idea.
On the contrary, it's suicidal.
The proposal, which will be on Washington ballots in November, would limit the terms of state legislators, the governor and lieutenant governor, and U.S. senators and representatives.
If it is adopted, current officeholders who have already reached the limit -- 12 years for Congress -- could run once more, in 1992.
Then out.


Exxon Plans Additive for Cleaner Fuel
The Exxon Corporation today became the latest refiner to announce plans to invest millions of dollars in new plants to produce an essential component of cleaner-burning fuel.
Analysts say the component, methyl tertiary butyl ether, could be in short supply for the next few years as tougher laws take effect to limit smog-related pollution, raising demand for cleaner fuels.


Review/Theater; In Decayed, Empty Nursing Home, A Pageant of the Lame and Hurt
One would be hard put to find a more dramatic outdoor setting for a play than the courtyard of the Towers, a decrepit fortress at 106th Street off Central Park West that is the location for the En Garde Arts production of "Another Person Is a Foreign Country."
It was built in the late 19th century by the architect Charles Coolidge Haight and served as the first American hospital devoted entirely to cancer care.
In the 1950's, it was converted into a nursing home by Bernard Bergman, whose syndicate of nursing homes became the focus of a series of state investigations in the 1970's that revealed widespread patient abuse.


CNN and Tass Plan A Book on the Coup
The Cable News Network and Tass, the Soviet press agency, are jointly planning to publish a quickie book about events surrounding the failed coup in the Kremlin, CNN announced yesterday.
The book is scheduled to be published in November.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Private Export Funding Co. priced $150 million of 7.9 percent notes through Citicorp Securities at 99.873, to yield 7.92 percent.
The noncallable notes, which mature in 2000, are rated AAA by both Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's.


Observer; Capra Beats the Game
The obituary prose being written about the heartwarming Americanism embedded in the films of Frank Capra, who died the other day, neglects to mention that Hollywood would surely have blackballed him as an odious Bolshevik had he tried making his films in the 1950's.
In Capra's most admired movies, members of the snootier classes were greedy or black-hearted swine.
In Capra's America good, upright, innocent Mr.
Deeds, Mr.
Smith, John Doe and George Bailey were all at the mercy of vile capitalists, lawyers and politicians who infested society.


El Paso Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


By Design; Covering Up a Bit for Fall
Tans begin to fade, the sound of waves crashing on the beach recedes and what you did after the four margueritas that night becomes a memory you would rather forget.
Civilized life beckons.
The clothes you wore around the summer house, and the swimsuits and sandals, won't do for Columbus Avenue and West Broadway.


Bowne &amp; Co. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Chip, But Not Off the Old Block
AST RESEARCH Inc., one of the leading makers of notebook computers, introduced a new model last week that analysts said will be one of the fastest notebook PC's on the market.
The AST Premium Exec 386SX/25 is the first brand-name notebook based on a new microprocessor built by Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
Until now, all of the major brands of high-performance, I.B.M.
PC-compatible notebook computers have been based on the i386SX microprocessor built by the Intel Corporation of Santa Clara, Calif.
Advanced Micro, based in Sunnydale, Calif., went to court to affirm its right to build its own version of the Intel chip, and subsequently produced a processor that is faster and more energy efficient than Intel's.


Sports of The Times; Tyson Can Fight, but Can't Hide
WHEN the curtain went up at a news conference in the grand ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria last week, the gladiators in the Nov. 8 heavyweight title bout were up on the stage, side by side.
The champion, Evander Holyfield, was standing straight in a dark gray suit, his hands behind his back.
The challenger and former champion, Mike Tyson, was slouched in a light gray suit, his hands in his pants pockets.
Even before his indictment yesterday in Indianapolis on charges of rape, criminal deviate conduct and confinement, maybe Mike Tyson decided that should be his new public posture: keeping his hands in his pockets.
But he's a little late.


Gendis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Goodyear To Sell Unit To Cut Debt
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, which has recently begun another round of sales of assets to lower debt, said yesterday that it was putting its polyester business up for sale.
Analysts estimated that Goodyear might receive as much as $300 million for the business.
The polyester unit makes resin for a variety of products that include beverage bottles, containers for microwave ovens and adhesives.
The unit also produces textiles for polyester fabric this is used to make tires.


Kansas City Police Go After Own 'Bad Boys'
Lightning slashed across the sky over this city known for its hot barbecue, cool jazz and tough police officers.
One officer, Jim Pott, sat in a patrol car watching the storm and talked about his place on what he and colleagues bitterly call "the bad boys list."
The list, a computer printout of 25 officers who have an unusually large number of citizen complaints against them, is part of the Kansas City Police Department's new "early warning system." The program is intended to prevent officers from using the kind of excessive force that provoked public outrage last spring when a videotape of Los Angeles police officers beating a motorist was made public.


Dr. Robert J. Stoller, 66, Teacher And Leading Sex-Identity Theorist
Dr.
Robert J. Stoller, a leading psychoanalytic theorist on sex-identity problems and perversions, and a psychiatry professor at the University of California at Los Angeles, died Friday night in a traffic accident outside his home in Los Angeles.
He was 66.
Dr.
Stoller was killed as he pulled out of his driveway and his car was struck by another car in Pacific Palisades, Calif., said Dr.
Richard Green, a colleague in the psychiatry department at U.C.L.A.'s medical school.
He died instantly from injuries in the crash.


Coslet Adds His Name To Reasons for Loss
Those 20 unanswered points by Seattle in the Seahawks' 20-13 victory over the Jets in the Kingdome on Sunday were still causing Coach Bruce Coslet to play 20 questions today -- with himself, with his staff and with his players.
"Why does a guy blow a coverage?" asked Coslet, whose team is 1-1 in his second year at the helm.
"Why does a guy miss a block on pass protection? Why does a guy jump offsides? I don't know. It's not very encouraging. We've got to get a lot better real quick."


Israel Should Have $10 Billion Loan Guarantee; Palestinians as Partners
To the Editor:
"Yasir Arafat and the Beanball" (editorial, Aug. 8) does yeoman service for Israel as it tries to avoid the Middle East peace talks being organized by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
Your opinion makers seem to paint the Palestinians as the last holdouts in the quest for peace.


More Rain Is in Store for Flood-Ravaged Utah


CHRONICLE
The University of Chicago's celebration of its centennial will be graced by a rare gathering of 20 of probably the most elite group in the world: Nobel Prize winners.
University officials said they expected the Nobel laureates to gather in Chicago on Oct. 5 for a dinner for more than 1,000 people.


Devils Awarded Barr and McKay
The arbitrator wasn't as generous to the Devils today in their compensation case with Detroit as he was six days ago when he awarded them Scott Stevens in their case against St.
Louis.
Judge Edward Houston of Ottawa, the National Hockey League's arbitrator on free agency and salary disputes, awarded the Devils Dave Barr and Randy McKay as compensation for Detroit's signing of Troy Crowder.


Music in Review
Music at the Anchorage Cadman Plaza West, Brooklyn
From the outside, the Anchorage, at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge, on the Brooklyn side, does not immediately suggest itself as a place to hear music.
A huge stone structure in which the bridge's cables are anchored, and over which traffic rumbles, it might seem a more fitting venue for grimy underworld dealings.


Texas Meridian Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Announced the resignation of Pat Dobson, pitching coach.
Named Guy Hansen pitching coach for the remainder of the season.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Sent Joe Roa, pitcher, to the New York Mets to complete the Aug. 29 trade for Alejandro Pena, pitcher.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Recalled Gino Minutelli, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Named Donald A. Smiley vice president and expansion coordinator.
NEW YORK METS -- Recalled Blaine Beatty, pitcher, from Tidewater of the International League.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
MIAMI HEAT -- Named Alvin Gentry assistant coach. Continental Basketball Association
TRI-CITY CHINOOK -- Traded Tony Martin, forward, to the Rockford Lightning for Wayne Tinkle, center.
FOOTBALL National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Waived Brad Daluiso, placekicker.
Agreed to terms with Norm Johnson, placekicker.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Waived Mike Brennan, offensive lineman.
Activated Carl Zander, linebacker.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Waived Sean Smith, defensive end, and George Adams, running back.
Activated John Stephens, running back, and Sammy Martin, wide receiver.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Placed Tim Worley, running back, on injured reserve.
Activated David Little, linebacker.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
DETROIT RED WINGS -- Sent Dave Barr and Randy McKay, right wings, to the New Jersey Devils as compensation for the signing of Troy Crowder, right wing.
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Signed Patrick Poulin, left wing. East Coast Hockey League
DAYTON BOMBERS -- Signed Mike Hassman, left wing, to a try-out agreement.
SOCCER Major Indoor Soccer League
SAN DIEGO SOCKERS -- Traded the rights to Branko Segota, midfielder, and a 1992 first-round draft choice to the St.
Louis Storm for the rights to Thompson Usiyan, midfielder.
COLLEGE
HARVARD -- Named Bob Leonard golf coach.
JAMES MADISON -- Named Jaymie Gast director of marketing and promotions; Kevin Anderson assistant baseball coach; and Pete Shaifer graduate assistant wrestling coach.


CHRONICLE
The police in East Hampton, L.I., are investigating whether CAROLINE KENNEDY SCHLOSSBERG was the intended target of a bomb threat on Saturday.
Chief GLEN STONEMETZ said a bomb threat was called in to the Maidstone Club in East Hampton, where the daughter of John F. Kennedy and JACQUELINE KENNEDY ONASSIS was attending a wedding reception.


Where Sununu Stands
TO John H. Sununu, Chief of Staff to President Bush and the person who is by all accounts the single individual most responsible for the United States's wait-and-see stance on global warming, the question is a straightforward one of economic growth versus an unproven environmental threat.
And he suggests that the drive to put a cap on carbon dioxide emissions, a byproduct of growth that many scientists fear will cause the earth's climate to warm, is the latest vehicle adopted by a perennial "no-growth" movement whose roots go back at least to the early 1970's.


Israel Should Have $10 Billion Loan Guarantee
To the Editor:
"Israel, Most of All, Needs a Just Settlement" (letter, Aug. 18), David Rubenstein's otherwise insightful response to your July 28 Week in Review analysis on the Middle East, contains a blatant misconception regarding United States aid to Israel.


Industrial Acoustics Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hoboken-Newark Rail Link Opens as Part of Multimillion-Dollar Expansion
Four trains carried 498 rush-hour passengers over $16 million worth of new rail line between Newark and Hoboken this morning, in the first phase of a $500 million plan to expand rail access in New Jersey to the Hudson River waterfront and midtown Manhattan.
The new commuting option, called the Waterfront Connection, is the first extension of train service in northern New Jersey since 1967.
Officials of N.J.
Transit, the state's mass-transit agency, said the multimillion-dollar price tag for the entire expansion project, which will connect New Jersey's 12 commuter train lines over the next decade, was justified on grounds including economic expansion, urban revitalization and the possibility of reducing the use of cars, cutting polluting emissions and improving air quality.


An Instant Librarian
HAVING a reference source at hand on disk when you're working on a personal computer is extremely convenient, so convenient, indeed, that after a while it becomes an unacceptable chore to get up, find a book and look for information.
CD-ROM disks, with their enormous storage capacity, are emerging as the medium of choice for reference material.
After all, one disk can hold, to cite one example, a dictionary, thesaurus, collection of quotations, 20th-century history guide, all the five-digit ZIP codes and much more.
But not many of us own CD-ROM drives yet, and not everybody needs instant access to vast amounts of information.
There is still a case for putting such material on conventional hard disks.


The Hearings On Television
The Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court will be shown on four television channels today, beginning at 10 A.M.
Eastern daylight time
The Public Broadcasting Service and the C-SPAN cable network will have gavel-to-gavel coverage of today's Senate Judiciary Committee hearing, with no interruptions for commercials.


A Russian Theater Debut
The Russian Academy of Dramatic Arts, the oldest theater school in the Soviet Union, is to make its United States debut with a benefit performance for the Phoenix Ensemble at 8 P.M. tomorrow at the Little Theater at Hunter College, East 68th Street east of Park Park Avenue.
The visiting company, whose Russian acronym is Gitis, will perform "Funny and Sad Stories," three one-act plays from three periods in Russian literature.
The plays will be performed in Russian and will be repeated on Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M. and at 6 and 9 P.M. on Saturday.
Wednesday night's benefit will be followed by a reception and cabaret at the Soviet Mission to the United Nations.
Information: (212) 330-0442.


Dobson Quits as Royals Pitching Coach
The Kansas City pitching coach, PAT DOBSON resigned yesterday, apparently after the Royals declined to guarantee his job for next year.
Manager HAL McRAE, expected to make several changes after the season in the coaching staff he inherited when JOHN WATHAN was dismissed in May, said Dobson sought a guarantee about his job and that he could not give it.
"He's a good pitching coach," McRae said.
"I know he'll get another job."


International Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A High School Braces For Segregation's End
Throughout the 1980's, white parents in this racially mixed suburb and its wealthy neighbor, Englewood Cliffs, snubbed Dwight Morrow High School here, and sent their children to private and parochial schools.
Now, as a new academic year begins, the school, which is now nearly 90 percent black and Hispanic, is the focal point of what is potentially the most far-reaching case in years involving the racial balance of suburban New Jersey schools.
Over the summer, the State Board of Education provoked a policy split in Trenton when it ordered a study into creation of a regional school system in eastern Bergen County because of the situation at Morrow.
Regionalization is the merging of several school districts into one.


Yankees Are Disarmed By Kelly's 3 Blunders
Highlight films of the famous moments from aging Memorial Stadium were shown during the Yankee-Oriole game tonight, because the Orioles are moving to a new park next season.
The fondest Baltimore memories were recalled.
If the videotape is ever updated, Pat Kelly's performance for the Yanks tonight might be included in a blooper section.
Kelly made three errors at third base that spawned five unearned runs and helped Baltimore cruise to an 8-0 victory over the Yankees.
There are only 12 games remaining for the Orioles at Memorial, and Kelly probably wished they had torn the place down tonight because it would have given him somewhere to hide.


American Software reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Children's Discovery Centers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mallard Coach Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Quotation of the Day
"If our riders want it, you could hypothetically have country western being played at some stations and rap music being played at others. The idea is to make the subway environment a little more pleasant and in most situations music does just that." -- Mary McCartney of the New York City Transit Authority.  [ A1:6. ]


Tyson Indicted on Rape Count; Bout Is Still On
Mike Tyson was indicted here today on charges of rape and three other criminal counts.
But in spite of his legal troubles, the former heavyweight champion will apparently fight Evander Holyfield in a title bout in November, as scheduled.
The indictment came after a monthlong investigation by a special Marion County grand jury into allegations Tyson sexually assaulted an 18-year-old woman in his suite at a luxury hotel here during the early morning of July 19.


Metro Tel Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


New Group to Support Insurgents Is Divided as Council Vote Nears
The Majority Coalition for a New New York, which was formed with great fanfare last month to support insurgent City Council candidates, has run into financial and political problems.
The coalition has raised only one-fifth of the $500,000 it had hoped to pump into the campaigns of its candidates, many of whom are challenging incumbents in Thursday's primary, according to its first financial disclosure report.


If It's Almost Fall, It's a Fete at Saks
The format has changed a bit, but after 12 years the black-tie dinner dance called SFA-USA continues to serve as the kickoff of the fall fashion-cum-social season.
More than 400 people have been invited to the party tonight at Saks Fifth Avenue.
"The formula has proven itself," said Melvin Jacobs, chairman of the store.
"After vacations and weeks on the beach, women are ready to immerse themselves in fall clothes."


2 'Jovial Con Men' Demystify Those Crop Circles in Britain
The mystery of those giant circles and odd geometric shapes that have been showing up in recent summers in wheat fields across southern England has been explained -- up to a point.
Newspapers in London today published the claims of two local men who said they were the ones who had been skulking around the countryside under cover of darkness, trampling out patterns with wooden boards as a big joke.


MACEDONIANS VOTE FOR INDEPENDENCE FROM YUGOSLAVIA
Yugoslavia's disintegration appeared to have been pushed a step forward today.
The results of a referendum in the southern republic of Macedonia on Sunday showed that an overwhelming majority had voted to follow the secessionist republics of Croatia and Slovenia in seeking independence.
Preliminary results made public today indicated that roughly three-fourths of those who voted want Macedonia to become a sovereign state.
About 75 percent of the 1.3 million eligible to vote did so; Macedonia's Albanian minority boycotted the balloting.


Link Planned for TV Sales
TV Answer Inc., a start-up firm that specializes in interactive television technology, announced plans today with Hughes Network Systems to build a nationwide network that would allow television viewers to buy goods and services through a device attached to their sets.
TV Answer, of Reston, Va., has developed a two-way radio technology that allows television viewers to order goods and services through the communications device.
The device sends and receives data over the air to a nearby company that processes the orders and relays them to the businesses from which goods and services are being ordered.
The system is intended to work in conjunction with advertising and programs on regular television channels, but it would provide other services as well, from banking to information on stocks and sports.


Chancellor Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jones's Cowboys Galloping Again
A newlywed couple from London dropped by Jerry Jones's office yesterday morning, at Jones's request.
The couple had just been married at Texas Stadium and were planning to attend the Dallas Cowboys-Washington Redskins game last night.
Jones, the owner of the Cowboys, wanted their evening to be special.
He offered a gift from Tiffany's -- a crystal paperweight in the shape of a football, with the Cowboy star on the top -- and all the while the couple blushed, surprised that on a game day, the owner would be so thoughtful to avid fans from across the Atlantic.


Editorial Notebook; Judge Thomas's Grandfather -- and Mine
The Senate Judiciary Committee would do well to rid its chamber of ancestral ghosts before Clarence Thomas utters a word about his fitness to serve on the Supreme Court.
Many specters will attend, but the most troublesome is Judge Thomas's grandfather, the Georgia sharecropper who has figured so prominently in press reports about the nominee.
Judge Thomas's identity has become fused with his grandfather's.
It's time to separate the two.
When Clarence Thomas was first described as "the grandson of a sharecropper," the phrase seemed a harmless identifier.
Then it was inflated into a credential.
Lately, imaginative senators have sought to make it a trump card that would ward off questions about his opinions on race, poverty and affirmative action.
In the process, the importance of Judge Thomas's origins -- and origins generally -- has been greatly overstated.


Twin Star Productions reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mammography Tells Women a Vital Fact
To the Editor:
As a former medical researcher and medical student, current medical writer-editor and (now) breast cancer patient, I must take exception to the letter by Maryann Napoli (Aug. 14), which questions the value of mammography.
Her views are not only wrong, but also dangerous if they keep a frightened but medically inexperienced woman from confirming with mammography what her fingers tell her month after month.


Belmac Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Sigma Designs reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Kit Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Transit Leaders To Propose Cuts In Improvements
Faced with criticism from state lawmakers over the size of its rebuilding plans, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has decided to scale back by as much as $1 billion, or 9 percent, its proposal for renovating the New York region's subway, bus and commuter rail lines over the next five years, its top officials said yesterday.
The authority's senior executives declined to specify which projects would be curtailed and which ones eliminated.
They said they would outline their proposal at meetings tomorrow and Friday with their board.


Brain Yields New Clues On Its Organization For Language
CHRISTOPHER, 29 years old, cannot draw simple figures, add 2 and 2 or tie his shoes.
Yet he speaks 16 languages, half of them fluently.
Adam, 28, is a stroke patient.
He can name man-made objects like saws, screwdrivers and shovels, but the stroke has left him unable to name most animate objects.
The curious result is that ducks, foxes, camels and zebras are indistinguishable to him.


Jones Spacelink Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tyson Indicted on Rape Count; Bout Is Still On
Mike Tyson was indicted here today on charges of rape and three other criminal counts.
But in spite of his legal troubles, the former heavyweight champion will apparently fight Evander Holyfield in a title bout in November, as scheduled.
The indictment came after a monthlong investigation by a special Marion County grand jury into allegations Tyson sexually assaulted an 18-year-old woman in his suite at a luxury hotel here during the early morning of July 19.


HMG/Courtland Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Race Is Likely to Yield First Gay Member of Council
Thomas K. Duane and Liz J. Abzug, the two gay candidates competing to represent the City Council from the Third District, were startled to find themselves campaigning outside the same subway entrance in Greenwich Village early last Friday morning.
After nodding with the icy civility of divorced spouses who unexpectedly meet at a party, the two rivals stood within five feet of each other, handed out fliers, glad-handed subway riders and exchanged not a word.
Hostilities did not break out until Mr.
Duane left, and Ms.
Abzug tried to greet one of Mr.
Duane's supporters, Jane Sweeney, campaign chairwoman of the Village Independent Democrats.
When Ms.
Abzug banteringly said, "Well, at least I'm friendly," Ms.
Sweeney retorted with a resounding, "Hah!" and exclaimed: "Friendly?! Your mother has yelled at half of Greenwich Village over this." She was referring to Bella Abzug, the former Congresswoman whose fierce, Gypsy Rose Lee-like campaign on behalf of her daughter had become a contentious campaign issue -- like almost everything else in this close and impassioned race.


Study Sees Moves on HIV Infection Backfiring
FAR from encouraging HIV-infected health care workers to come forward, new Federal guidelines and proposed practice limitations will drive those infected with the virus that causes AIDS to hide their condition, a new survey suggests.
The survey found that health care workers infected with the HIV virus are reluctant to tell employers and patients about their condition or to restrict their practice to non-invasive procedures, because they feared for their jobs.


Disney and Paramount Plan A Rare Team-Up on a Film
In a rare case of two studios teaming up to make a movie, the Walt Disney Company and Paramount Pictures said today that they would jointly produce a film about a rugby team's battle to survive a plane crash in the remote Andes Mountains.
The deal signaled a warming of the relationship between Disney and Paramount, which had feuded for years.
And some industry executives said it could revive interest in joint film ventures at a time when studios were trying to reduce their costs and minimize the risks of a flop.


Corrections
A listing for the October play "Beau Jest" at the Lamb's Theater in the annotated calendar of the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday misstated the telephone number for ticket information, because of misinformation supplied by the play's producer.
The correct number is (212) 496-5710.


At Meeting on Global Warming, U.S. Stands Alone
IN a contest between uncertain science and uncertain economics, negotiators from around the world convened in Nairobi yesterday for what promises to be a contentious effort to act against the prospect of a possibly catastrophic heating of the Earth's atmosphere in the next century.
The talks, aimed at hammering out a treaty to be signed next June in Rio de Janeiro, are the first major test of whether the world can unite against a threat that appears real in the long term but whose magnitude and pacing are unclear and whose remedies may exact substantial economic costs.


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended today in New York City.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Abu Dhabi Is Said to Seize 30 Former B.C.C.I. Officials
The Government of Abu Dhabi completed a roundup of former executives of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International yesterday, bringing the number of people detained in the two-day sweep to more than 30, according to advisers to the emirate.
The Abu Dhabi sweep brought in senior executives of the bank, including Swaleh Naqvi, the former chief executive who has been charged with orchestrating the multibillion-dollar fraud that prompted regulators in several countries to seize the bank on July 5, and his successor, Zafar Iqbal.


Patricia Dickenson Cline, Development Director, 56
Patricia Dickenson Cline, an associate director of development for Princeton University, died on Sunday at her home in Princeton Township, N.J.
She was 56 years old.
She died of cancer, her family said.


Dollar Below 1.70 Marks; New Weakness Is Feared
The dollar fell below 1.70 German marks yesterday, possibly signaling a new period of weakness for the American currency.
This is the first time the dollar has moved decisively below 1.70 marks since May, and then it only paused in a rally that carried the dollar up 27 percent from 1.44 marks in February to 1.83 in July and again in August.
It has now fallen 7 percent from that recent high.


Continental Bank Ratings Lowered
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation has removed the Continental Bank Corporation from its credit watch list but lowered the ratings on $1.4 billion of the company's debt.
Continental's senior debt now carries a BBB- rating, downgraded from BBB, and the subordinated debt has been lowered to BB+ from BBB-.
Commercial paper and preferred shares also received lower ratings.


Quebec Business Has 2d Thoughts
Until recently, a rising phalanx of aggressive French-Canadian entrepreneurs who have helped make Quebec into one of the world's most economically competitive regions were among the strongest voices for separation from the rest of Canada.
But now many of these executives, who wield significant political power as well as economic weight in what is sometimes called Quebec Inc., are expressing second thoughts.


Marie Stevens Jacobs, Sportswoman, 73
Marie Stevens Jacobs, a prominent sportswoman and skier in Lake Placid, N.Y., died on Sunday at her home in Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.
She was 73 years old.
Her family said she died after a long battle with cancer.


Market Place; New Capital Rule Near for Insurers
ABOUT a year ago, investors in bank stocks had to learn a new method of accounting for a bank's capital, or cushion against loss.
The new method was called risk-based capital, and it tied the amount of capital a bank was required to maintain to the riskiness of its investments.
Now, amid mounting concern about the safety of life insurance companies' investments and the growing liabilities faced by casualty insurers, the insurance industry is considering a similar accounting change.


Loss Leaves Mets With Sinking Feeling
The Mets are now getting to the point where they might have to root all the harder for the end of the season in order to avoid so complete a collapse that they would fall all the way to the cellar of the National League East.
That thought, once laughable, edged another notch toward being possible last night, as the last-place Montreal Expos took advantage of the Mets' latest downward spiral to win, 4-3.


Public Storage Properties VII Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Charter Power Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


No Better Offer, U.S. Says
Hoping to press the Phillipine Senate into changing its preliminary vote on renewal of the American lease at the Subic Bay Naval Station, the Bush Administration insisted today that it would not improve its offer and warned that the Phillipines risks losing hundreds of millions of dollars a year.
The White House and the Pentagon both said the United States was scaling back its military force levels and stationing anyway and could accommodate its needs elsewhere if the lease is not renewed.


Catherine's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Givat Brenner Journal; Even in the Kibbutz, Socialism Is Under Challenge
The old recreation hall has become a play-for-pay amusement center for the children of the nearby town of Rehovot.
While they romp, a tractor-hauled truck equipped with benches takes parents on tours around the factories and farms of this kibbutz, "the world's largest," a they like to joke here about this quintessentially Israeli institution.
Around the swimming pool, townspeople who have paid admission take their ease, and in the clothing and furniture shops they hunt for bargains.


Music in Review
'Cavalleria Rusticana' and 'I Pagliacci'  New York City Opera
The New York City Opera's new production of "Cavalleria Rusticana" and "I Pagliacci" largely repopulated both casts on Saturday night.
The only familiar face from the original performances is Sigmund Cowan as Tonio in the second of these operas.
Whether a matter of choice or practicality, Mr.
Cowan is a wise holdover, and was one of Saturday's strongest and securest performers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
A.T.&amp; T. plans to provide long-distance service directly to Armenia, a first for a Soviet republic and a potential model for modernizing telephone communications throughout the Soviet Union.
Like the rest of the country, Armenia has received its few calls through scarce and sternly monitored lines.
Moscow itself is able to receive fewer calls through normal telephone channels than a medium-size apartment building in Manhattan.  [ Page D1. ]
The Abu Dhabi Government completed a roundup of former executives of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, raising to more than 30 the number of people detained in a two-day sweep.
Among them are Swaleh Naqvi, the former chief executive.  [ D1. ]


HBO Turns 'Baby-Sitters Club' Into a Series of Specials
About three years ago, the editors from Scholastic Inc. checked the astonishing monthly sales totals for one of their book series, "The Baby-Sitters Club," and began to ask themselves a question:
"Why isn't our phone ringing?"
Deborah Forte, a vice president of Scholastic, couldn't understand it.
Here Scholastic had a series of stories shaping up as the biggest-selling series of children books in at least a generation -- if not of all time -- and no one was looking to turn the stories into a Saturday morning children's show.
The stories, for readers between the ages of 6 and 12, deal with a group of pre- and early-teen-age girls who form their own business as professional baby sitters.
A Tardy Marketplace
"It was curious, because it seems that the marketplace always responds to things that are big hits," Ms.
Forte said.


Chip Indicator Off in Month
Seasonally weak economic activity in the United States electronics industry caused the semiconductor industry's leading indicator to fall for the fourth straight month in August, a trade group said today.
The organization, the Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 0.94 for the three-month period that ended in August, down from 0.96 in July, and from a revised figure of 1.01 in June.


BAKER SEES MEXICO AS A SOVIET MODEL
On the eve of a visit to the Soviet Union, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d again praised Mexico today as a model that the United States will urge on other countries facing economic difficulties.
A dozen Cabinet-level American and Mexican officials met here today for their ninth annual round of wide-ranging negotiations.
The talks focused on the three-month-old negotiations for a North American free trade agreement between the United States, Mexico and Canada, but no new deals were announced.


Artopex International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lionel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


First Security Kentucky reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Arrow Automotive reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Martin Marietta Wins Contract
The Martin Marietta Corporation received a $300 million contract today from the Boeing Company's helicopter division to complete development of the advanced night-navigation and targeting system for the Army's new RAH-66 Comanche helicopter.
Boeing and the Sikorsky Aircraft unit of the United Technologies Corporation were selected in April to develop the Comanche for the Army.


Chess
There is nothing like time pressure to make a player unrecognizable.
Then the mightiest can look like a duffer.
The victims of this malady appear to play aimlessly, and this is because they have not got the time to aim.
But there is no good reason to feel sorry for them.
If they had not failed to solve the early problems their opponents set for them, they would not have needed to spend so much of the time -- two hours for 40 moves -- allotted for a major tournament or match game.
And they would never have gotten into such a frantic situation that all they could do was clutch the piece nearest to hand and make a blunder.


Frequency Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


AEP Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Westerbeke Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Nell Donnelly Reed, 102, Pioneer In Manufacture of Women's Attire
Nell Donnelly Reed, a pioneer in women's ready-to-wear clothing in the 1920's and 1930's, died Sunday morning at her home in Kansas City, Mo.
She was 102 years old.
In 1916, Mrs.
Reed began making and selling ruffled dresses to replace the drab, cotton house dresses of the period.
By the 1940's her clothing company was described as the largest of its kind in the world.


In Camera Technique, Promise of Advances For Chest Operations
A NEW technique for chest surgery promises to spare tens of thousands of patients with cancer and other lung ailments the bone-splitting of standard chest surgery which can leave patients with pain for the rest of their lives.
The method, an adaptation of techniques in wide use for gynecological or abdominal operations, is called endoscopic surgery.
Doctors perform it by making small holes in the chest and then operate by inserting tiny cameras, scissors, lasers and other instruments.


Chicken Processors Tighten Fire Safety
Chicken processors, already besieged by charges of tainted products, high injury rates among workers and low wages, now find themsevlves on the defensive about basic fire safety practices since a deadly blaze at a processing plant in North Carolina.
Twenty-five people died last Tuesday when fire swept through the Imperial Food Products Company plant in Hamlet, N.C.
Locked doors apparently blocked their escape, and local officials said that the company had not taken such basic safety steps as insuring that exit signs were illuminated, doors could open, workers knew how to escape and adequate fire-fighting equipment was handy.


Hancock Holding Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
CHRISTIE HEFNER, a graduate of Brandeis University who is better known as president and chief executive of Playboy Enterprises and perhaps best known as the daughter of HUGH HEFNER, has been elected to the university's board.


Hawkins Chemical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Tyson Can Fight, but Can't Hide
WHEN the curtain went up at a news conference in the grand ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria last week, the gladiators in the Nov. 8 heavyweight title bout were up on the stage, side by side.
The champion, Evander Holyfield, was standing straight in a dark gray suit, his hands behind his back.
The challenger and former champion, Mike Tyson, was slouched in a light gray suit, his hands in his pants pockets.
Even before his indictment yesterday in Indianapolis on charges of rape, criminal deviate conduct and confinement, maybe Mike Tyson decided that should be his new public posture: keeping his hands in his pockets.
But he's a little late.


A Rosh ha-Shanah Rite in New York: Casting Sins Into River


Uranium Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Israel Should have $10 Billion Loan Guarantee; Competitive Bonds
To the Editor:
In an Aug. 6 news article about Jacob Frenkel, the new head of Israel's Central Bank, you attribute to Helena Hessel, a Standard &amp; Poor's analyst, a statement that Israel has never floated bonds on international capital markets other than below-market-rate bonds sold primarily to supporters of Israel.
Ms.
Hessel has given you misguided information.


Redskins Outmuscle Cowboys, 33-31
The shootout between the Redskins and Cowboys here tonight began innocently enough.
After one quarter, Dallas led, 14-7, thanks in part to Emmitt Smith's brilliant 75-yard scoring dash.
At halftime, Dallas led by 21-20, as the Redskins kept pace.
Washington's defense, however, stiffened just enough in the second half and Dallas could not match it.
That was the difference in the Redskins' 33-31 victory before 63,025 fans in Texas Stadium.
Washington improved to 2-0 and snapped a losing streak in Monday night games at six.
Dallas slipped to 1-1.


Coffee Prices Rise Sharply On Report of Dry Weather
An extended dry spell in parts of Latin America sent coffee futures prices sharply higher yesterday on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York.
Next season's coffee crop could be severely threatened unless it gets a lot more rain this month or next, analysts said.


Rita Greenland, Advertising Executive, 61
Rita Greenland, an advertising executive active in Jewish organizations, died on Saturday at New York University Hospital.
She was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan and Bedford Hills, N.Y.
The family said she died of cancer.


Central Capital reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ryan-Murphy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


In Choosing School Supplies, You Can't Be Too Careful


CRI Insured Mortgage Assn reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


British Mortgages Back New Notes
TMC Pimbs Seventh Financing P.L.C., a company formed to securitize residential mortgages in Britain, plans to offer about $:300 million, or about $517.95 million, of class A mortgage-backed notes.
The notes, which will have a floating interest rate, will be offered through Salomon Brothers International.
The notes have received a rating of Aaa by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and will be reoffered at a price of 99.77.


Dow Off 4.47, to 3,007.16, in Quiet Trading
Stock prices fell slightly yesterday in sleepy trading, with many investors absent in observance of Rosh ha-Shanah.
Smaller stocks showed gains, but over all the market was sluggish, weighed down mainly by the blue chips.
The Dow Jones industrial average drifted 4.47 points lower to close at 3,007.16.
The bond market's firmness helped stocks trim some of their early modest declines.
Some traders thought the market would be susceptible to futures-related program trades, but that did not materialze.


Defiance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about public relations firms that use satellite technology misstated the location of Medialink.
It is at Third Avenue and East 44th Street.


Metalclad Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Subways (And Away We Go) Plan a Lot of Traveling Music
New York City subways, legendary as an underground maze of hostility, suspicion and frustration that challenges the sturdiest of human spirits, could use something that calms the nerves a bit.
Transit officials are considering piped-in music.
The notion, which to some may sound about as likely as mud-wrestling at the Met, raises not so soothing questions: Could "Take the A Train" be played south of Lincoln Center?
Would the Bronx request M. C. Hammer?
Would already unintelligible public announcements now blare out above a Mantovani soundtrack?
If music be the fuel of transit, read on.
Paul Simon on Concert Day
Exactly what kind will soothe the angry rider who has just missed a connection or the employee who is 15 minutes late to an appointment and still waiting for the local has not yet been determined.


Journal Classroom Issue
Dow Jones &amp; Company said it had begun publishing The Wall Street Journal Classroom Edition, a monthly newspaper aimed at improving the economic and business literacy of high school students.
It said it had distributed more than 30,000 copies of the September issue and expected circulation to climb to 70,000 students and 2,400 teachers by the end of the academic year.


Gooden Expects to Return in Top Form
The arthroscopic surgery has been performed.
The small tear in the rotator cuff has been closed.
The troublesome debris that cluttered the right shoulder has been removed.
What neither the doctors nor the Mets could do, during the surgical procedure performed Saturday or in the two days following, is give Dwight Gooden an absolute guarantee that he will be the same pitcher he was when he returns to the mound sometime next spring.


No Better Offer, U.S. Says
Hoping to press the Phillipine Senate into changing its preliminary vote on renewal of the American lease at the Subic Bay Naval Station, the Bush Administration insisted today that it would not improve its offer and warned that the Phillipines risks losing hundreds of millions of dollars a year.
The White House and the Pentagon both said the United States was scaling back its military force levels and stationing anyway and could accommodate its needs elsewhere if the lease is not renewed.


Cleanup Begins Amid Concern Over Asbestos
The asbestos released by the fire at the Staten Island Ferry Terminal in lower Manhattan on Sunday poses far less danger to the public than the asbestos that burst into the air when a Con Edison steam pipe exploded in the Gramercy Park area two years ago, an official of the New York City Department of Environmental Protection said yesterday.
A form of asbestos often considered less harmful, chrysotile, appears to have been used in most if not all of the terminal, said Ginna Holmes, a spokeswoman for the evironmental department.
The other common form of asbestos, amphibole, is most often found in high-temperature steam pipes.


Women Still Behind in Medicine
Although women are making progress in entering medicine, a new report says that at all levels above medical student, women still have disproportionately low status and pay.
The report, released today by the Feminist Majority Foundation and the American Medical Women's Association, said that not a single dean of an American medical school is a woman, that 98 percent of department chairmen are men and that medical school faculties are still 79 percent men, despite the fact that 36 percent of all medical students are women.


Police Seek Missing 8-Year-Old Bronx Girl
The police are seeking an 8-year-old Bronx girl who disappeared from her apartment building on Sunday after visiting her uncle and cousins.
The girl, Shemika Jennings of 1630 Undercliff Avenue in Morris Heights, stayed with her cousins and her uncle, Warrel Thomas, on Saturday night in her uncle's apartment in the same building, the police said.


Books of The Times; Black Dreams of 1950's Turn to Rage
All-Bright Court By Connie Porter 224 pages. Houghton Mifflin Company
All-Bright Court, as Connie Porter tells us at the beginning of her first novel, is a housing development -- a series of tenements, really -- built in the shadow of the steel mills outside Buffalo.
Originally built for the Polish, Italian, German and Russian immigrants who came to start a new life in America, it has been handed down to the black workers who now man the steel furnaces.
It is 1955, and many of the men and their families have migrated here from the South, seduced by the prospect of homes with gas stoves and indoor plumbing and the promise of jobs and opportunities, promises that will founder in poverty and rage by the end of the 60's.


Kings Road Entertainment reports earnings for Year to April 30


Ted and Joe, 1941: September 10


S-K-I Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Stock Move By Warnaco
The Warnaco Group Inc., which designs, makes and markets a clothing and personal items, said yesterday that it hoped to make an initial stock offering with an estimated value of up to $103.5 million.
Warnaco said it had asked the Securities and Exchange Commission to let it offer 5.7 million common shares, with the offering price expected to be $16 to $18 each.


Montana May Need Surgery on Elbow
JOE MONTANA of the 49ers was told yesterday that he may need surgery to repair a torn right elbow tendon, and if he does, it is likely he will miss more than the four games that the San Francisco team originally projected.
Montana, who has quarterbacked four Super Bowl champions and was named the National Football League's most valuable player the last two years, has been on injured reserve since the start of the season and hasn't thrown a pass in more than a month.
Dr.
MICHAEL DILLINGHAM, the team's physician, said he met yesterday with Montana, 35 years old, and brought up the subject of surgery.


Levy Higher Toll on Single-Occupant Vehicles
To the Editor:
"For Whom the Bridge Tolls" (editorial, Aug. 18), concerning a proposal to charge tolls on all bridges leading into Manhattan (as is now done for tunnels), overlooks an easy answer to the congestion and pollution caused by automobiles.


Corrections
A voters' guide yesterday to the primary elections for the New York City Council this week omitted the 13th District in the Bronx.
There is no primary in the 13th, where Michael DeMarco is the incumbent.
In addition, one of the candidates in the 15th District, Jose L. Rivera, was incorrectly described; the biography given for Mr.
Rivera actually described one of his opponents, Councilman Jose Rivera, whose name was omitted from the guide.


Utilitech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bernard Chaus Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Israel Should Have $10 Billion Loan Guarantee; Cut Aid Now
To the Editor:
Israel is requesting $10 billion in loan guarantees for the resettlement of Soviet Jews, many of whom are living in the United Nations-mandated Palestinian state under Israeli occupation.
While American families go begging, we are expected to subsidize Soviet Jewish families at about $35,000 each.
Considering that we spent only $9.3 billion on domestic job training and $5.3 billion on education, Israel's request is ludicrous.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMISSION ON TRADE LAW, WORKING GROUP ON INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS -- 10:30 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Arcaro To Antley: You're Not Alone
At age 75, Eddie Arcaro is half a century older than Chris Antley.
But the old master of the track can still feel for the young rider, who will be the most conspicuous absentee next Sunday when half a dozen or more of the best horses and jockeys in the land gather at Belmont Park for one of the season's racing classics, the Woodward Stakes.
It is one of the milestones on the road to racing success, the first encounter of the year for the 3-year-old winner of the Kentucky Derby and the older stars of the handicap division, and the final race of 10 in the American Championship Racing Series.


Biograph Joining Ranks Of Film-House Failures
The Biograph Theater will become the latest in a string of movie revival houses to close its doors in Manhattan.
Cineplex Odeon, the theater's Toronto-based owner, said yesterday that the Biograph's last picture show would be Sept. 21.
The theater at 225 West 57th Street opened its doors as the Biograph on Feb. 19, 1988, after Cineplex Odeon had transformed the Regency Theater, the revival house on West 67th Street and Broadway, into a theater showing new releases.
The Regency's revival format, and the theater's program director, Frank Rowley, moved over to the Biograph.


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Q&amp;A
Hailstones
Q.
What determines how big hailstones are?


U.S. Credit Union Fund Is Expected to Impose a Premium
The heavy losses from credit unions in New England have led Federal regulators to decide that the nation's 13,000 federally insured credit unions should pay about $160 million to their Government-run insurance fund.
The payments would be the first made by the industry to the fund since 1985.
When directors of the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund vote on a premium this Friday, "it's fair to say that the likelihood of an assessment is extremely strong," said Roger W. Jepsen, chairman of the National Credit Union Administration.
He is recommending a premium of about 8.3 cents for every $100 of deposits, sharply lower than 23 cents that banks are charged.


Officer Reportedly Knew of Salomon Plan
One of the key Salomon Brothers executives involved in the Treasuries market scandal was given information in May indicating that a Salomon trader had tried to corner the two-year note auction that month but did not inform the Government, people involved in the case said yesterday.
This does not indicate that the former executive, John W. Meriwether, did anything illegal, or knew that laws were being violated in the May auction.
But it demonstrates that Salomon executives had far more knowledge about the activities of the firm's former chief government-bond trader, Paul W. Mozer, than had previously been believed and had apparently not reined him in, people involved in the case said.


Sports of The Times; Tyson Can Fight, but Can't Hide
WHEN the curtain went up at a news conference in the grand ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria last week, the gladiators in the Nov. 8 heavyweight title bout were up on the stage, side by side.
The champion, Evander Holyfield, was standing straight in a dark gray suit, his hands behind his back.
The challenger and former champion, Mike Tyson, was slouched in a light gray suit, his hands in his pants pockets.
Even before his indictment yesterday in Indianapolis on charges of rape, criminal deviate conduct and confinement, maybe Mike Tyson decided that should be his new public posture: keeping his hands in his pockets.
But he's a little late.


Washington at Work; Balancing Influence and Integrity
Frank Mankiewicz was nervous.
He played with a pencil on the desk in his glass cubicle office.
He took a call from his son in California.
He hung up and twirled the pencil like an airplane propeller, round and round and round on the desktop.
Mr.
Mankiewicz, the consummate Washington survivor, campaign manager to Robert F. Kennedy and George McGovern, now a high-priced rainmaker for America's largest public relations firm, a man whose reputation for ease with the media was legendary, was uncomfortable being interviewed.


Treasuries Up in Active Trading
Prices of Treasury securities rose in fairly active trading, and bond yields fell below 8 percent for the first time since mid-February yesterday, largely on the continued belief among credit market participants that the Federal Reserve Board is on the verge of easing short-term interest rates.
Expectation that the Fed might move quickly to lower its discount rate and the overnight Federal funds rate was fueled by a report from the Labor Department on Friday that showed the job market expanded at a very slow pace in August.
Those expectations pushed prices up strongly early in the session.


Economic Pulse: The Southeast -- A Special Report.; Reminders of Its Old Poverty Hit South in Recession's Grip
It is about 70 miles from Spartanburg to Great Falls, but the distance between these South Carolina towns is the difference between the Southeast's future and its past.
Spartanburg has been able to replace lost textile jobs; Great Falls has not.
Spartanburg and the neighboring communities along the Interstate 85 corridor in the northwest corner of the state are now home to companies like Michelin, Mita and Hoechst Celanese.
The area boasts one of the largest concentrations of foreign manufacturing companies in the United States.


Careers; Veterinary Jobs Grow In Variety
THERE are two notable trends involving veterinarians these days, according to Franklin M. Loew, dean of the Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine.
There is more interest in veterinarians working abroad and there are a growing number of displaced middle managers choosing to become animal experts.
"I know the international sector is growing," Dr.
Loew said last week, explaining that many nations in Eastern Europe need medical help to increase their cattle, pig and other livestock numbers.
He called the food situation in the area "a ticking bomb," with time running out for feeding populations this winter.


Bridge
Big scores of more than 75 percent of the match points are relatively common in a single session, but nobody has ever achieved that in a major event lasting four sessions.
The record is 72 percent, posted in 1964 by Simon Becker, of Philadelphia, and Eli Jaye, of Manhattan, while winning the prestigious Goldman Pairs at the Eastern Regional Championships in New York City.
Jaye, who died late last month, was a popular figure in the Greater New York Bridge Association, which he once served as president.
Becker died four years earlier.


Review/Opera; A Modest 'Cosi' in Which the Comedy Prevails
New York opera is experiencing a familiar urban phenomenon: a disappearing middle class.
The big houses are still with us; so too are the tiny church-basement operations.
Union disputes and a reluctant donor base have been busy wiping away the in-betweens.
Small companies offering short seasons, young singers and interesting repertory continue to go out of business, a situation that made Opera Ebony's good-natured and confidently produced "Cosi Fan Tutte" at Aaron Davis Hall on Sunday afternoon such a pleasant surprise.
Founded in 1973, Opera Ebony seems to be doing just fine.
It can hire a pit orchestra able to play together and in tune, a sophisticated young conductor (Leslie B. Dunner) to manage it and a cast -- a contrast of youth and experience -- that held its own with Mozart's difficult and subtle vocal music.


Abolish Tactical Warheads
The Soviet Union's vast nuclear arsenal actually consists of two stockpiles: long-range strategic missiles and tactical weapons for use on land or sea or in aircraft.
But while the Kremlin's collapse has raised justifiable concern over the strategic systems targeted on the United States, we should be more apprehensive over the command and control of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons, an arsenal with many more warheads and fewer security safeguards.
The disintegration of the union raises the possibility that these weapons might fall into the wrong hands or, worse, might one day be used -- a prospect that places special responsibility on all nuclear powers, not just the Soviet Union, to address this problem.
Half the 45,000 nuclear warheads in the world today are tactical weapons -- including missiles and artillery shells on land; cruise missiles, bombs, and rockets at sea; and tactical bombs and missiles in aircraft.
About 15,000 of these are Soviet, and 8,000 American.
France, Britain, and China also deploy about 150 tactical warheads each.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.37
5.43
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.27
5.30
7.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.33
7.34
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.52
7.56
8.71
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.99
8.01
8.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
9.10
9.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.96
6.97
7.60
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Hallwood Energy Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Democrats Try to Carve Gingrich Out
A new redistricting plan drawn up by the Georgia Legislature has carved up the district of Representative Newt Gingrich, forcing the second-most powerful Republican in the House to find a new district in which to run.
But after a bitter redistricting fight whose outcome is still in doubt, it is not at all clear who is the real loser.


Empire Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Gulag Comes to Haunt Chinese Area
If Solzhenitsyn were Chinese, then the windswept plains here in Qinghai Province might be as notorious as Siberia, and the word "laogai" might be as common and ominous as "gulag."
Qinghai Province, the northeastern part of what was once Tibet, is a sparsely populated region of prairies and mountains, 10,000 feet or more in elevation with few trees or shrubs and bitterly cold winds that leave cheeks dry and cracked.
Soon after the 1949 Communist revolution, it was made the centerpiece of China's gulag: the site of harsh, remote labor camps where "counterrevolutionaries" and criminals fought for survival and often lost.


Giants Outsmarted at Own Game, So Forget Letdown Theory
As the Giants began putting aside Sunday's loss to the Rams, one of the most painful side effects that they have had to deal with is that Los Angeles did to the Giants the things that the Giants did to teams last season in their march to the Super Bowl.
"The Rams came in here and took a page out of what we'd like to call our book," said Coach Ray Handley.
"Control the ball, not make mistakes, use field position to your advantage. Throw when you want to throw, not when someone else tells you to throw. Don't let anyone else dictate the situation to you. They did an excellent job of it.


INSIDE
South Africans Call for Pact
South Africa's two main black political groups said they remained committed to signing a peace accord despite new political violence.
Page A3.
Bigfoot?
Well, Not Exactly
The mystery of those giant circles in English wheat fields has been explained, up to a point, by two "jovial con men in their 60's." Page A6.
Thinking About Thinking
Studies of people with unusual language abilities offer startling insights into the nature of thought.
Science Times, page C1.
Tyson Indicted in Rape Case
Mike Tyson was indicted on a rape charge, but his heavyweight title fight with Evander Holyfield will apparently go on.
SportsTuesday, page B7.


SOVIET TURMOIL: Scenes of Soviet Autumn; The Questions Gather Like Falling Leaves And Answers Are as Scarce as Essentials
Who is leading the Soviet Union? And where?
As the three-week storm raised by the coup gave way to the first chills of autumn and the country entered the first week of what is now officially called the "transitional period," a flurry of questions seemed to float onto the land.


Boston Technology Hires a Sprint Founder
Boston Technology Inc., a small maker and marketer of telephone services like voice mail, has named David S. Gergacz, a founding executive at U S Sprint, as its president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Gergacz (pronounced GUR-gus) is going to a company that is much smaller than Sprint's Network Systems division, where he was president from 1988 to 1990.
During his tenure, Network Systems, which sells services like video-conferencing, grew to $500 million in sales from $10 million.


In Shift, Nutrasweet Plans Fitness Center
Shifting its focus from the food ingredient business, the Nutrasweet Company said yesterday that it was planning to open a fitness center for people who are at least 50 years old.
Nutrasweet, a unit of the Monsanto Company, is best known for its sweetener by the same name.
Nutrasweet has been under intense pressure to develop new products because its patent for the sugar substitute expires next year, opening the way for competition that will force the company to reduce prices.


Tyson Set To Face Charges Today
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight boxing champion, will surrender to authorities Wednesday and answer charges that he raped an 18-year-old woman who was a contestant in a Miss Black America pageant.
Tyson is scheduled to appear at 9:30 A.M.
Eastern time, in Marion Superior Court, where the charges against him will be read and a plea entered on his behalf.


Health Concepts IV Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Salomon Executive Has an Agenda for Cleaning Up the Desk
A month after Salomon Brothers was shaken by scandal, profits at the firm's core government-bond trading business have fallen by about 20 percent, the newly appointed head of the firm's trading desk, Eric R. Rosenfeld, said in an interview yesterday.
Since margins in the government-bond business are narrow, a firm's profitability is vitally dependent on trading volume, said Mr.
Rosenfeld, a former Harvard professor who gave up academia in 1984 for a new world on Wall Street.
And after scarcely three weeks on his new job, Mr.
Rosenfeld said: "Volume is down, so profitability is down, but not astronomically. It's not gangbusters. But it's not hopeless."


Pavarotti Withdraws From Met's 'Idomeneo'
The tenor Luciano Pavarotti has withdrawn from his performances of Mozart's "Idomeneo" at the Metropolitan Opera this season because of scheduling difficulties.
His replacement in the work's season premiere on Sept. 26 will be the English tenor Anthony Rolfe Johnson in his debut with the company.
Mr.
Rolfe Johnson is also scheduled to sing the role on Oct. 2, 5 and 8.
Mr.
Pavarotti is to sing in the opening-night gala performance on Sept. 23 and in all performances of the new production of Donizetti's "Elisir d'Amore" for which he was previously announced.
His replacement for performances of "Idomeneo" on Dec. 11, 14, 17 and 21 will be announced later.


Stake Technology Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:  After having lived nearly all my life in apartments in various parts of New York City, I recently moved to my first house, in suburban Metuchen, N.J.
One weekend morning, feeling a bit overwhelmed by the demands of home ownership, I found myself in the local hardware store buying supplies for the latest repair project.
A harried-looking fellow entered the store and quickly approached the register.
"Do you rent carpet shampooing machines?" he asked.
"We do," the clerk said, "but they're all out."
"Thank God," the man responded with relief.
I wasn't so lucky. --
ALAN STERN
. . .
Dear Diary:
I have my feet in the wading pool at the West 93d Street playground on an extra-hot afternoon, baby-sitting my niece's children, 3 and 5, and watching what kids do with the hand-span, toe-deep stream that cuts across the playground and cascades down the three tiers of the miniature amphitheater that is the wading pool:
Float your Zabar's peanut-butter container down the stream with a leaf for a passenger till it tumbles down the waterfall.
Walk down the stream one foot before the other, arms out like a high-wire artist.
Scoop up water and join the permanent water fight.
Gingerly lower your body to barely clear the waterfall; put just your tongue in the cold, rushing water.
Lie down in the waterfall.
Block the stream at the top of the waterfall with your plump bottom, then stand to let a brief Niagara leap from between your legs.
Throw sand in the waterfall.
Throw sand on the drain to see if you can clog it.
Patch the drain with leaves.
Put a plastic bag over the drain.
Take high splashy steps around the deepening water of the moat (there's an island in the middle of the wading pool).
Daringly jump across the moat.
Be happily terrified when your watcher swings you back and forth so that your feet send up sheer sheets of water and arching strings of diamond droplets.
Pull out the plastic-bag plug and wonder at the whirlpool.
Try to make it whirl the other way.
Run away when Aunt Barbara says it's time to go.
Get caught.
Walk home in your wet bathing suit.
When Mommy comes back and says: "Did you have fun in the playground? Was the water on?" just say, "Yes." Hug her leg.
Ask for a bagel with your spaghetti. --
BARBARA MICHALAK
. . .
The place is the lounge of the American Hotel in Sag Harbor, L.I., where Janet Jacobs and her husband, Ted Fine, are waiting for a table.
Enter three well-dressed 30-something women.
They look around for a while.
One speaks.
"I ate here once in the 80's," she says. With that the trio exits.
. . .
Dear Diary:
Whenever I'm traveling on business, I make a point of calling my answering machine in New York every afternoon for my messages.
The machine records what callers have to say for as long as they keep talking or until the tape runs out.
On this particular day I had a message from my neighbor Tony, who called from his speaker phone.
"Just wanted to see if you were around for dinner or a movie," he said.
Then I heard a slight click as he reached to turn off his speaker -- and missed.
So it was that from my hotel room in Cleveland I listened to a half hour of Tony puttering around his kitchen, Tony singing snatches of Gilbert and Sullivan, Tony washing dishes.
I kept waiting for him to notice his error and hang up so I could hear the rest of my messages.
No such luck.
After the third rendition of a "Pirates of Penzance" patter song the tape was used up and the line went dead.
Not only would no one be able to leave a message for the rest of my trip but there would be a hefty long-distance charge on my next bill.
Tony doesn't own an answering machine so I can't get revenge.
But I am considering getting him a singing coach. --
BRUCE E. HALL
. . .
THE FRESHMAN
Having moved quarts of clothes  and stereos inside your pint-sized room  we finally start to say our  ivy-covered bittersweet so longs.
And all the while I promise not  to be surrounded by my maudlin memories:  No thoughts of pig-tailed 4-year-olds  on Daddy-driven seesaws  or love-struck moody adolescents  on endless cordless phone calls.
Instead I am circled by future fantasies  of wide-eyed college kids swept up  in Western Civ and English Comp  or tame gentle frat parties with  light beer and late night laughter.
And suddenly released from my ruminations  we all squeeze these moments until you  disappear into the freshman dorm  kissing us and yesterday goodbye and  hugging newborn notions of bold tomorrows. -- ROGER GRANET
. . .
The scene:
The A.&amp;P. deli counter in Little Silver, N.J.
Dramatis personae:
Woman shopper of a certain age; young deli clerk with punk haircut and three earrings in one ear; Jeannette B. Molzer, who overhears the following dialogue:
Shopper:
What does the turkey pastrami look like?
Clerk:
Pretty weird, actually.
Shopper:
I'll take half a pound, please.
. . .
Dear Diary:
Strolling beneath an oak tree on Austin Street in Forest Hills, Queens, the other day, I was conked on the head by a falling acorn.
At the time I was more amused than annoyed.
Later I bgan to wonder how many other innocent pedestrians had also been so thumped.
Was it a common occurrence?
How many people were struck, say, on a given day?
Were there statistics on such a phenomenon?
Early the next morning I returned to the scene.
I counted the number of passers-by.
I kept score of dropping acorns.
Seventeen fell within 30 minutes.
Three found their marks.
The victims all had the same reaction.
At first they appeared dazed by the surprise attack.
Then, standing 'neath the row of trees, they gazed up to the sky.
No one cursed.
No one gestured angrily.
No one sneered.
Rather, each seemed strangely pleased, beguiled that Mother Nature had chosen them for a thumping.
It was as if the acorn, when it conked them on the bean, had imparted a touch of wisdom along with a dose of good cheer.
As far as I could tell not one of the thumped exhibited a loss of faith or disillusionment in city life.
That's rather amazing, don't you think? --
ERNEST SLYMAN


Marshall Steel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giuliani Is Key Figure in Primary in Queens
In a campaign for New York City Council that went largely ignored by news organizations and gave him few opportunities alone before large gatherings, Michael J. Abel's Republican primary race in Queens has just about been built on one plank: he is the favored candidate of Rudolph W. Giuliani and his opponent is not.
With most of the attention grabbed by the livelier Democratic Party primaries, and with the more recognizable G.O.P. candidates sitting out the primary unopposed, the distractions caused by their own party leaders were sometimes the only interest the Republicans could stir.


Moscow Rights Conference Sees Danger in Nationalism
East and West agreed today at the opening session of the first international conference on human rights in Moscow that the greatest threat to civil liberties was now no longer Communism, but violent nationalistic passions unleashed by its collapse.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, opening the gathering in the same brilliant white, chandelier-lit Hall of Columns where Stalin held his show trials in the 1930's, thanked the world for its support during last month's failed coup, and said that minority rights must not be trampled in republics now trying to withdraw from the Soviet Union.


In a New York Restaurant, Flavors and Style of a Cairo Kitchen
LIKE so many new immigrants to New York, Moustafa Ragab, from Egypt, needed time at first to find a niche.
Unable to speak English and lonely for Cairo, he was at a loss for what he might eventually do.
He got a job for a time in a Middle Eastern grocery store on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, and then tried unsuccessfully to run a gas station.


BRIEFS
*
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Ill., a maker of health care products, and Sherwood Medical, St.
Louis, have agreed to manufacture and co-market infection control products for health care professionals. *
Alberto-Culver Co., Melrose Park, Ill., a maker of personal care products, has completed the purchase of an equity interest and voting control in Cederroth Nordic A.B. from Salve Holding A.B. for about $17.4 million.


Jack Crawford, Tennis Player, 83
Jack Crawford, who won three Grand Slam tennis tournaments in one year, died here today.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Crawford, who won Wimbledon, the French and Australian Opens in 1933 and lost the United States final to Fred Perry of Britain, died in a nursing home after a long illness.
Mr.
Crawford won an epic Wimbledon singles title against Ellsworth Vines in 1933, and was runner-up to Perry the next year.
Mr.
Crawford won four Australian titles and was a member of Australia's winning Davis Cup team in 1939.


Seismed Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Painful Trip for Iran-Contra Casualty
Nearly five years after Robert C. McFarlane became an early casualty of the Iran-contra affair, the former national security adviser is about to re-emerge, reluctantly, from a long passage through personal pain and private reassessment.
Mr.
McFarlane has been summoned to testify on Wednesday as a main witness in a Federal court hearing that could determine whether the convictions against Oliver L. North, the former Marine Corps lieutenant colonel who was a subordinate and protege of Mr.
McFarlane at the National Security Council, will be thrown out.


Education Alternatives Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nell Donnelly Reed, 102, Pioneer In Manufacture of Women's Attire
Nell Donnelly Reed, a pioneer in women's ready-to-wear clothing in the 1920's and 1930's, died Sunday morning at her home in Kansas City, Mo.
She was 102 years old.
In 1916, Mrs.
Reed began making and selling ruffled dresses to replace the drab, cotton house dresses of the period.
By the 1940's her clothing company was described as the largest of its kind in the world.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 11


Haiti's Parliament Shows Leader Its Backbone
Gleaming like an immaculate prize, Haiti's high-domed presidential palace sits haughtily behind iron gates and amid well-tended gardens.
Barely half a mile away, vendors of yogurt and sugar cane mill through the cramped and scruffy grounds of Parliament.
The disparity speaks volumes about Haitian political life, many people here say.
In 187 years of independence, Parliaments have rarely amounted to more than plums for politicians.
The legislators' main virtue was derisively said to be their ready pronunciation of the phrase "I approve" in response to the decrees issued by a procession of heavy-handed leaders.


25 Whales Stranded in Cape Cod


Vallone Urges Mayor to Block Increases in Pay
The New York City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, yesterday asked Mayor David N. Dinkins to withhold retroactive pay increases for some city employees in management positions, contending the move would save $24 million to finance programs like recycling, the Staten Island Ferry and school-crossing guards.
In a letter yesterday to Mr.
Dinkins, Council officials said the money would offset some of the cuts made in the budget for the fiscal year that began July 1.
But Leland T. Jones, the Mayor's spokesman, characterized the request as stemming from misinformation.
He said there was currently no plan to give managers a retroactive pay increase.
He noted that nonunion managerial employees who make more than $70,000 annually are already under both a wage freeze and a 5 percent pay cut ordered by Mr.
Dinkins last October.


New Curbs On Exports Are Sought
Trying to protect an American edge in high technology demonstrated in the Persian Gulf war, the Department of Defense is quietly proposing strict new controls on the export of inexpensive but powerful computer work stations that can have military uses.
The Defense Department refuses to comment on its reasoning, but the industry executives who have spoken with Pentagon officials and who oppose the restrictions say the officials are afraid that the computers, which cost as little as $20,000 and can fit on a desktop, will be used for designing weapons.


New Head Of Meredith Magazines
William T. Kerr, president of The New York Times Company Magazine Group, yesterday was named president of the Meredith Corporation Magazine Group.
Meredith publishes The Ladies' Home Journal, Better Homes &amp; Gardens and other magazines.
Mr.
Kerr will replace James A. Autry, who joined Meredith in 1960 and has headed the magazine group since 1986.
Mr.
Autry had previously announced that he would retire in December, setting off an intense competition among magazine executives for the job.


The Hearings On Television
The Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court will be shown on four channels today, beginning at 10 A.M.
Eastern daylight time.
The Public Broadcasting Service will have gavel-to-gavel coverage of today's Senate Judiciary Committee's hearing, with no interruptions for commercials.


Quick Fixes Won't Solve Toxic-Waste Problem; Facilitating Cleanups
To the Editor:
"Experts Question Staggering Costs of Toxic Cleanups" (front page, Sept. 1) describes me as "an environmentalist who is president of Clean Sites, a nonprofit organization in Virginia that advises communities on hazardous-waste cleanups." Rather, Clean Sites works with companies, government agencies and communities to bring about hazardous-waste cleanups.


THE THOMAS HEARINGS: The Opening Skirmish; Thomas Scores Points in the Crucial Battle For the First Impression, but So Do Critics
The tone inside the Senate Caucus Room was elaborately polite, but the opening day of Clarence Thomas's confirmation hearing was a battle -- a battle for the all-important initial impression that the public would receive of a nominee whom many had discussed and read about but few had seen in action in the 10 weeks since President Bush chose him for the Supreme Court.
At stake was the image that would dominate the rest of the proceedings.
Would the senators, and the public, remember the affecting, even inspiring personal story that Judge Thomas, as expected, emphasized at every opportunity?
Or would they find his views those of a conservative activist with odd, even dangerous ideas, which the Democratic senators who questioned him tried to evoke?


Baker Eases Terms for Aid to Soviets
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d softened Washington's conditions for economic aid to the Soviet Union today by dropping its insistence on seeing a free-market program in operation before assistance is extended.
The Bush Administration had demanded that the Soviet Union not only produce a plan for a market economy but also begin to carry it out before the United States and six other major industrialized democracies would consider any substantial increase in economic assistance.


Northwest Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Miscellany
*
Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston, has acquired the Cippola Group, a Boston company specializing in direct marketing, sales promotion and design.
The founder of the Cippola Group, Vin Cippola, becomes a principal, director and executive vice president at Ingalls, Quinn.


Topics of The Times; TV Illuminates the Hearings
How is Clarence Thomas doing at his Supreme Court confirmation hearings?
One of the best ways to find out will be to watch television, especially the Public Broadcasting Service's live, gavel-to-gavel coverage.
It started yesterday morning and continues this week and next.
Viewers will see and hear more than just the nominee.
They'll also be able to decide how the Senate Judiciary Committee is doing.
Which Senators are probing, which are posturing, which are filibustering?
Which ask the most sensible questions?
Viewers will be well advised to keep watching after the nominee finishes testifying, to hear the witnesses for and against him.


Charlton Plays Hardball
There may be nothing in the rules of baseball to prevent a base runner from reading the catcher's signs and relaying them to the batter, but Cincinnati pitcher NORM CHARLTON has his own rules, it seems, and his own means of enforcement: throwing at the offending runner the next time he comes to the plate.
That, according to Charlton, is exactly what happened in a game against the Los Angeles Dodgers on Monday night when he hit catcher MIKE SCIOSCIA on the hand with a pitch in the sixth inning.
Charlton told The Cincinnati Post that he had deliberately thrown at Scioscia because he was convinced that the Dodger catcher, who reached second three times during the game, was taking advantage of his vantage point by stealing the Reds' signs.


A.L. Van Houtte reports earnings for Qtr to July 20


Western Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Players International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Intel Planning New Products
The Intel Corporation, entering a new business, is making a big push into selling products to help connect personal computers into networks.
At a news conference here on Wednesday, the company will introduce three families of products to help manage networks and help personal computers communicate.
Intel, the leading provider of central control chips for personal computers, already makes chips for networking that it sells to computer companies.
But the new products will be sold to computer users for use in connecting into networks the millions of personal computers already in use.


Water Alert Ends After 2 Days of Tests
The water alert on City Island, off Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx, was lifted yesterday afternoon after a second day of tests by the New York City Department of Environmental Protection showed the disappearance of a bacterial contamination that had been detected earlier this month.
Since last Thursday, the island's 4,000 residents had been under a warning by city health and environmental officials not to drink tap water without boiling it first.
Routine tests had earlier found E. coli bacteria, which occurs in human and animal feces, at levels above what the state considers safe.


Orioles Push Yankees Closer To Sixth Place
It will never be mistaken for a pennant race, but the Yankees are finally involved in a race this year.
They are immersed in the modest race for fifth place in the American League East and Baltimore is gaining on them in a hurry.
The Yankees toyed with a .500 record and remained perched in third place less than two months ago.
They gushed about their improved play and thought sixth place was something they would look down upon all season.
Maybe not.
Baltimore pounded the Yankees again in a 6-3 victory tonight at Memorial Stadium and moved to within three and a half games of fifth place.


Vari-Care Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Optical Radiation Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Lakeland Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ex-Diplomat Plead Guilty in Heroin Case
A former Nicaraguan diplomat pleaded guilty in Brooklyn yesterday to Federal charges of aiding and abetting the importing of heroin, according to Federal authorities.
The defendant, William Tapia, was arrested last year in Tokyo, where he was the counselor of the Nicaraguan Embassy.
Mr.
Tapia was dismissed from his diplomatic post after Japanese authorities arrested him at the request of the United States.
He was charged with taking part in a 1987 scheme to smuggle 125 pounds of heroin from Thailand to New York City.


Surgery for Daulton
Phillies catcher DARREN DAULTON had three bone chips removed from his left knee yesterday and was told he should be ready to play by spring training. . . .
The Immigration and Naturalization Service said that RENE AROCHA, the Cuban pitcher who defected to the United States during a tour with the Cuban national team in July, may stay in the United States and play professional baseball.
As a result, after Arocha plays in a few instructional league games so teams can scout him, major league baseball is expected to hold a special lottery draft for him. (AP)


CHRONICLE
A four-poster bed that belonged to BILL WYMAN of the Rolling Stones and before him to MICK JAGGER, was sold yesterday at auction for $24,740 to RAY GAFFNEY, an advertising photographer from London who had never bought anything at auction before.
The bed was sold by Sotheby's in Billingshurst, England, about 50 miles south of London.
Mr.
Gaffney said he decided to buy the bed "on a whim."


The U.N. Today
General Assembly COMMISSION ON TRADE LAW, WORKING GROUP ON INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS -- 10:30 A.M.
ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF DPI FOR NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Pinnacle Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


40 Ill From Fajitas At Oyster Festival
Nearly 40 people who ate chicken fajitas at the Norwalk Oyster Festival last weekend complained of food poisoning, the authorities said.
The Norwalk Health Department received calls Monday night from people complaining of stomach cramps, diarrhea and high fever.


The Effect of Political Events on Rooting Interests
With the Soviet Union splitting up, whom shall we hate in next year's Winter and Summer Olympic Games?
Iraq?
Libya?
Can we seriously loathe Cuba after seeing Fidel Castro do the wave at the Pan American Games?
Television has benefited from the United States-Soviet competitive antipathy, wrapping itself up in American heroes while setting up their titantic clashes with the villains (the folks with "C.C.C.P." stitched on their red jerseys).


Rent-a-Wreck of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


California Amplifier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


With Sauces, It's No Longer Better Dead Than Red
OVER the last two decades, the red sauce river has flowed like a natural boundary between the pristine gourmet state and the less discriminate masses.
Red sauce constituted treason under the gourmet flag, recalling the archaic days of breaded, deep-fried veal, leaden meatballs, limp spaghetti or --
quelle horreur
-- an easy, inexpensive meal from a can.
"Insecure foodies sneer at anything swamped in tomato sauce," said Raymond Sokolov, whose social history of food, "Why We Eat What We Eat," will be published by Summit Books next week.


Personal Health
TEN years after an effective vaccine was licensed against it, hepatitis B continues to spread, largely because of ignorance and inertia.
The hepatitis B virus can cause a debilitating liver infection that lasts for weeks or months and has no known cure or effective treatment.
Some victims are left with a chronic liver infection, a lifelong ability to spread the disease and as much as a 200-fold increase in the risk of developing liver cancer.
Even more distressing is the fact that half the people who are infected with the hepatitis B virus develop no apparent symptoms, yet a significant number remain contagious for life, unwittingly spreading liver disease.


Colleges, Seeking More Money, Try to Broaden Restricted Scholarships
Colleges offer scholarships for academic superiority, for athletic prowess and, of course, for financial need.
Then there are the types of scholarships awarded to people like Matthew J. Clinton.
Mr.
Clinton, an 18-year-old freshman at Iowa State University, won his $1,000 scholarship this year partly because he is majoring in agriculture and his home is south of U.S. 30 in Iowa, a geographic restriction built into his scholarship by its donor.


If the Vegetables Are Tasty and Fresh, This Must Be September
AFTER the hot, lazy summer months, September is a time of new beginnings for me.
School has resumed, vacations are over and I get back in the mood to cook again.
Fall is also the time of year when local vegetables are plentiful.
Whether I buy them at a nearby farm market or my favorite supermarket, I take advantage of good buys, searching, for example, for slightly wilted vegetables at reduced prices.
Then I concoct dishes around these bargains.
The menu I am offering here puts great emphasis on the bounty of late summer.
Corn is at its peak, and this is the time to make my corn salad, which is delicious served lukewarm or at room temperature on lettuce.


Seeking to Use More of the Radio Spectrum
Until recently, most important advances in communications have come from breakthroughs in computer processing and miniaturization: ever smaller and cheaper wireless telephones, satellite messaging systems for truck drivers and global paging networks.
But now, a growing number of researchers in government and industry are focusing on what may ultimately be a more revolutionary goal: freeing the world from the acute scarcity of useful radio frequencies.


Xylogics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


U.S. Intec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Balances Without Any Checks
Big changes are coming in consumers' monthly checking account statements as a growing number of banks try to convince Americans that they do not need to get back every one of the more than 56 billion checks they write annually.
One of the newest methods is to give customers computer-generated images of canceled checks with their monthly account statements, rather than returning the bundle of 30 or more checks the average household writes.
The system is in place at three banks, with more expected to begin in the next few months.


Sports of The Times; The Braves Try to 'Just Go Do It'
TO be in a pennant race is to try to minimize the reality of a pennant race.
As most of the Atlanta Braves are doing now.
At least publicly.
"Just focus on the game we're in," Manager Bobby Cox keeps saying.
"Don't worry about the other club. It's an old story, but it's true."


Nobel Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Klinghoffer Daughters Protest Opera
Lisa and Ilsa Klinghoffer, the daughters of Leon Klinghoffer, have expressed their disapproval of a new opera by the composer John Adams and the librettist Alice Goodman.
The work, "The Death of Klinghoffer," is about the hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro by Palestinian terrorists in 1985, during which Mr.
Kling hoffer was murdered.
The opera, which has been performed in Brussels, Vienna and Lyons, France, is running at the Brooklyn Academy of Music through Friday.
It also portrays their mother, Marilyn, who died in 1986.


Tescorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Shot Fired Through Window Of Crown Heights Synagogue
Leaders of a synagogue in Crown Heights, Brooklyn -- the scene of recent racial tensions involving black and Jewish residents -- reported yesterday that a bullet had been fired through a synagogue window sometime last weekend, the police said.


Lancaster Colony Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; Stash Some Cash, Too
The National Weather Service has an "Action Checklist" of umpteen precautionary things to do if you are in the path of an oncoming hurricane.
Gas up the car, because gas pumps won't work if the power is cut off.
Stock up on canned food; refrigerators don't refrigerate either.
If you are taking a prescription medicine, check your supply.
Make sure you have enough of the right size batteries for flashlights and radios.
Protect your windows with tape, plywood or shutters.


Belcher Blasts Mound
TIM BELCHER, the Los Angeles Dodgers' right-hander, filed a complaint yesterday with National League President BILL WHITE over the condition of the Riverfront Stadium mound.
Belcher said he slightly pulled a groin muscle Monday night because of the poor footing on the mound, which had been rebuilt after a Cincinnati Bengals football game Sunday.


John Richard Alden, 83, Author And American Revolution Expert
John R. Alden, a historian who was an authority on the American Revolution, died Aug. 14 at Morton Plant Hospital in Clearwater, Fla.
He was 83 years old and had moved to Clearwater after retiring from the faculty of Duke University in 1976.
Professor Alden's death was reported yesterday by a friend, Prof.
Ira D. Gruber of the history department at Rice University, who said Professor Alden had emphysema.


Review/Television; Tracing the Roots of the Homeless
At its best "Street Stories" is an effort to learn how a few of the nation's losers got that way.
Here and there this two-hour start to a new season of "48 Hours" comes close enough to some homeless people and their families back home to confirm that they did not begin life as addicts, prostitutes or criminals.
But for most of the time, as in the opening segment about Alexis Ficks Welsh, the former Radio City Music Hall Rockette, who was stabbed to death by a homeless man on the West Side of Manhattan this year, the program is just "Hard Copy" with pretensions.
The "48 Hours" correspondents deliver pieces on teen-age runaways in Portland, Ore., a victim of gang violence in San Diego, a 14-year-old girl in Cleveland who was paralyzed for life by a stray bullet.
The most effective report, from San Francisco's red-light district, focuses on Marilyn, whose life consists of what are known on the street as "runs." She turns a trick for drug money, gets high, gets low and starts over.
Marilyn's mother and sisters remember her as "a lovely child" and their memories are backed up by pictures of a pretty girl in a ballerina outfit.


THOMAS DECLINES REQUESTS BY PANEL FOR ABORTION VIEW
Judge Clarence Thomas, President Bush's choice to succeed Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court, said today that he believed Americans had a constitutional right to privacy.
But he declined to tell the Senate Judiciary Committee whether he believed that the Constitution provided for a right to an abortion.
Judge Thomas's remarks came in the committee's first day of hearings on his nomination to the High Court.
In their opening statements and initial questioning, several Senators indicated that they intended to challenge the judge on a series of comments and writings that opponents have assailed as demonstrating a hard-edged conservative outlook.  [ Excerpts from the hearings, page A22. ]


Gold Prices Drop on Fear Of Soviet Republics' Sales
The specter of the Soviet breakaway republics raising cash by selling gold sent futures prices for gold into a decline yesterday.
The potential gold sales by the Soviet Union or its republics have been a lingering concern among traders at the Commodity Exchange in New York.


Public &amp; Private; Justice for The Next Century
Picture a columnist appearing before an audience of readers.
Someone asks a question about an issue -- capital punishment, say, or abortion, or busing.
And the columnist replies, "It would be improper for me to discuss that because I plan to write about it in the future."
Now, there's considerable difference between columnists and justices of the Supreme Court, the greatest being that the latter are infinitely more important, despite what the former sometimes seem to believe.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Burson-Marsteller, New York, a public relations unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., named Linda Gay Blanc managing director in its New York office. *
Carrier Corp., Farmington, Conn., a heating and air-conditioning subsidiary of United Technologies Corp., announced that Gerald L. Wilson, dean of engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had been appointed vice president for corporate technology and manufacturing while on extended leave of absence from M.I.T.


Mallon Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Foreign Affairs; Break The Spell
We have an incredible opportunity to think afresh and creatively about the Soviet Union.
But first we have to free ourselves from American hard-liners whose wild exaggerations of overall Soviet power contorted cold war thinking and whose more recent advice, though often wrong and usually contradictory, still holds sway.
Item.
Our hard-liners portrayed Mikhail Gorbachev as a new and evil Communist threat in a peace loincloth.
In fact, he did everything and more the West had been demanding for 45 years, from reducing Soviet military power to dismantling totalitarianism and building democracy.
Even if Mr.
Gorbachev is not the Joshua to lead his people into the promised land, he is the Moses who freed them from slavery.
There is something dreadfully revealing and stifling in hard-line hatred (shared by Russians) of this flawed but courageous and visionary man.
Perhaps it is because he represents a central authority they are determined to destroy.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 4 about a new abortion statement by the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America misstated the vote by which the statement was adopted.
The official vote was 837 to 141.
The vote cited in the article, 905 to 70, provided by a church spokesman, represented a second vote on a procedural question.


CHRONICLE
If there are recurring themes in life, sometimes they pop up in the strangest ways.
For example, SHERRILL MILNES, the baritone, spent the weekend in Budweis, Czechoslovakia, performing in the Emmy Destinn Festival, which honored Miss Destinn, a Czech soprano who died in poverty and obscurity.
In 1910, Miss Destin originated the role of Minnie in "La Fanciulla del West" by Puccini.
A new production of the opera will have its premiere at the Metropolitan Opera in New York on Oct. 10, with Mr.
Milnes among its stars.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the continuation of an article in Science Times yesterday about a meeting on greenhouse gases and global warming included scrambled passages.
Readers wishing copies of the corrected page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
A chart with the article had incorrect figures for metric tons of carbon dioxide emitted per $1,000 of gross national product in several nations.
A corrected chart appears today on page A20.


Courier and Agassi A Team in Davis Cup
After he was was eliminated in the first round of the United States Open, ANDRE AGASSI got a consoling call from the captain of the Davis Cup team telling him that he was still a member of the team that will take on Germany in the second round in Kansas City next week.
Yesterday, Agassi got an even bigger boost, news that his singles partner would be JIM COURIER, who made it to the Open final, and that the doubles players would be Open finalists SCOTT DAVIS and DAVID PATE.
Davis and Pate replace RICK LEACH and JIM PUGH, who were knocked out of the Open in the second round. (AP)


Better Valve Timing Aids Gas Mileage
Automobile gas mileage can be improved as much as 20 percent, Clemson University researchers say, through the use of an adjustable camshaft that can vary the timing of valve operations in the engine.
Intake valves open and close to allow a mixture of gasoline and air to enter an engine's cylinder.
Exhaust valves allow the combustion products to leave after the spark plug fires.
The operations of both are controlled by one or more camshafts, which are round metal shafts with raised surfaces, or lobes, that press down on the valves to open them.
Springs, compressed when the valves are opened, do the closing.


Debut for an Electric Car Created for Los Angeles
Here in the city of angels, internal-combustion engines and smog, the search for clean cars, clean fuel and clean air is eternal.
Earlier this summer the City Council laid plans to make Los Angeles the first "electric-vehicle ready" city in America, a brave new world where every parking garage space would be equipped with a charger and where regular and unleaded gasoline would seem as antiquated as horseshoes and carriages.


Beef Industry Council Names Four Finalists
Four finalists have been selected in the review of the $25 million account of the Beef Industry Council, Chicago, a spokeswoman said yesterday.
They are Ketchum Advertising, San Francisco, the incumbent; GSD&amp;M, Austin, Tex., and the Leo Burnett Company and DDB Needham Worldwide, both of Chicago.


Tyson Set To Face Charges Today
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight boxing champion, will surrender to authorities Wednesday and answer charges that he raped an 18-year-old woman who was a contestant in a Miss Black America pageant.
Tyson is scheduled to appear at 9:30 A.M.
Eastern time, in Marion Superior Court, where the charges against him will be read and a plea entered on his behalf.


Man Gives Guilty Plea In Swindle
The mastermind of a multimillion-dollar scheme that gobbled up the savings of hundreds of investors, most of them recent Eastern European immigrants, pleaded guilty to fraud charges yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
In entering his plea, Eugene R. Karczewski, 59 years old, the founder of the Stockbridge Funding Corporation, which is now defunct, told the judge he had not intended to defraud anyone.
"As the business went bad, we thought we could pull it around," he said.


Arson Blaze Is Ruled Out In Ferry Case
New York City's Chief Fire Marshal said yesterday that he believed the fire that destroyed the roof of the Staten Island Ferry Terminal was caused by homeless people who habitually loitered in an attic-like upper floor of the terminal, smoking crack and drinking.
Even though the investigators initially said the Sunday morning fire was suspicious because it appeared to spread so rapidly, they now have ruled out arson or an electrical malfunction as causes, Chief John Stickevers said.


Standard Logic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


60-Minute Gourmet
MORE requests seem to come in for Provencal-style recipes than any other these days.
My guess is that this reflects something deeper than a fad, since the cooking of Provence addresses many contemporary nutritional and dietary needs.
With its emphasis on fresh vegetables, herbs and olive oil, it is relatively lean.
And when the cook knows how to mix and match herbs and spices well, it can be delicious.
The recipe here calls for Cornish hens in a classic Provencal sauce.
Cornish hens are ideal for quick dinners, since they roast in 45 minutes or less.
This recipe calls for browning and then braising, which take about 25 minutes in all.
For convenience, the dish can be made in advance, cooled and reheated.
But if you do this, do not add the basil garnish until serving time.
Each hen is cut into eight serving pieces.
The pieces are first browned in oil, then cooked with onions, leeks, garlic, tomatoes, green olives, herbs and chicken broth.
A simple mixed vegetable dish, which goes well with this assertive sauce, should be prepared at the last minute.
1.
Heat the oil in a heavy skillet large enough to hold the pieces of Cornish hen in one layer.
Sprinkle the pieces with salt and pepper.
When the oil becomes hot, add the pieces, skin side down.
Cook over medium-high heat until lightly browned, about 5 minutes.
Turn and cook 5 minutes more.
2.
Add the onions, leeks and garlic, and cook, stirring, until wilted, about 2 minutes.
Add the tomatoes, olives, thyme, wine, chicken broth, bay leaf, saffron, Tabasco, salt and pepper.
Stir and scrape the bottom of the skillet to dissolve any brown particles on the bottom.
Cover closely, and simmer 10 minutes.
3.
Remove the thyme sprigs and bay leaf.
If there is too much liquid, reduce the sauce a bit.
Sprinkle with basil and serve.
Yield: 4 servings. Mixed Vegetables
2 tablespoons butter  1/2 cup chopped scallions  1 1/2 cups green beans cut into 1 1/2-inch lengths  1 1/2 cups carrots cut into small batons 1/2-inch long  1 1/2 cups small red potatoes, also cut into 1/2-inch batons  1 1/2 cups white turnips cut into 1/2-inch batons  Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste  4 tablespoons water  1 1/2 cups zucchini cut into 1/2-inch batons.
1.
In a heavy saucepan, heat the butter, and add the scallions.
Cook briefly, then add the beans, carrots, potatoes, turnips, salt, pepper and water.
Cover closely.
2.
If the saucepan is heavy enough and the cover fits snugly, this should be sufficient water.
Take care that the saucepan does not become dry or the vegetables will burn.
Add more water if neccessary.
3.
Cook over gentle to moderate heat for about 5 minutes, stirring and shaking the pan occasionally to redistribute the vegetables so they cook evenly.
Then add the zucchini, cover the pan again, and cook for about 3 minutes more.
Do not overcook.
Yield: 4 servings.


Saatchi Effort On Refugees
A unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., London, has accepted an assignment to persuade Vietnamese "boat people" in Southeast Asian refugee camps to return to the country that they fled.
The European Commission, the executive body for the 12- nation European Community, plans to pay about $600,000 to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Strategy, the advertising and communications company's government consultancy division.


Giants Expect Lift From Hampton
The Chicago Bears will present the Giants with the same type of defensive puzzle this Sunday that the Rams offered them last Sunday: plenty of blitzing linebackers, distinguished pass coverages and an eight-man defensive front.
The Giants expect to have one element that they didn't have last Sunday.
Running back Rodney Hampton, who missed the first two games of the season with an injured right shoulder, is expected to be in the lineup against the Bears at Soldier Field in Chicago.


On the Way Up, a Russian Steps on Toes
Anatoly A. Sobchak paced an office across from the Kremlin today, his impatience crackling like static electricity.
He had a head cold, a waiting room filled with restive visitors, and an annoying sense that his country was dribbling toward oblivion.
"We are losing days and weeks," Mr.
Sobchak fumed.
"Sure, we won a great victory, but if this keeps up we just might lose the country."


Green Could Mean Luck for the Mets
The jets seemed uncomfortably close over Shea Stadium Monday night.
Not to worry, a veteran of many Mets home games said.
They always seem closer when the ball park has so few fans because all that noise from the engines has nothing to bounce off except empty seats.
The 12,950 or so fans who showed up to see the fourth-place Mets and the sixth-place Expos, did not help ease the din.
For they sent quite a few boos reverberating around the suddenly unfriendly confines as well.


Georgian Militants Seek Ouster of Republic's Nationalist President


Metropolitan Realty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kaiser Health Chairman Will Head a Fed Bank
The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco today named James A. Vohs its chairman, effective Jan. 1.
Mr.
Vohs is also chairman of the Kaiser Foundation Health Plan Inc. and Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, both based in Oakland, Calif.
Mr.
Vohs, who is 62, succeeds Robert F. Erburu, who has been designated vice chairman by the central bank's board of governors in Washington.
Mr.
Erburu, who is 61, is also chairman and chief executive of the Times Mirror Company of Los Angeles.
Mr.
Vohs and Mr.
Erburu were selected as directors who are representative of non-banking interests; their appointments are for one year.


FPS Computing reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Congress Is Cautious On Overhauling System
Key lawmakers in the House and Senate today signaled their intentions to put off any immediate regulatory overhaul of the government securities market and to extend the existing law for at least a month while they consider more significant changes.
In the Senate, five Democrats and three Republicans on the Banking Committee introduced modest legislation that would do little more than clarify the existing law on securities fraud.
Their bill would make explicit the general provisions of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to apply to the government securities market.


Book Notes
'Where's Dan Quayle?'
Could Dan Quayle do for Macmillan publishers what the bespectacled nerd Waldo has done for Little, Brown in recent years?
This disarming possibility has emerged from the remarkable initial sales of "Where's Dan Quayle?," a spoof on the Waldo books in which the cherubic figure of the Vice President has to be found amid various tumultuous and colorful scenes.
The Quayle book, by Rick Wolffe and Bill Rosen, has sold more than 100,000 copies in its first two weeks in the stores and is already on the best-seller lists of the Doubleday stores and Ingram, a major wholesaler.
"The book is walking out of stores," said Barry Lippman, the president of Macmillan, who has just ordered another printing of 100,000 copies.
The publication of "Where's Dan Quayle?" was preceded by what Mr.
Lippman called "extensive legal vetting" to insure that there would be no problem with the fact that its form is a direct copy of "Where's Waldo?"
John Keller, the publisher of the children's books division at Little, Brown, insisted that the company was not concerned.
"Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery," he said, "and I am sure 'Waldo' sales will be unaffected by Mr. Quayle."
Little, Brown has already sold more than seven million copies of its four Waldo books, written by Martin Handford.
A fifth, "Where's Waldo? The Magnificent Poster Book" is about to arrive in stores.
Waldo amounts to a phenomenon of children's publishing, a field that has boomed while much of the rest of the industry has slumped.
Wherein lies Waldo's appeal?
He is a thin little guy -- smiling, bemused, blank -- who strolls obliviously through the wildest goings-on.
He never does anything, he just shows up.
He is, suggests Mr.
Keller, "Everyman, an anti-hero for our time."
The publisher rejected suggestions that there might be some similarities between Waldo and the Vice President.
"Waldo, unlike the Vice President, is innocuous and does not have the power to hurt me," Mr.
Keller said.
"But it is true they both have to show up at a lot of functions."
Macmillan has sent a copy of the book to the Vice President but as yet has received no reply from his office.
"As soon as they locate him, they are going to give the book to him," Mr.
Lippman said.
Auction for a Precis
A strong auction for a nonfiction work on the 1963 slaying of the civil rights leader Medgar Evers has confirmed that a good 25-page proposal can still, even in these difficult times, earn a lot of money for an author writing a first book.
People involved in the bidding said the proposed book, to be written by Maryanne Vollers and titled "The Ghosts of Mississippi," went to Little, Brown for a substantial six-figure sum after a highly competitive auction.
The book will be based on Ms.
Vollers's extensive Esquire magazine article, published in July.
Bill Phillips, the editor in chief of Little, Brown, said the book would tell the story of "how the new South has to deal with the old South that is still among it." It would, he said, use the killing of Evers and two inconclusive trials of Byron de la Beckwith, the man accused in the death, as the means to trace a social history of the South.
A third trial of Mr.
Beckwith, based on new evidence and a reindictment, is expected to start soon.
But he is fighting extradition from Tennessee to Jackson, Miss., where the trial would take place.
Two earlier trials ended in a hung jury and a mistrial.
The book is due for delivery in about 18 months. Economic Advice
Pantheon, meanwhile, has paid what its executive editor, Erroll McDonald, called "next to nothing" for the right to publish a joint proposal for the Soviet economy, written by Graham Allison of the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard and Grigory A. Yavlinsky of the Soviet Center for Economic and Political Research.
The house hopes that interest in things Russian is currently such that even an essentially academic work may have wide popular appeal.
The book is called "Window of Opportunity: Joint Program for Western Cooperation in the Soviet Transformation to Democracy and the Market Economy." The work was submitted to leaders of the Group of Seven industrialized nations before their July meeting in London as a possible basis for the program of Western aid to the Soviet Union.
Initially rejected by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet President, as being too radically free market in approach, the proposal is firmly supported by Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of the Russian Republic.
"It is eminently readable," Mr.
McDonald said.
"If it had been written for a purely academic audience, the authors would not have dared show it to George Bush." Along with countless other books about the Soviet Union, this one will be in stores within a month.


When the Nice Guy Finishes First
The dust is still settling from the explosion of power golf with which John Daly won the P.G.A.
Championship a month ago.
But while the fallout of his newfound fame is making the 25-year-old tour rookie a rich man, some of it is already old.
The star-making machinery has been grinding the private life of golf's newest hero to a halt, with the national news media shadowing him, countless business deals -- including an instruction video and a book -- on the table, and even a country song, "Long John Daly," on the charts.


Jockey to Solve Big Mystery Today
All summer, passers-by have wondered about the identity of the model on a Jockey International Inc. billboard in Times Square.
At a news conference this morning, Jockey will disclose that she is Nancy Hogshead, an Olympic gold medalist swimmer.
The sign, 18 feet by 90 feet, has carried the image of a woman with an obscured face, dressed in black bikini underwear and hosiery.
The hidden identity raised speculation as to who she is; Sports Illustrated guessed last month that it was Ms.
Hogshead, but the company declined to confirm the report.


CHRONICLE
The Boys Choir of Harlem normally commands fees of $3,500 to $12,000, but when it performs this afternoon at the centennial celebration of the Columbia University School of Nursing, it will be rewarded instead with physicals for its 250 students.
"We wanted to have very special entertainment, and when we asked Dr. WALTER TURNBULL, the president of the choir, about fees, he brought up the fact that all the children needed back-to-school physicals," said Dr.
MARY O. MUNDINGER, dean of the nursing school.


NO PROGRESS SEEN IN CANADA STRIKE
The second day of a nationwide strike of Canadian federal workers disrupted millions of people today, creating a new political challenge to a seven-year-old Progressive Conservative Government that has sunk to new lows in opinion polls.
As more than half of the 155,000-member Public Service Alliance of Canada stayed out of work -- halting grain shipments, tying up air transportation and slowing border crossings -- the union and the Government refused to budge from their positions.


Canadian Western Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League --
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Released Fernando Valenzuela, pitcher, from his minor-league contract with Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.


Corrections
A profile in Business Day yesterday about Frank Mankiewicz, the Washington public relations executive, misattributed a comment about working for Arabs.
It was Jerry Blizen, a former Hill &amp; Knowlton executive, and not Mr.
Mankiewicz, who said he was Jewish and did not work on contracts for Arabs.
The article also misidentified countries that Hill &amp; Knowlton has refused to represent.
They include Libya and Chile, but not Colombia.


Heinz Net Up But Stock Falls
The H. J. Heinz Company today reported a 78 percent rise in first-quarter earnings, but the figures were well below analysts' expectations and the company's stock fell sharply.
Meanwhile, Anthony J. F. O'Reilly, the company's chairman, said Heinz would use the benefits of a previously announced restructuring to market its core products more aggressively.
He said some jobs would be lost in the cost- cutting, but would not say how many or when.


Arbitrator Given Bids By Oilers, Rangers
The great chess match over seven-goal scorer Adam Graves moved one square ahead today as rival general managers Neil Smith and Glen Sather sent very different compensation bids to an Ottawa arbitrator.
Sather, of the Oilers, bid for two promising young players.
A person familiar with the Oilers' position confirmed tonight that Sather had asked for both Steven Rice, one of the Rangers' top offensive prospects, and Louie DeBrusk, a 225-pound banger who earned 230 penalty minutes last season in the minors.


The Pop Life; Just When You Thought Rock 'n' Roll Was Dead
At 12:01 A.M. on Tuesday, a pop culture explosion is expected to detonate.
That is the day Guns 'n' Roses finally releases its two new albums, "Use Your Illusion I" and "Use Your Illusion II," and the advance order for the records is huge -- more than four million copies, according to Geffen Records, the band's label.
Anticipating a heavy turnout of buyers, a spokesman for Geffen said, over 1,000 stores across the country will open at midnight.
In New York City, Tower Records plans to extend its normal midnight closing time until about 2 A.M.
"or as long as it takes," as one store manager put it.
A spokesman for Sam Goody said two of its Manhattan stores (at 1011 Third Avenue, at 60th Street, and 390 Avenue of the Americas, at Eighth Street) would stay open Monday night to sell the album "as long as people keep coming in."
"This is a major event," said Lew Garrett, a vice president of purchasing for Camelot, one of the top three record chains in the country.
"We placed the largest single order for a new release in the company's history. That's based on demand all year for this project. Outside of Michael Jackson's 'Thriller,' this will probably be the biggest rock record ever."
The album's initial success represents a boon for the ailing record industry.
Following the recent success of albums by Metallica and Van Halen, it also signals a resurgence of hard rock.
"People have been saying that rock-and-roll is dead," said Ed Rosenblatt, president of Geffen.
"It's clearly not true. Some of the major names haven't released albums, and there haven't been records by U2 or Springsteen or Def Leppard. I think the industry has put out too many copycat bands, which has put buyers to sleep. I think the tremendous anticipation on these albums shows that the market still exists strongly, if you put something out there worthwhile."
The recession has affected not only the pop touring industry, but pop record sales as well.
And one theory has it that advance orders of the Guns 'n' Roses albums are high because retail chains, which are buying on credit, see the album as a quick way to generate cash to pay off old debts.
"Business-wise it's been a tough year; we've had to really scrap for every sale," said Mr.
Garrett.
"We think we have the potential to sell more than we've ever sold of anything. It will provide a ray of sunshine for everyone."
Part of the pre-release excitement can be traced to a series of shrewd marketing ploys.
The group has waited four years to release a new album; its last, "Appetite for Destruction," sold 14 million copies.
The two "Use Your Illusion" albums were originally scheduled for a May release, but Guns 'n' Roses refused to let them be issued then because, the company said, the band was not artistically satisfied with them.
The delay fueled both publicity and anticipation.
Also, a single from the album, "You Could Be Mine," has been a big hit, thanks in large part to its being from the summer's biggest movie, "Terminator 2: Judgment Day."
"We just got out of the way," said Robert Smith, head of marketing at Geffen.
"When the record was delayed for a few months, the situation just grew in terms of consumer and retail interest. The band began gigging in May, and the marriage of the biggest movie of the summer and the biggest rock band built up incredible demand. When 800,000 cassette singles of 'You Could Be Mine,' went out the door, without any campaign, we realized that they're bigger than we ever thought."
The record company has planned the release cleverly.
Betting that teen-agers couldn't afford a double album that might have a list price near $30, they instead voted to split the release in two, with one album having 16 tracks and the other 14; the total amount of music comes out to nearly two and a half hours and the list price of each is $15.99.
The first single, "Don't Cry," can be found on both albums, but in different versions.
And the company plans to push singles from alternating albums.
"You can't underestimate the label," Mr.
Garrett said of Geffen.
"They know how to make something big."
But as much as any label tries, it is impossible to sell a dud.
Guns 'n' Roses has clearly built a large constituency that is ready and waiting to buy its music.
Out of Africa
The pianist and composer Randy Weston, who is performing on Friday at Alice Tully Hall as part of Lincoln Center's jazz program and on Sunday in a free concert at the band shell in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, is one of the most imposing improvisers working in jazz.
One of the New York-based be-bop musicians who came to prominence in the 1950's, he learned the lessons of Duke Ellington, Thelonious Monk and Bud Powell, turning them into an amalgam of ringing chords, giant open spaces, percussive dissonances and skittering runs.
In 1961 Mr.
Weston went to Africa, and his musical life changed.
Since then, he has traveled through Africa extensively, living in Morocco and studying all sorts of different musical practices.
Friday's show is partly a byproduct of his first trip.
Mr.
Weston and his orchestra will be re-creating the original music for his orchestral work and album, "Highlife," which came out in 1963.
"A lot of African countries were just getting independence," Mr.
Weston said.
"I wanted to do an album celebrating the events. I had spent a lot of time in Nigeria in a club owned by Bobby Benson, a drummer, and Fela and other African musicians would come and sit in and play. It was a great experience, so some of the tunes are about that scene. And I'll be doing some material off of a big band album I just recorded for Antilles.
"My interest in Africa had started even earlier, though," said Mr.
Weston.
"It came out of my wonderful father. When I was a very little boy he had books about Africa, and he loved Marcus Garvey. He always said to me that Africa was the beginning of civilization. He instilled Africa in me, that we had a glorious history, that we were a global people. Since then I've tried to meet my brothers and sisters around the world. And he made me take piano lessons!"
Though Mr.
Weston works with larger groups, he rarely performs with a big orchestra.
The show will feature the arrangements and writing of Melba Liston, one of the best arrangers to come up in the 1950's.
Ms.
Liston and Mr.
Weston have collaborated over the years -- they've just completed a new big band project -- and they work wonderfully together.
"I love working with a big band because you get all those extra colors and sounds," said Mr.
Weston.
"And Melba is so so skillful she knows what I'm going to do before I do it. She can take my compositions and get the sounds that the pieces call for. I'm ceally thankful to her, and the incredible musicians who are playing this music."


Aladdin International Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Wine Talk
THERE are lots of good wine buys around.
So many that there is a tendency to get carried away while enumerating them.
Consider what happened last week in this space.
What was supposed to be an all-encompassing list of good red wines at reasonable prices had barely mentioned a few European wines when there was no more space.
Herewith then, another go at it, this one confined to our own shores and mostly California at that.
The search for bargains from vines in the United States is getting tougher.
The Italians, French and Spanish continue to turn out a splendid variety of excellent wines for $10 and under.


Saturn Disq Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 23


In Poland, Studying the Fine Art of Chic
It is early evening at the Warsaw School of Grace, and 14 recent graduates are preparing for its commencement exercises.
One takes deep breaths and practices her posture in the mirror; another nervously tap dances, top hat in hand, and a third applies and reapplies new lip liner in what she says is her color.
"After this course they are ready for Europe," said Anna Kosewska, the director of the three-year-old school.
"They are poised, and redone with a confidence they never had. Our horrible 40-year-old standards of beauty are wiped away in one month."


Salem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woman Is Fatally Shot While Waiting for Bus
A 50-year-old Brooklyn woman waiting on a corner for a bus was shot and killed last night by a man who later told the police he meant to shoot someone else.
The woman, holding a bus transfer in her hand, was standing at the corner of Glenwood Road and Nostrand Avenue in Flatbush shortly after 6 P.M. when a bullet struck her in the head, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


Piedmont Mining Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Intercim Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.37
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.24
5.27
7.40
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.25
5.30
7.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.52
7.52
8.66
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.00
7.99
8.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
9.05
9.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.96
6.96
7.60
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sharks Lure Pavelich
When he quit the Minnesota North Stars 12 days into the 1986-87 season, MARK PAVELICH, who had spent the previous five seasons with the Rangers, said he was simply fed up with the life style of professional hockey.
Now, he has decided on a comeback.
After making clear that he wouldn't think of playing in New York, Boston or Philadelphia, the 33-year-old center was lured out of retirement by the expansion San Jose Sharks and has been busy shaking the cramps out of his legs in training camp.
"I'd rather be old and experienced than be young and have the legs," he said. (AP)


A Correction: Carbon Dioxide Emissions
A chart with an article in Science Times yesterday about a meeting on greenhouse gases had incorrect figures for metric tons of carbon dioxide emitted per $1,000 of gross national product in several nations.
This corrected chart shows carbon dioxide emissions for selected countries.
They are expressed in total metric tons, metric tons per capita and metric tons per $1,000 of gross national product.
Emissions/
Country
1988 Total
Per Capita
GNP Ratio
East Germany
327.4
19.8
2,05
United States
4,804.1
19.4
0.98
Canada
437.8
16.9
1,00
Czechoslovakia
233.6
15.0
1.90
Australia
241.3
14.7
0.98
Soviet Union
3,982.0
13.9
1.50
Poland
459.4
12.1
2.66
West Germany
669.9
11.0
0.56
United Kingdom
559.2
9.9
0.80
Romania
220.7
9.5
2.77
South Africa
284.2
8.4
3.60
Japan
989.3
8.1
0.35
Italy
359.7
6.2
0.43
France
320.1
5.9
0.34
Korea
204.6
4.8
1.19
Spain
187.7
4.8
0.55
Mexico
306.9
3.7
1.74
China
2,236.3
2.1
6.01
Brazil
202.4
1.5
0.63
India
600.6
0.7
2.52


Aquino Leads a March in Support of U.S. Base Pact
President Corazon C. Aquino led thousands of Filipinos in a march through heavy rains to the Philippine Senate today to demand ratification of a new American lease on Subic Bay Naval Station, a day after a majority of the Senators announced their intention to reject the base agreement.
Before the march, a rally in support of the agreement drew a enthusiastic crowd estimated by the police at 100,000 to 200,000 people, but there was no indication that Mrs.
Aquino's plea or the turnout had changed anyone's vote in the 23-member Senate.


F.D.A. Seeks Limit on Lead in Wine
The Food and Drug Administration, concerned about lead levels found in tests of some table wines, today proposed a limit on the allowable lead content in wines sold in this country.
The agency also said it would propose banning the use of lead foil wraps on corked bottles.
It said wines that used such wraps were found in tests to have the highest lead contents.
The F.D.A. recommended that the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which regulates alcoholic beverages, consider lead levels in wine above 300 parts per billion as potentially harmful to consumers.


Quick Fixes Won't Solve Toxic-Waste Problem
To the Editor:
The premise of "Experts Question Staggering Costs of Toxic Cleanups" (front page, Sept. 1) -- that "most analysts agree" virtually all risks of contaminated waste sites could be eliminated by the judicious use of fences or similar shortcuts -- is not supported by fact, and ignores the sorry history of hazardous-site cleanups in America.


Polish Premier, in U.S., Says Austerity Works
Facing parliamentary elections in 47 days, Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki of Poland made a campaign stop here today.
His schedule, including speeches and calls on businessmen, members of Congress and international bankers, culminates Wednesday in a meeting with President Bush.
An Administration official said that the Polish elections on Oct. 27 will in effect be a referendum on Mr.
Bielecki.


Plains Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Japanese Find Signs of Hope For Solution of Island Dispute
Japanese officials said today that there was a new basis for hope that Boris N. Yeltsin and other leaders in the Soviet Union were more prepared to solve a longstanding territorial dispute that has soured relations and blocked consideration of large scale Japanese aid.
But the officials said it was too soon to tell whether a series of recent statements and messages from Mr.
Yeltsin and others in Moscow meant that the territorial dispute could be solved in the near future.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 6
Aug. 30
Sept. 7
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.4
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
212.9
209.6
211.1
Distillate stocks
130.1
126.7
131.7
Crude imports, daily
6.0
6.4
6.9
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.8
2.0
Crude stocks
343.3
350.3
374.3
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
91.1
90.5
93.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Volt Information Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 9


Wet Seal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


New Paramount Theater to Give Radio City a Run for Its Music
When Barry Manilow plays the new 5,600-seat Paramount theater this month, his engagement will open a new era in the concert business in New York City.
Until now, the only multi-use theater in Manhattan of comparable size has been Radio City Music Hall.
But with the opening of the Paramount, on the site of the old Felt Forum in Madison Square Garden, the two houses will soon be engaged in fierce competition to present big-name entertainment at a time when the concert business is in recession.


Senators Rebuff Bush on Israeli Loan Guarantees
President Bush met with Senate supporters of Israel today and appealed to them to back his request for a four-month delay in Congressional consideration of the Israeli request for $10 billion in loan guarantees to help settle Soviet Jews.
But in return, all they promised him was a two-week delay "to avoid confrontation if possible," as Senator Bob Kasten, Republican of Wisconsin, put it.
"Compromise on this situation is possible," he said.


Baghdad Requires Air Inspectors To Use Iraqi Copters, U.N. Says
Iraq has refused to allow United Nations inspectors to fly their planes over its territory, officials of the world organization said today.
As part of the United Nations-mandated cease-fire formally ending the Persian Gulf war, the Iraqis agreed to permit overflights by teams from the United Nations commission overseeing the destruction of Iraqi weapons.
Germany contributed the use of three air force helicopters with crews and ground-support personnel.


Ashidowa-teri Journal; Venezuela Befriends Tribe, but What's Venezuela?
Two degrees north of the Equator, an American anthropologist stood in a circular Yanomami lodge here recently and asked a hunter what he thought of Venezuela's new Upper Orinoco-Casiquiare Biosphere Reserve.
A mystified look crossed the young man's brow, already distorted by designs in ocher paint.
He consulted a friend dressed only in feathers, then demanded, in Yanomami, "What's Venezuela?"


Upscale Down-and-Outers Try Pawning
THE lawyer needed an engagement ring but had lost his credit by filing for bankruptcy.
The advertising agency owner couldn't meet her payroll because her clients were paying their bills late.
The fifth-grade teacher wanted to trim her credit card balance without her husband's knowledge.
So where did each of these upscale and respectable, though cash-poor, people turn?


Transtech Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Brophy Makes a Move in Fight Over Strike the Gold
The feud embroiling the three owners of Strike the Gold intensified yesterday when B. Giles Brophy counterattacked against his two partners and claimed both the colt and his career prize money of almost $1.3 million.
The action was taken in a complaint filed by Brophy in Suffolk County Court, four months after Strike the Gold won the Kentucky Derby and five days before he was to challenge older horses in the $500,000 Woodward Stakes at Belmont Park.


Randers Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


North American Vaccine reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marvin Oliv, Recycling Expert, 76
Marvin Oliv, co-founder and retired publisher of Recycling Today, died Monday at the Cherry Nursing Home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 76 years old.
His family said he died after a long illness.
Mr.
Oliv, a graduate of Paterson State Teachers College who was a major in the Army Air Forces in World War II, became interested in recycling in the 1950's.


Weaving a Network of Mentors for Young Women
A recent survey of corporate America suggested that even after 20 years of steady advances for women, most high-powered business positions are filled by men, in part because men are able to take advantage of an "old boys' network" of school chums and close friends that is all but closed to women.
Even those women who graduate from the nation's most prestigious universities are likely to run into blank walls as they start careers without the right contacts.
For this reason, a number of University of Pennsylvania alumnae who are successful in professional careers have established a group called the Trustees' Council of Penn Women.
Their goal: to help women get ahead.
Their plan: to form what in essence is an "old girls' network."


Taylor Sees Racial Factor
When Lawrence Taylor entered a drug rehabilitation program in 1986, when he was suspended for four games for substance abuse in 1988, and when he was charged with drunken driving in 1989, was it big news because Taylor was the Giants' dominant player?
Not according to Lawrence Taylor.


Dow Stocks Fall 24.60, To 2,982.56,
Stock prices fell sharply yesterday in light trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 24.60 points, to 2,982.56.
The market fell amid concern that third-quarter profits might not be strong enough to justify current stock valuations.
In addition, program-selling pushed stocks lower, and investors expressed disappointment that the Fed did not lower interest rates.


A.W. McMillan, 91, Longtime Columnist At Amsterdam News
Allan W. McMillan, longtime columnist for The Amsterdam News and the first black syndicated columnist, died on Saturday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His niece, Marlene McMillan, said he died of prostate cancer.


Kingdom Recuperating
A week after undergoing major knee surgery, ROGER KINGDOM, the world-record holder in the 110-meter hurdles, has begun rehabilitation in hopes of winning his third consecutive Olympic gold medal in the event. (AP)


PHP Healthcare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Walshire Assurance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; Asbestos Cleanup Has Few Winners
THE unexpected profits plunge that sent investors scurrying to sell their shares of Browning-Ferris Industries last week was only the latest reminder of how tough it is to pick winners in the environmental field.
For all Browning-Ferris's problems, however, the focus by the company on solid-waste disposal and related recycling programs positions it in one of the more predictable growth segments in the waste-disposal business.
For persistent financial bloodshed in the environmental sector, it is still hard to match the asbestos-abatement business.
Although the asbestos-removal business has grown from almost nothing into a multibillion-dollar industry over the last 10 years, countless investors paid heavily for their attempts to ride the wave of growing profits.


Nu-West Industries reports earnings for Year to June 30


Mother's Suit Blocked In Steinberg Death
New York's highest court yesterday barred a wrongful-death lawsuit brought by the biological mother of Lisa Steinberg, the 6-year-old girl who died at the hands of Joel B. Steinberg.
The State Court of Appeals in Albany refused to hear the case brought by Michele Launders, who had sued Mr.
Steinberg and New York City officials.
Lower courts had ruled that Ms.
Launders had no standing to sue.


Apathy May Give New York Council an Old Look
New York City is about to hold its most important City Council primary in memory, but standing outside a supermarket in Flushing, Queens, the other day, Armando Correa said he had other, more pressing things on his mind.
"I don't think about it," he said of tomorrow's primary.
"I got my son, my wife and my work, that's what I think about. I'm going to die anyway like everybody else. So what's the point?"


Dutch Survey Casts New Light On Patients Who Choose to Die
MERCY killing and assisted suicide of the terminally ill have been practiced more openly and tolerated more widely in the Netherlands than in any other country.
Yet after almost two decades of quietly accepting requests for mercy killing or suicide as a patient's right, the Dutch knew little about who was choosing to die, why they sought death and who was helping them obtain it.
Now researchers have begun to answer these questions, with sometimes startling results.
Patients asking for a doctor's help to kill themselves are typically cancer patients in their early 60's who fear "dependence, loss of dignity, humiliation and pain," a new study shows.
The physician who applies the euthanasia in most cases is the family doctor and most of such deaths take place at home, the study says.


Felipe Rojas-Lombardi, 46, Dies; Chef Known for Spanish Cuisine
Felipe Rojas-Lombardi, the Peruvian-born chef who helped bring a Spanish and Caribbean influence into America's haute cuisine repertory, died yesterday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure after a two-year bout with degenerative osteoporosis, his business partner, Tim Johnson, said.


I.M.F. Cuts Off Zaire
Zaire will no longer be allowed to borrow money from the International Monetary Fund, the organization said.
Zaire is behind in payments on about $81.7 million lent by the I.M.F., the agency said.


Bank Profits: Weakest 2d Quarter Since '87
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation today reported the weakest second-quarter earnings for the nation's banking industry since 1987, but it said that the overwhelming majority of banks remained profitable.
In his final report on the quarterly condition of banks, the F.D.I.C.'s chairman, L. William Seidman, characterized the industry as "bumping along the bottom."


About New York
Such are the scenes that define life: On a Friday almost two years ago, Kara Shipley, then 5 years old, fell off her bike.
Her parents then found a lump behind an ear -- an "ear thingie," she calls it -- and took her to a doctor.
Leukemia.
The other day, Kara made her regular visit to the hospital for a spinal tap and a bone marrow test.
Chemotherapy, thousands upon thousands of pills, being called "a baldie" by unknowing children -- this had been her life for a long time.


U.S. MOVES TO CURB MEDICAID PAYMENTS FOR MANY STATES
Despite protests from Republican as well as Democratic governors, the Bush Administration today issued new rules intended to eliminate what it described as a "scam" used by states to extract $3 billion to $5 billion a year from the Federal Government for Medicaid benefits.
The move has broad political, fiscal and medical implications.
Under the rules, the Federal Government will no longer match spending by states for Medicaid if the state money comes from donations or special taxes paid by hospitals and nursing homes.


Accounts
*
Nutrasweet Co., Deerfield, Ill., a subsidiary of Monsanto Co., to Cramer-Krasselt, Chicago, for a fitness center in Newton, Mass., developed in conjunction with Tufts University and scheduled to open next year.
Billings were not disclosed.


No French Doors to Eastern Europe
It is no good welcoming the independent countries of Eastern Europe with tears of joy if we do not allow them access to our markets.
So said Jacques Delors of France, president of the European Commission.
But France's Prime Minister, Edith Cresson, doesn't agree.
At her Government's insistence, the foreign ministers of the European Community scotched a plan to open the community's borders, by a crack, to allow entry of goods from Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
Apparently it's fine to help Eastern Europe move to markets -- as long as it causes no French citizen the slightest discomfort.


New Campaigns
*
I.B.M. has brought back the Charlie Chaplin "Little Tramp" character in a television commercial, by Lintas New York, for the 10th anniversary of the introduction of the I.B.M.
PC.
A spokesman for I.B.M. said the character, played again by the actor Billy Scudder, is returning only for the anniversary and would not reappear in the company's general campaign.


Utility's Threat To Cancel Plan
Northeast Utilities said yesterday that it would drop its plan to acquire the Public Service Company of New Hampshire unless the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission revises an Aug. 9 ruling on how the merged company would have to operate its transmission system.
Northeast, based in Hartford, said that the conditions set by the Federal regulators would raise electricity prices for Northeast's customers in Connecticut and for customers of Public Service in New Hampshire, and that officials in the two states were objecting.


Westfield Minerals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Steeped in Past, Faith in Future For a Soviet Sect
Leonid Kalenyuk, a former coal miner from the Ukraine, finds in the current turmoil of the Soviet Union a confirmation of the apocalyptic prophecies that he says drove him from his country to join a community of Soviet immigrants here.
"This coup attempt was a warning to believers that they must leave while they can," said Mr.
Kalenyuk, who is one of tens of thousands of Pentecostal Christians who have flooded into the United States from the Soviet Union over the past three years.


'Agita' Spells No Relief in Any Language
To the Editor:
In Anna Quindlen's Aug. 17 column advocating a Presidential bid by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, I stumbled on a sentence: "He communicates the agita of the immigrant child who simultaneously sees the dream gone wrong and believes it can come true." Surely someone had blundered with that fourth word -- an unintentionally apocopated form of "agitation," perhaps?


THE COUNCIL PRIMARIES: Campaign Trail; Many Still Haven't Filed Election Financial Data
Under a New York City law intended to open up government and guard against corruption, candidates for the City Council were required to submit detailed personal financial disclosure statements to the Conflicts of Interest Board by Aug. 7.
More than a month later, and two days before Primary Day, only 93 of the 226 candidates have done so.
The 18-page forms require candidates to provide information about any assets, investments, property and occupational interests that might create a conflict for a public official.
The penalty for late filing is a $100 fine, and candidates who do not file at all can be fined $1,000.


Studios, After a Summer of Dogs, Hesitate to Count Their Chickens
After its worst summer at the box office in nearly two decades, Hollywood is heading into the fall season edgy about the prospects for its movies, despite a lineup that includes some almost certain hits.
In handicapping the films still to be released this year, studio executives and theater owners predict particularly strong box-office showings for two movies: "Hook," a variation of the Peter Pan story directed by Steven Spielberg for Tri-Star and scheduled for release on Dec. 11, and "The Addams Family" from Paramount, whose trailer has been bringing loud cheers from fans of the 1960's television series.
It opens on Nov. 22.


Huffman Koos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


SENATOR PROPOSES NEW BUDGET PLAN
Senator Tom Harkin, the Iowa Democrat who is expected to announce his intention to run for the Presidency next week, proposed today that Congress abandon last year's budget agreement so more money could be spent on social programs.
Under Mr.
Harkin's proposal, an amendment to an appropriations bill, $3.1 billion would be taken from the Pentagon budget and diverted to Head Start, educational grants, heating programs for the poor and several health programs.


Osborn Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Missing 8-Year-Old Bronx Girl Is Found Dead
The body of an 8-year-old Bronx girl, missing since Sunday morning when she left her uncle's home to return to her own apartment a floor below, was discovered yesterday afternoon in a bag that had been stuffed into a niche of a seawall below the Triborough Bridge, the police said.
Dozens of police officers, as well as scuba divers, vessels from the department's harbor unit and a bloodhound -- who had traced the little girl's scent to a picnic table near the river -- had searched all day Monday and throughout the morning yesterday.


U.N. Leader, in Iran, Cites Hostage Gains
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations arrived yesterday in Teheran, Iran, saying that "some progress" had been made in the negotiations to free the 10 remaining Western hostages in Lebanon.
Privately officials traveling with the Secretary General said the situation was at a critical juncture.


THE THOMAS HEARINGS: TV Critic's Notebook; Unveiling A Version Of Thomas For Video
Like a new car model that had been shrouded to excite expectations, the latest Supreme Court nominee was put on exhibition yesterday before the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Fans of news and talk shows have had most of the summer to absorb the prevailing opinion that barring an act of God or of television, Judge Clarence Thomas will be Associate Justice Thomas well before the first frost.
Whether he has made any solicitations on the matter to the Divine Court remains Judge Thomas's business.
But it is public knowledge that he has enjoyed the attentions of Administration minders in preparing for this week's unveiling before the nation.


On Wall St., New Stress on Morality
The Salomon Brothers scandal has sent tremors along Wall Street, as firms rush to clean house and distance themselves from employees who may have violated securities laws.
Investment bankers, traders and analysts say some firms are overreacting as they try to make sure they are not hit by the kinds of troubles that have engulfed Salomon.


Ocean Spray and Napier Try to Tinker With Success
WHEN it comes to a long-running, successful advertising campaign, how long is too long?
And if an agency and its client decide that it is, indeed, time to shift a campaign, what do they do for an encore?
Two consumer-product companies are answering those questions in ways that suggest that the main reason to change advertising is to respond to changed markets and consumers.
One is Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc., which has decided, along with its agency, Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece, to end after two and a half years an attention-getting television campaign featuring the singer Bobby McFerrin crooning about how Ocean Spray cranberry drinks are "music to your mouth."


In Thomas Hearing Room, Spirits of Hearings Past
As the Senate Judiciary Committee began its exploration today of Judge Clarence Thomas's fitness to serve on the Supreme Court, the ghost of Robert H. Bork hung as heavily as the ornate chandeliers in the recently refurbished Senate caucus room.
With Republicans still smarting over Judge Bork's failed nomination in 1987, and many Democrats still relishing his defeat, comparisons to his appearances in the same room were inevitable.


Brooklyn Man Seized In Possession of Guns
A 55-year-old New York City Transit Authority maintenance employee was arrested last night and charged with illegal possession of 42 rifles and handguns that were found by firefighters in his Brooklyn apartment yesterday, the police said.
The suspect, Stephen Katz, was picked up by the police around 6 P.M. in front of his apartment at 1622 Ocean Avenue in the Flatbush section.


Interest Rates Are Little Changed
Interest rates were little changed yesterday, as traders waited for some sign that the Federal Reserve would ease monetary policy and encourage lower interest rates.
Although the overnight rate for bank loans in the Federal funds market slipped below 5 1/2 percent, its recent level during the afternoon, there was no signal from the Fed that it would supply the extra funds that would bring the overnight rate down on a sustained basis.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Department of Defense is quietly proposing strict controls on the export of inexpensive but powerful computer work stations that can have military uses, in an attempt to protect a U.S. edge in technology demonstrated in the Persian Gulf.  [ Page D1. ]
A minister in the transitional Soviet Government has endorsed Japan's claim to Soviet-held islands, heightening speculation that a deal may be possible in return for Japanese aid.  [ A1. ]
The U.S. posted its first back-to-back trade surpluses since 1982, helped by record foreign sales and payments by allies.  [ D7. ]
Argentina has regained enough credibility among investors to issue $300 million of new bonds.  [ D14. ]
The second day of a nationwide strike of Federal workers continued to make life miserable for millions of Canadians.  [ A5. ] The Economy
The F.D.I.C. reported the weakest second-quarter earnings for the nation's banking industry since 1987.  [ D1. ]
The Administration issued rules to eliminate what it called a "scam" by states to extract U.S. money for Medicaid.  [ A1. ]
The Government's most important food consumption survey is probably useless, a scientific panel and the G.A.O. say.
Both the Agriculture Department and the company that did the work, National Analysts, were faulted.
Eating Well.  [ C1. ]
Big changes are coming in checking account statements as banks try to convince Americans that they do not need to get back all of the checks they write.  [ D1. ]
The City of Los Angeles is helping to underwrite development of an electric car and expects to reap royalties from sales.  [ A16. ] Markets
Salomon's former head of securities trading was paid more than $11 million in the last three years, the firm disclosed.
Paul Mozer's earnings have been at the center of Wall Street rumors since the Treasury scandal broke.  [ D1. ]  Profits of Salomon's government-bond trading business have fallen about 20 percent in the last month, the new head of the trading desk said.  [ D3. ]
The Salomon scandal has sent tremors along Wall Street, as firms rush to clean house and distance themselves from employees who may have violated securities laws.  [ D1. ]  Lawmakers signaled their intentions to put off any immediate regulatory overhaul.  [ D2. ]
Stock prices fell sharply in light trading, with the Dow industrials down 24.60, to 2,982.56.  [ D1. ]
Interest rates changed little as credit market participants waited for signs that the Fed would ease monetary policy.  [ D14. ]  C.D. and money market yields continued to decline.  [ D6. ]
The specter of Soviet republics raising cash by selling gold sent futures prices for gold into a decline.  [ D15. ]  The dollar was mixed against leading foreign currencies.  [ D15. ] Companies
Nutrasweet plans to open a fitness center for people who are at least 50 years old.  [ D4. ]
The new president of Meredith's Magazine Group will be William Kerr, who has been president of the Magazine Group of The New York Times Company.  [ D4. ] Today's Columns
Emerging Soviet republics seem determined to abandon the ruble, a move that most economists consider the height of nationalist vanity.
But the fiscal anchor of a single currency can also be a burden.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
It is hard to match the asbestos-abatement business for persistent financial bloodshed.
The closest thing to a winner has been the Brand Companies.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]
When it comes to a long-running campaign, how long is too long?
Two consumer-product companies have found their own answers.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D16. ]


Poetry Series at the Y
Alice Walker, who won a Pulitzer Prize for her novel "The Color Purple," is to open the 53d season of the 92d Street Y's Poetry Center on Oct. 7 at 8 P.M.
Ms.
Walker is to read from her new book of poems, "Her Blue Body Everything We Know," and other works.
She will be followed by the poet Adrienne Rich on Oct. 14, the Canadian writer Mordecai Richler on Oct. 21, and the novelists A. S. Byatt and Diane Johnson on Oct. 28.
All readings begin at 8 P.M.
Tickets for Ms.
Walker's reading, at $12, and for the other three October readings, at $8, are available at the Y box office, 1395 Lexington Avenue, or by calling (212) 996-1100.


Southwest Cafes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 19


Schourek Gives Mets What They Needed Most
Hope returned to the Mets yesterday in the form of what they suddenly appear to need most, a healthy young power pitcher who can make them unbeatable for a day.
The odds were certainly in the slumping Mets' favor.
The opponent was the last-place Montreal Expos and the stakes were nothing more than to avoid sliding closer to the cellar themselves.
A one-hit, 9-0 shutout from rookie left-hander Pete Schourek was still a useful mouthwash to soften the bitter aftertaste of the surgery on Dwight Gooden and Sid Fernandez last week, adding to the likelihood that Frank Viola will soon go elsewhere as a free agent.


Yields on C.D.'s and Funds Continue to Drop at Banks
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts continued to decline for the week ended yesterday, aacording to The Bank Rate Monitor, the North Palm Beach, Fla., publication that focuses on interest rates.
Robert K. Heady, publisher, said he expected rates to fall further.


Europeans Are Unable to Pacify a Croatian City
It was supposed to be the day the European Community brought peace to Osijek.
But Serbian guerrillas fired 120-millimeter mortars into the city's square, killing a woman and wounding other people.
Then a Yugoslav officer arriving to represent the army in cease-fire arbitration was nearly lynched by an angry local crowd.
Finally, Croatian militiamen fired artillery back at the Serbs.


Arab Societies, Not Koran, Decreed Veil
To the Editor:
"The Veiled Look: It's Enforced With a Vengeance" (Gaza Journal, Aug. 22) speaks of the covering of women's heads "as decreed by the Koran." It is not decreed in the Koran.
The pertinent 24th Sura first calls on men to be modest and then adjures "believing women . . . to be modest and to display of their adornment only that which is apparent, and to draw their veils over their bosoms. . . ." No explicit reference is made to covering head, hair or face.
The article itself states that until recently few women in Gaza covered their heads.


Bridge
For a good player who owns a computer, either a PC or a Macintosh, a remarkable new product is now available.
It is BASEIII, which has already been enthusiastically adopted by numerous experts, including the world champions Bob Hamman and Eric Rodwell.
The program, with full documentation, costs $199.
It can be ordered from its creator: Fred Gitelman, 40A Hillsdale Avenue East, Toronto, Ontario, M4S 1T5.
Last month Gitelman was a runner-up, representing Canada, in the World Junior Team Championships in Ann Arbor, Mich.


Kenya Doesn't Have Monopoly on Violence
To the Editor:
Maini Kiai seems to be out of touch with reality ("Kenya Teaches Its Citizens Lawlessness," letter Aug. 12).
What government in the world does not respect force?
Governments have armies, police, commanders in chief and military guards of honor.
This is not violent?


Italian Soccer: Where Titans and Egos Tread
When a big-name auto tycoon jousts in public with a renowned movie and stage director, and talk of free speech mingles with intimations of violence, what else could be stirring but the Italian soccer season?
In a land that lists among its attributes passion, style and the acquisition of money, soccer provides a synthesis of all three -- the impassioned roar of the fans; the ballet of boot and braggadocio, and increasingly, the purchase, resale, gain and loss of players whose reputations are matched only by their staggering salaries.
Between them, over the last few years, Silvio Berlusconi, a television and publishing magnate who owns the A. C. Milan team, and Gianni Agnelli, the head of Fiat and owner of Juventus of Turin, have spent a reported $69 million on new talent to bolster teams whose fortunes -- and team jerseys -- help advertise their bosses' other enterprises.
It is the complete synergy of sports and salesmanship.


Make It Easier for New York Voters to Participate in Primaries
To the Editor:
The New York State Legislature should reform the election law to make it easier for voters to participate in primary elections.
This year the primary election will be held on Thursday, Sept. 12.
Enrolled Democrats, Republicans, Conservatives and Liberals will have the chance to choose the candidate of their preferred political party to represent them in the November elections.
Under present law, people who recently moved into their homes can join a party within 30 days of the primary contest (even if the voter moved across the street) and be eligible to vote in the primary.


JG Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


With Tearful Nod to a Tired Aide, Dinkins Puts Off a Trip to Africa
What was planned as a triumphal pilgrimage to his roots has turned into disappointment for Mayor David N. Dinkins.
He announced yesterday that he would postpone his scheduled trip to South Africa because his chief aide had been too busy with turmoil in New York to raise the needed money.
His eyes welling with tears, Mr.
Dinkins paused repeatedly at a City Hall news conference to compose himself as he praised the aide, Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch, for his efforts to calm the recent racial tension in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
That tireless work, the Mayor said, left Mr.
Lynch unable to raise the $400,000 to $500,000 in private contributions needed for the trip in time for the planned departure on Monday.
"We intend to go," Mr. Dinkins said. "We just can't go now."  Difficult Moment
The scene in the Blue Room was an excruciating political moment for the Mayor.
That he was forced to defer yet another of his dreams as the city's first black mayor crystallized just how alone he sometimes is, and how dependent on Mr.
Lynch.
It also echoed the organizational and fiscal problems that have plagued his administration, even as his plans for going had drawn criticism from some New Yorkers who said he had enough problems in his own backyard.


Perfectdata Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Soviets Triumph; Americans Place 5th
There might be uncertainty at home, with all the political and economic upheaval.
But here at the world championships of gymnastics tonight, all was calm and orderly for the men of the Soviet Union.
For the fourth consecutive time the event has been held and the sixth in the last seven since 1979, the Soviet athletes proved themselves the best among 30 countries as they won the team competition and led 12 countries automatic qualifying for the 1992 Barcelona Olympics.


Beach Medical Waste: Debris but No Panic
It began as a simple incident: a few syringes washing up on a beach in July 1988.
But it developed into the big environmental scare of the summer, closing New York and New Jersey beaches and costing the states about $1.5 billion in revenue.
To the public, it seemed that the beaches were being overrun by bushels of medical waste, possibly contaminated with AIDS, that had been dumped at sea by less-than-scrupulous hospitals and disposal companies.
But the reality was different, health and environmental officials say.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Board Picks President
ROBERT G. MAXWELL of Hauppauge, L.I., yesterday was named president of the American Kennel Club, dogdom's ruling body, by the board at its meeting in the Waldorf-Astoria.
Maxwell has been serving as chief operating officer and executive vice president of the organization for the last 18 months when KENNETH MARDEN was not reappointed president by the board.


Ames Department Stores Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to July 27


Michigan Tries to Look Ahead
Miles from the mobs at Michigan Stadium, weeks and months removed from the autumn Saturdays that define his college experience, the disappointments followed Erick Anderson through his summer.
He is a senior linebacker, the first Michigan player to lead the Wolverines in tackles for three consecutive seasons.
Anderson is likely to follow his grandfather and father into professional football.
But even while fishing for catfish and bass on the Huron River, Anderson found his mind drifting back to that Saturday night last September at Notre Dame Stadium.


Salomon Trader in Scandal: 10 Million Pay in 3 Years
The former head of Salomon Brothers' Government securities trading desk, whom the firm has blamed for ordering the illegal trades that have shaken the firm, was paid more than $11 million in the last three years, Salomon disclosed yesterday.
The trader, Paul W. Mozer, saw his compensation climb rapidly in that time, and received $4.75 million in 1990 alone, the firm said in a letter to Representative Edward J. Markey, the Massachusetts Democrat who has held hearings on the scandal.


Food Notes
Queries on Olive Oil
The International Olive Oil Council, a trade group, has started a telephone service to answer questions about olive oil.
Information about cooking, storage, diet and health is available Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., at (800) 232-6548.
Marketplace Tastings
The sixth annual Marketplace Tastings sponsored by the American Institute of Wine and Food will be held Sept. 21 at Bridgewaters in the Fulton Market building in the South Street Seaport.
Fruit and vegetable growers and seafood distributors will be on hand, along with producers of meats, game, poultry, cheeses, breads and wines, to offer samplings and comparative tastings.
There will be an oyster shucking contest, and chefs will conduct cooking demonstrations.
Admission is $15 for members of the institute, $20 for nonmembers.
Children under 12 are admitted free.
Tickets can be reserved in advance and will be sold at the door.
For information: (212) 447-0456.
Members of the institute will be admitted starting at 11:30 A.M., and nonmembers starting at noon.
The event runs until 5 P.M.
A series of hourlong cooking classes will be held during the event starting at 12:30 P.M.
These will be conducted by Tom Colicchio of Mondrian, Waldy Malouf of the Hudson River Club, George Germon and Johanne Killeen of Lucky's and Al Forno in Providence and Sarabeth Levine of Sarabeth's Kitchen.
Separate tickets ($10 for members of the institute, $15 for nonmembers) are required for the cooking classes.
On Improving School Food
The Center for Science in the Public Interest has published a booklet, "Organizing for Better School Food," for parents and others who want to improve the menu in public and private schools.
The booklet tells how to evaluate a school's food, how to organize a campaign to reduce the amount of fat and sugar in cafeteria food and how to improve the quality of food sold in vending machines.
It also explains the national school lunch program so that parents can learn how to work within the system.
And it describes how committees of parents helped improve the food in some school districts around the country.
The book is $7 including postage from the center, 1875 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 300, Washington, D.C. 20009.
Wine Tasting and Auction
On Saturday the Anderson School in Staatsburg-on-Hudson, which has programs for children and teen-agers with severe emotional problems, is holding a fund-raising wine tasting and auction from 4 to 8 P.M.
The auction, which includes prizes like rare wines, trips to California and London and dinners in restaurants in the Hudson Valley, will start at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets are $35.
Light food will be served.
To reserve tickets, call (914) 889-4034 or (800) 322-3735.
The school is on Route 9 just north of Hyde Park, N.Y., about 75 miles from New York City.
Courses at New School
The hundred or so courses in food and wine at the New School, 66 West 12th Street, cover a wide range of interests this semester.
One course offered includes a tour of the Fulton Fish Market and a cooking class Sept. 19 led by Bruce Beck, the author of "The Official Fulton Fish Market Cookbook" (E. P. Dutton, 1989).
The tour starts at 6:15 A.M., followed by a class in preparing fish purchased at the market.
The cost is $85 plus $20 for materials.
A workshop in preparing Thanksgiving dinner is scheduled for Nov. 23 from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The class will be repeated Nov. 24.
A class in preparing a kosher Thanksgiving dinner will be held Nov. 17, also from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The teaching kitchen for this class is not kosher.
The fee for these courses is $60 plus $20 for materials.
New York wine strategies is the topic of a class to be held Oct. 8 from 7:45 to 9:45 P.M.
The course includes a critical survey of wine shops in the city, how to set up a wine cellar, advice about joining wine clubs and how to run a wine tasting.
The fee is $10.
Classes meet at the New School or at the Culinary Center of New York, 100 Greenwich Avenue (12th Street).
To register, call (212) 229-5690.
For more information, call (212) 255-4141, 2 to 5 P.M.
Tasting Long Island Wines
There will be a tasting of Long Island wines on Sept. 21 to benefit the museums of Stony Brook in Stony Brook, L.I.
The tasting will be held from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M. in the Dorothy and Ward Melville carriage house at the museums on Route 25A.
Hors d'oeuvres will be prepared by the Country House Restaurant in Stony Brook, and there will be music by the Long Island Brass Guild.
Tickets are $27.50 and can be reserved by calling (516) 751-0066.  SPICE AND MORE SPICE
THE trend toward spicy food continues unabated.
The American Spice Trade Association reports that in 1990 consumption of seasonings set another record, almost 795.5 million pounds.
This is an increase of about 50 million pounds over 1989.
Along with a general interest in spicier foods, especially Mexican and Cajun prepared and fast foods, the association attributes the increase to the use of seasonings to compensate for a decrease in salt use and to the plethora of spicy products in supermarkets.
The largest increase, 22 million pounds, was in dehydrated onion and garlic, reflecting their use in prepared foods, snack foods and fast foods.
Further evidence of the emphasis on prepared foods is the shift in spicy foods from retail to wholesale.
In 1975, 60 percent of spice sales were at the retail level, and now it's only 40 percent.
The pepper category showed the second-largest increase, gaining 17.3 million pounds.
Of this, 14 million pounds was for hot red pepper, the rest for black and white.


Reflectone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; Surrogate Democracy
In theory, voters are supposed to choose the successor to Louis Laurino, who stepped down last month from the powerful post of Queens County Surrogate.
But with millions of dollars of court patronage at stake, the Queens Democratic organization isn't taking any chances.
Presiding over the probating of wills and estates, the Surrogate has the power to award lucrative fees to lawyers acting as conservators, guardians and trustees.
Mr.
Laurino, not known for his ethical sensitivity, made his resignation effective Aug. 3 -- just past the deadline for filing petitions for tomorrow's primary election.


Amplicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Educating Young Mr. Rosenfeld


Mattingly Has a Secret He Won't Share
Don Mattingly said before the game tonight with the Orioles that he had decided whether he would request a trade from the Yankees after the season, but he refused to divulge what his choice is.
Mattingly, who made a startling revelation during the haircut fiasco last month by announcing he had asked the Yankees to consider trading him in June, does not want to disclose his feelings until the season is over.


United Medicorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. LEADER VOICES HOPE ON HOSTAGES
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations arrived here tonight saying that "some progress" had been made in the negotiations to free the remaining 10 Western hostages in Lebanon.
Officials traveling with the Secretary General said privately that the situation was at a critical juncture.
Mr.
Perez de Cuellar's emissary on the hostage negotiations, Giandomenico Picco, did not arrive here as expected with the Secretary General and was said by officials to have been dispatched on another secret mission related to the hostage negotiations.
Mr.
Picco has been working to negotiate the release of Arab prisoners held by Israel to be followed by the release of more Western hostages, United Nations officials said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Colorado Housing and Finance Authority offered $110.4 million worth of single-family housing revenue refunding bonds at par with maturities from 1993 to 2031, through First Boston Corp.
The longest-term bond yields 7.2 percent.
The issue was rated Aa by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Former Agent Gets 5 Years For Selling Drugs He Seized
One of three former agents who accumulated more than $3 million through an international network of drug sales and money laundering while working for the Drug Enforcement Administration has been sentenced to five years in prison.
The 48-year-old defendant, Wayne Countryman, was sentenced Monday by Federal District Judge Terry J. Hatter Jr. after a Government prosecutor had praised Mr.
Countryman's "early and valuable cooperation" with investigators who broke the case.
Cooperated With Government
From 1982 to 1985, Mr.
Countryman and the two other former agents, Darnell Garcia and John Jackson, operated a multimillion-dollar ring in the Los Angeles area by stealing money, cocaine and heroin from drug dealers and from the agency itself, and then trafficking in the drugs, the court was told in hearings that lasted more than 18 months.


Soviet Aide Sees Islands' Return To the Japanese
A leading minister in the new transitional Soviet Government has endorsed Japan's claim to several Soviet-held islands in the Kurile chain, heightening speculation that a deal might be possible in return for Japanse economic ad.
Grigory A. Yavlinsky, vice chairman of the Soviet State Council's economic management committee, said the islands, seized by the Soviet Union at the end of World War II, seemed to properly belong to Japan under the terms of a treaty signed in 1855.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a New York Times/CBS News Poll on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court attributed an abortion position to him incorrectly in some copies.
As was noted elsewhere in the article, Judge Thomas has not publicly stated any position on abortion.


Quotation of the Day
"We did have somebody pawn a python named Sylvia. We had to keep it away from the jewelry area." -- Mike O'Neill, a Fort Lauderdale pawnbroker.  [ C9:2. ]


Detroit &amp; Canada Tunnel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Plan Is Devised to Rehire 257 Dallas Teachers
In an effort to stem tumultuous debate and several days of protests about teacher layoffs, the Dallas school superintendent has stitched together a plan to rehire all 257 teachers laid off because of a severe budget shortage.
The plan, presented tonight to the school board by Marvin Edwards, the superintendent of the Dallas Independent School District, calls for 127 teachers to be restored to their jobs, with another 32 to fill spaces left vacant by attrition and another 30 to fill slots created by dismissals.


Polling Hours On Primary Day
Polls for New York City Council primary elections will be open tomorrow from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Voters can learn the address of their polling site by dialing VOTE NYC in their area code.
In Connecticut, the polls for municipal primaries in 16 towns will be open from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Schools and government offices will remain open in both states, and regular parking rules will be in effect.


Make It Easier for New York Voters to Participate in Primaries; A Better Reflection
To the Editor:
"The 'Golden Age' of the City Council" (The Week in Review, Aug. 11) reminds us there is an electoral system that reflects New York City voter preferences without the contortions of the 1991 district line-drawing.
That is proportional representation.


Quick Fixes Won't Solve Toxic-Waste Problem; Circle of Contamination
To the Editor:
"Military Has New Strategic Goal in Cleanup of Vast Toxic Waste" (Military-Industrial Upheaval series, front page, Aug. 5) reports that many of the private companies pursuing the estimated $400 billion in defenseinstallation toxic-waste cleanup programs are the very same contractors that are responsible for the contamination of these military installations.


Westmin Resources Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
In a sign that Argentina has regained credibility among investors, the country has issued $300 million worth of new bonds though a group of banks and securities firms led by J. P. Morgan Securities.
Argentina had stopped making interest payments on its long-term bank loans in 1988, and last year it began making only partial interest payments.
The success of the new issue, which was increased to $300 million, from $100 million, because of strong demand, was a sign that investors worldwide were more impressed with the recent efforts by Argentina to restucture its economy than with its failure to make payments on $20 billion of outstanding medium- and long-term loans.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY U.S. Moves to Semifinal
Pat LaFontaine's goal with 2 minutes 33 seconds remaining gave the United States a 4-3 victory over Finland Monday night in Chicago and a second-place finish in the round-robin portion of the Canada Cup.
The Americans finished 4-1-0 for 8 points, their best showing ever in the six-team tournament.
Canada, which tied the Soviet Union, 3-3, on Monday to go 3-0-2 for 8 points, finished first because it beat the United States, 6-3, in their head-to-head meeting.


Mobile America Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Keep the Cuffs on Iraq
Saddam Hussein would like to be free of international economic sanctions.
But he isn't willing to meet the world's stated terms for lifting them: full compliance with the final United Nations cease-fire resolution.
Instead the Iraqi dictator has tried to con world opinion by manipulating the hunger of millions of innocent Iraqi civilians.
The Security Council is obliged to address this very real human need.
But it is also obliged to insist that Baghdad comply with the cease-fire resolution's arms control requirements and stop intimidating neighboring states and domestic dissidents.


Wiltek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Morgan's Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 13


Signal Apparel Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


People
*
Lintas New York has divided its broadcast production department into two divisions.
Stan Noble, senior vice president, has been promoted to senior executive producer, from executive producer, and will be in charge of the division that creates advertising.
Cathy Pitegoff, senior vice president, has been named manager of broadcast services, in charge of the new support services and business operations division. *
Nicholas Pisacane, a senior vice president, has been promoted to group creative director at McCann-Erickson New York, from associate creative director, and Matthew Lester has been promoted to senior vice president and group creative director, from vice president and associate creative director.


Underground Sound
To a New Yorker who experienced "Besame Mucho" on sax, "The Girl From Ipanema" on keyboard and a series of drum rolls on two upended buckets on a recent subway trip between Times Square and 59th and Lexington, the news that the Transit Authority is contemplating music in the subways was amazing.
"Geez," the New Yorker said.
"Who needs it?"
It's not, after all, as if there weren't a lot of music in the subways already.
There are the street musicians.
There is the Ivesian dissonance of the subway cars as they screech to a stop.
There is, above all, the new-age squawk of the loudspeakers in stations and cars as they retail their unintelligible messages.


Fahrelnissa Zeid Dies; Abstract Painter, 89
Princess Fahrelnissa Zeid, great-aunt of King Hussein of Jordan and an artist best known as an abstract painter of the Paris School in the 1950's and 60's, died on Thursday after a short illness.
She was 89 years old.
During an artistic career that spanned more than 60 years, the princess blended elements of Islamic and Byzantine art with abstract and other influences from the West.
She had exhibitions in major galleries in Paris, London and New York City.


Books of The Times; Expatriates in Romantic Paris, Engage and at Risk
The Translator  By Ward Just  313 pages. A Richard Todd Book/Houghton Mifflin. $21.95.


Waterbury Journal; An 'Inspirational' Ice Cream Factory
It's not easy to feel good about yourself when you've traveled dozens of miles out of your way to gorge yourself on ice cream.
But at the Ben &amp; Jerry's factory here, even overindulgence has the virtue of being politically correct.
As you enter the factory, you are informed that half of the $1 admission fee is donated to deserving community groups.
As you leave, you are asked to deposit your plastic spoon in a recycling bin.
At each stop in the tour you are reminded that Ben &amp; Jerry's is no ordinary corporate venture.
It is a "company that cares."


Heinz (H.J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Major U.S. Survey on Food Use and Pesticides Is Drawing Fire
The Federal Government's most important food consumption survey, which is instrumental in setting such Government policies as the school lunch program and calculating the tolerance level for pesticide residues in food, is so flawed it is probably useless, according to a scientific panel and the General Accounting Office.
That agency, an investigative arm of Congress, faults both the Department of Agriculture, which conducts the National Food Consumption Survey once a decade, and the company that did the work, National Analysts, a marketing concern, for mishandling the 1987-88 survey, which cost $7.6 million.


Economic Scene; Currency Muddle: Less Is More?
THE ruble, coin of the realm that Lenin and Stalin built, may be about to deconstruct with the rest of their empire.
Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia and the Ukraine are all reportedly determined to have their own currencies.
And Stanislav Shatalin, the leader of an informal committee that is brokering ground rules for a new Soviet economic confederation, seemed resigned last week to similar declarations of monetary independence by the other republics.


INSIDE
Staten Island Ferry Fire Laid to Homeless Loiterers
Carelessness by homeless people -- a match or a crack pipe left to smolder among debris -- apparently caused the fire at the Staten Island Ferry Terminal in Manhattan, a fire official said.
Crack vials were reportedly found on the upper floor.
Page B1.
A Warning on Nationalism
At its opening session in Moscow, an East-West conference on human rights agreed that the biggest threat to civil liberties was not Communism, but unbridled nationalism.
Page A10.
Computer Exports at Issue
The Department of Defense is quietly proposing strict new export curbs on computer work stations costing as little as $20,000 that can have military uses.
The industry is upset.
Page D1.
Nutrition Data in Doubt
A food-consumption survey instrumental in setting many Federal nutrition policies has been found seriously flawed.
Eating Well, page C1.
New Faces in Pawnshops
The number of pawnshops has shot up, and many of the new customers are middle-class victims of the recession.
The Living Section, page C1.


Seaport Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-15
Japan's claim to the Kurile Islands was endorsed by a leading minister in the new transitional Soviet Government, heightening speculation that a deal might be possible for them in return for economic aid.
Page A1
Japan finds signs of hope for solution of island dispute A11


Mr. Rooter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Carrington Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dollar Is Mixed as Traders Await Reports on Inflation
The dollar was mixed against leading foreign currencies yesterday in a slow session as most traders and analysts awaited the inflation reports due later in the week.
Many traders said the Federal Reserve would refrain from an expected cut in interest rates at least until tomorrow's release of the producer-price report for August.


Polling Hours For Primary
Polls for the New York City Council primary elections will be open today from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Voters can learn the address of their polling site by dialing VOTE-NYC in their area code.
Polls in Westchester County will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. for the mayoral races in Yonkers and Mount Vernon, the Common Council election in White Plains, and the local elections in the towns of Greenburgh, Cortlandt, Somer and Mount Pleasant.
Polls will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. for the county executive primaries in Suffolk County.


What Judge Thomas's Qualified Rating Means; The Souper's Pot
To the Editor:
Just outside my mother-in-law's village near Ballyferriter, Ireland, stands a generations-old iron caldron known locally as the souper's pot.
Unused since 19th-century famine days, the souper's pot recalls a religious test once given to the Roman Catholic Irish who lined up for whatever meager nutrition might be offered by the occupying foreign government.
Hungry people might be prompted to deny their religion, renounce papal authority or read a passage from an anti-Catholic tract for a bowl of soup.
If they refused, they went hungry again that day.


Masur Reaches for the High Notes
Orchestras like to think of their histories in terms of eras, each era defined not so much by occurrences in the outside world as by the tenures of their music directors.
For the New York Philharmonic, the Zubin Mehta era came to an end last May, and with last night's performance -- the opening concert of its 150th season, and the orchestra's 11,738th concert all told -- the Kurt Masur era began.
As gala concerts go, the Philharmonic opted for a dignified approach rather than a glitzy one.
On the other hand, it did its best to see that the event received the attention that the start of a new era deserves.
Above the Lincoln Center plaza facing Broadway flew one huge banner with a bright red M, announcing Mr.
Masur's ascent to the Philharmonic podium, and another celebrating the orchestra itself as "107 Great Musicians, OneBrilliant Instrument."


Fenner Convicted of Drunken Driving
DERRICK FENNER, the Seattle Seahawks' starting tailback, was convicted on Tuesday of driving while intoxicated.
The decision came one week after CHICK HARRIS, an assistant coach, was found guilty of negligent driving.
Defensive end JACOB GREEN faces a drunken-driving charge this month.


The Cuban-Soviet Connection: 31-Year Irritant to the U.S.
The announcement that the Soviet Union intends to pull its military contingent out of Cuba signals the removal of one of the thorniest vestiges of the cold war -- the presence of Soviet combat forces only 90 miles from the United States coast.
The military relationship that began 31 years ago between the Caribbean island republic and the Eurasian superpower was always an irritant to Washington and at times, including the 1962 crisis over Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, a flashpoint in East-West tensions.


William Polito, 55, a Consultant In Graphic and Interior Designing
William F. Polito, an interior designer, graphic design consultant and artist, died on Sept. 4 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 55 years old.
He died of AIDS, said a friend, Ron Smith.


Complaint Cites Fees Of Sea-Land
The Defense Department has filed a petition with the Federal Maritime Commission contending that a shipping company is overcharging it by as much as 100 percent for bringing military supplies back to the United States from the Middle East.
The department is also considering a lawsuit against the company, Sea-Land Service Inc., to reclaim what it believes are tens of millions of dollars in overcharges, said a Defense Department official who insisted on anonymity.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday about companies in the asbestos-removal business misstated the closing stock price for counter trading on Tuesday.
It was Advatex Associates Inc. in over-the-62.5 cents a share.


New Line By I.B.M. Is 'Open'
I.B.M. took a significiant step yesterday toward opening its product line so that it could work more closely with its competitors, announcing seven new mainframes and more than a hundred hardware add-ons and software programs.
The company also said that the powerful water-cooled mainframes that it announced a year ago would begin shipping next week.
It said these mainframes had top speeds 15 percent faster than I.B.M. had been projecting.


R.M. Engelbrecht, 68, Architect and Adviser
Robert Martin Engelbrecht, an architect and building consultant based in Princeton, N.J., died of injuries sustained in a car accident in central Florida on Friday.
He was 68 years old.
Mr.
Engelbrecht was known for his designs and construction techniques in the area of modular building systems.
The work that took him to Florida was part of a housing project being developed for Habitat for Humanity.


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(O) reports earnings for 12wks to Aug 17


Croatia Shuts Off Oil Pipeline to Serbia
As rebel Serbs supported by the army continued attacks on Croatia, the besieged republic struck back today with a previously unused weapon, shutting down the pipeline through Croatian territory that supplies Serbia with crude oil.
Deputy Prime Minister Branko Kostic of Serbia denounced the move as a "pirate-like action" and said two Serbian refineries, at Novi Sad and Pancevo, near Belgrade, where affected.
At a news conference in Belgrade, he said Serbia would raise the issue when a Yugoslav peace conference resumes in The Hague on Thursday.


Yankees Continue on Road to Nowhere
Both shots disappeared into the right-field seats after screaming and sailing through the night air at Memorial Stadium.
It was simple to pinpoint where each ball off a Baltimore bat was headed and just as easy to pinpoint the dejection of New York's Wade Taylor.
He probably felt like screaming, too.
In each instance, Taylor had a 1-2 count on the hitter with a runner on first base and each time his next pitch was turned into a quick home run.
Joe Orsulak and Sam Horn victimized Taylor with two-run homers tonight and the Orioles silenced the Yankees, 4-2.


AMSTERDAM PICKED FOR AIDS MEETING
The international AIDS meeting originally scheduled for Boston next year has been moved to Amsterdam in the wake of a furor over United States restrictions on foreign visitors, sponsors of the meeting said here today.
The Boston site of the meeting was canceled last month because of Bush Administration requirements that short-term visitors to the United States declare whether they are infected with the AIDS virus.
Groups representing people with AIDS threatened to disrupt the meeting to protest the policy, under which foreigners infected with the virus can be barred from the United States unless they get a waiver.


Barr Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Applied Solar Energy reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Calendar: Four Tours Of Architects' Homes
Tours Times Four
New Jersey Chapter of the American Society of Interior Designers; (201) 343-4900.
A series of tours featuring the houses of architects and interior designers will be held to benefit the society, the Jersey Battered Women's Services and the Community Resource Council of Bergen County.
The tours, which run from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., will be held in Morris and Somerset Counties on Sept. 26; Essex and Passaic Counties on Sept. 29; eastern Bergen County on Oct. 3 and western Bergen County on Oct. 6.
Tickets are $25 per tour or $75 for all four: send a stamped, self-addressed envelope and check payable to "A.S.I.D. Benefit House Tours 1991" to A.S.I.D.
Benefit House Tours, P.O.
Box 363, Morris Plains, N.J. 07950.
Auction for Children
Sotheby's, 1334 York Avenue (72d Street); (212) 759-0760.
An auction of photographs, paintings, drawings, prints and sculpture will be held at 7:30 P.M. on Sept. 19 to benefit the United States Committee for Unicef.
Tickets, $125.
An Austrian Architect
Avery Hall at Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street; (212) 854-3414.
An exhibition of photographs, drawings and models of works by the architect Lois Welzenbacher (1889-1955) starts on Monday and runs through Oct. 11.
Hours: 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Free.
International Appeal
Nippon Club Gallery, 145 West 57th Street; (212) 581-2223.
"Fabric Gardens," an exhibition of quilts, will be on display through Sept. 23.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 6 P.M Monday through Saturday.
Free.
A Robe as Canvas
Center for Tapestry Arts, 167 Spring Street (West Broadway); (212) 431-7500.
"Impressionistic Landscapes: Kimono Forms," featuring eight kimonos by Tim Harding, will be on display through Oct. 26.
Gallery hours: noon to 5 P.M.
Wednesday through Saturday.
Free.


Soviet Move Could Heighten Pressure for Change in Cuba
The Soviet decision to withdraw its troops from Cuba and end its economic subsidy of the Cuban economy constitutes a powerful shock to the morale of the island's Communist establishment and may intensify pressures for radical change, experts in Cuban affairs said today.
Since the tensest period of Soviet-American cold war jostling over Cuba in the 1960's, Soviet forces have played only a symbolic role in the defense of the island.
The Cuban armed forces are estimated to include 180,500 men and woman on active duty and 130,000 reserves out of a total population of more than 10 million.


COMPANY NEWS;
Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it would take a $75 million charge in the third quarter to remove debt from its balance sheet.
The beauty products company, based in New York, said the charge, to total $1.04 a share, was primarily to write down various notes and other securities received when Avon sold several health-care and other businesses in 1987 and 1988.


Dicon Systems reports earnings for Year to May 31


Senate Measure Clarifies Position On Notifying Parents in Abortions
The Senate today approved a proposal that would in many cases require clinics that receive Federal funds to notify the parents of minors seeking an abortion before the procedure is performed.
The 92-to-8 vote clarified an area the Senate had left murky earlier this year when it cast voice votes on the same day supporting measures calling for notification of parents and another that would allow the minor to notify any qualified adult.


Sports of The Times; Don't Blame Boxing For Tyson
GO ahead, call off the fight, ban boxing, stop people from brain-bashing.
But don't do it because of Mike Tyson.
Tyson should stand on his own in court, a man charged with the ugly crime of rape.
And boxing should stand on its own in public, a dangerous business with more decent people than ominous slobs like Tyson.


2 Men Shot and Killed After Relative's Wake
Two men attending the wake of a relative in Brooklyn were shot and killed last night after they were chased from the funeral home by other members of the family, the police said.
The incident began shortly after 6 P.M. at the McMillan Funeral Chapel at 1230 Bushwick Avenue in Bushwick.


12 Killed as South African Factions Vie for Power
The police said today that at least 12 more people had been killed in factional violence in South Africa, bringing the death toll in four days of fighting to nearly 100, the highest over such a short period in recent years.
The violence came within hours of a meeting late Tuesday night between Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, and President F. W. de Klerk.
No details were released other than a statement saying that the two men had made progress in areas of "mutual interest," including the release of political prisoners.


Johnson Resting After Treatment
Coach BOB JOHNSON of the Pittsburgh Penguins underwent radiation treatment yesterday for a second brain tumor.


BRIEFS
*
American Home Products Corp., New York, a maker of prescription drugs and other supplies, and Eisai Co.
Ltd., Tokyo, a pharmaceuticals company, have started a venture to sell and distribute pharmaceuticals and nutritional products in Japan. *
Concord Farms Inc., Concord, N.C., a duck producer that is owned by Cherry Valley Farms Ltd. of Britain, said it would close Oct. 11.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHEN their cousin needed some time to recover from an automobile accident this summer, Susan and Dave Rozakis offered to care for her 9-year-old daughter.
Their own 6-year-old daughter seemed excited about the upcoming visit.
"I expected my niece to have some problems fitting in, and my daughter to be fine," said Ms.
Rozakis, a civil engineer in San Carlos, Calif., a suburb of San Francisco.


Estrogen After Menopause Cuts Heart Attack Risk, Study Finds
A large-scale, 10-year study of nurses indicates that women who take the female hormone estrogen after menopause can cut their risk of heart disease almost in half.
Medical experts say the new findings should help answer a question that has troubled millions of middle-aged and elderly women: Are the benefits of estrogen worth the risks?
Besides its effect on heart disease, the drug averts thinning of the bones, a serious disease in the elderly.
But women have been concerned by evidence that taking estrogen can bring on cancers of the breast or lining of the uterus.


Shirley S. Katzenbach, Volunteer, 74, Is Dead
Shirley Steinman Katzenbach, a philanthropist and volunteer in several health and cultural institutions in New York City, died on Monday at St.
Luke's Roosevelt Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan and Waccabuc in Westchester County.
She died of a stroke, a spokeswoman for the family said.


A Chapter 11 Filing Is Set by Telesphere
Telesphere Communications Inc., which for weeks had resisted a liquidation of the company sought by angry creditors, said yesterday that it would seek protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code and that it had hired a new chief executive from a crisis-management company.
The telecommunications company also said it would stop providing "900-line" telephone services like "phone sex" and horoscopes, which once provided most of its revenues.
It said such services had "become increasingly unprofitable due to consumer dissatisfaction and the resulting difficulty in collecting bills."


Bank of Boston Signs Fed Accord
The Bank of Boston earlier this week signed an agreement with the Federal Reserve under which it agreed to improve its financial strength and not pay dividends without consent of the Fed.
"The agreement with the Fed is nothing but a formalization of the existing understandings we have with the Fed," said Constance Hubbel, a spokeswoman for the Bank of Boston.
She noted that in 1989 when loan problems at the bank began increasing, the company signed an agreement with the Comptroller of the Currency to improve lending procedures and maintain financial strength and agreed to a memo of understanding with the Fed.The latest Fed agreement comes as the bank remains troubled with bad loans.
But losses fell to $138.2 million in the first half of 1991 from a loss of $441.7 million in the last half of 1990.


U.S. Sets Rules to Cut Landfill Pollution
The Environmental Protection Agency today announced new national standards to prevent leakage from landfills into which Americans dump 135 million tons of trash and garbage each year.
The rules will affect nearly 6,000 municipal landfills across the country and will require at least half the states to make major changes to prevent contamination of soil and underground water supplies, agency officials said.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Dominion Bankshares Corp., Roanoke, Va., a bank holding company, named James E. Adams chief financial officer and executive vice president in charge of finance. *
First American Title Insurance Co. of New York, Garden City, L.I., a subsidiary of First American Financial Corp., named Robert G. Bannon president and chief executive.


National Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25


Proposal for Economic Union Offered
The separate republics of the crumpled Soviet nation were offered a draft treaty today for a new economic union rooted in free-market commitment to private property, a revived ruble and hoped-for restraint in the republics' search for independence.
The promised blueprint for a new economic union to resurrect this badly reeling nation was kept deliberately skimpy on details, apparently in order to make it more politically inviting for the Soviet republics, heady now with sovereignty, to choose to accept some common economic ground rules.


From a Sunny Window, A Winterful of Flavor
HERBS do not rank high on the list of exquisite houseplants.
And many are maddeningly temperamental when grown on sills indoors.
So why fuss and suffer when you could grow a flashy flower instead?
Because once you have harvested your own fresh crop, no desiccated store specimen will suffice.


Tyson Pleads Not Guilty to Rape Charge
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion who was indicted Monday on charges of raping a beauty pageant contestant, surrendered to authorities today and was freed after posting bail of $30,000.
Accompanied by Vincent Fuller, an attorney from Washington, and his local counsel, James Voyles, Tyson was arraigned this morning before Marion Superior Court Judge Patricia J. Gifford.


Look! There on the L.I.E.!
YOU'D never have guessed.
In July, the best-selling book at Urban Center Books in Manhattan, which design aficionados frequent, was "Transmission Towers on the Long Island Expressway: A Study of the Language of Form" (Princeton Architectural Press, 1991, $9.95), by Michele Bertomen.
Forty-two copies were sold.
The book, which includes beautiful drawings of the towers along the L.I.E., claims that the 19 towers deserve attention as an architectural form.
"In the past, towers symbolized God, transcendence, a singular point of view," said Ms.
Bertomen, an architect who lives in Brooklyn.
"Transmission towers represent diversity, a soup of electromagnetic radiation."
Ms.
Bertomen discovered the towers for herself in 1985, when she began teaching architecture at the New York Institute of Technology in


THOMAS UNDERGOES TOUGH QUESTIONING ON PAST REMARKS
Judge Clarence Thomas faced stiff questioning today in his second appearance before the Senate Judiciary Committee, with some Democratic Senators questioning whether he was tailoring his comments and repudiating his earlier writings and speeches to win a seat on the Supreme Court.
Senator Howell Heflin, an Alabama Democrat whose support to Judge Thomas's nomination is crucial, told the nominee he was concerned that "there appears to be a conflict between what you've said in the past and what you've told us here."


On the First Day of School, a Familiar Face Is a Welcome Sight


A Fill-In Pitcher Helps Mets Finally Stop Cubs
The announcement earlier in the week had been lost amid the numbing and nonstop medical updates that had so consumed the Mets.
For Wally Whitehurst, the lack of publicity didn't lessen the hurt.
Whitehurst, the organization's good soldier, had not been so great as a starter, and so he had lost his job, removed from the rotation for the remainder of the season.


Taster's Choice Couple Return in Commercials
The couple whose coy coffee commercials have charmed consumers is returning to television next week, amid plans for further installments in their relationship to unfold next year.
The pair, the actors Sharon Maughan and Anthony Head, have been featured in two television spots created by McCann-Erickson New York.
The spots, which tell a continuing story about the couple's flirtation over a jar of Taster's Choice instant coffee, are based on a similar series of ads in Britain for Nescafe Gold Blend, which, like Taster's Choice, is made by Nestle S.A.


Review/Television; Chasing Ratings, NBC Tries a Pair of Radio D.J.'s
Desperate to try anything as its audiences dwindle, commercial television has developed a curious yen for radio D.J.'s.
California's clean-cut Rick Dees was recruited to be a late-night talk-show host.
It didn't work.
New York's scruffy Howard Stern, a sort of walking testament to 1960's excess, was given an endearingly ratty showcase on local station WWOR.
That didn't work either, despite some memorable moments when Mr.
Stern descended upon a somewhat confused Bob Hope for an impromptu interview.
Now, squinting nervously at a brand new season, NBC has found Mark Thompson and Brian Phelps, two D.J.'s from Los Angeles.
Like the rest of their breed, Mark and Brian seem to be eternal man-boys, quite content to spend the greater part of their lives in a state of blissful post-adolescence.
Shucks, for most men these days, it's the American way.
Taking their cue from Walter Mitty, the two apparently irrepressible cutups will each week put themselves in extraordinary situations, things like white-water rafting or swinging on a circus trapeze.
In "The Adventures of Mark and Brian" -- Sundays at 7 P.M. -- the stars will, as they put it, get to do what they always "kinda wanted to do."


Americans in Running for Overall Titles
Four Americans -- MICHAEL JOHNSON, MIKE POWELL, RENALDO NEHEMIAH and SANDRA FARMER-PATRICK -- are contending for the overall titles in the I.A.A.F.
Mobil Grand Prix outdoor track and field circuit.
Two meets remain on the 19-meet schedule, the Van Damme Memorial in Brussels, tomorrow, and the Sept. 20 Grand Prix final in Barcelona, Spain.


Tyson Pleads Not Guilty to Rape Charge
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion who was indicted Monday on charges of raping a beauty pageant contestant, surrendered to authorities today and was freed after posting bail of $30,000.
Accompanied by Vincent Fuller, an attorney from Washington, and his local counsel, James Voyles, Tyson was arraigned this morning before Marion Superior Court Judge Patricia J. Gifford.


Freddie Mac Debt
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac, is offering $200 million in debentures that are due in 1998.
They were priced yesterday at par, to yield 7.85 percent, through the underwriting subsidiary of the First Tennessee National Corporation.
The price was about 32 basis points over the seven-year Treasury note, which has been trading around 7.53 percent.
The issue is noncallable for one year.


CHRONICLE
It was a one-two punch Tuesday evening for aficionados of book parties.
There were two simultaneous literary fetes, each with more or less the same cachet.
Uptown on Fifth Avenue in the home of ARTHUR L. LIMAN, the lawyer, and his wife, ELLEN LIMAN, crowds gathered for LUCINDA FRANKS, author of the new novel "Wild Apples." At the same time, downtown in the Police Building apartment of JASON EPSTEIN, editorial director of Random House, they congregated for KEN AULETTA and his "Three Blind Mice: How the TV Networks Lost Their Way."


Essay; The Kurds' Dilemma
Trust is a fragile but valuable asset in the conduct of foreign policy.
The degree to which the nearly free and the newly freed trust the word and the will of the United States directly affects the decisions they make about their own freedom.
Consider the Kurds and recall our commitment to their survival.


New York Council Primary: Minority Candidates' Big Day
As many as a dozen new black and Hispanic candidates are expected to win Democratic primaries for the New York City Council today in races that insure a profound change in the shape of the recently empowered legislature.
The candidates, whose victories in each case would be tantamount to victory in November in their heavily Democratic districts, would more than double the number of black and Hispanic members of the Council, which will expand from 35 to 51 seats in January as part of a two-year effort to increase minority representation.


Standard Brands Paint Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28


Soviet and U.S. Teams Go 1-2 in World Meet
The Soviet Union completed a sweep of the team titles of the world gymnastics championships tonight as its six women won the gold medal one night after the Soviet men did the same.
By scoring 396.055 points with a significant margin of victory of nearly 2 points, it was the second-consecutive title for the women and fifth in the last six tournaments since 1981, nearly matching the men's performance of four consecutive titles and six since 1979, when the current biennial schedule was begun.


Special Counsel Selected for U.S.O.C.
The United States Olympic Committee has appointed ARNOLD I. BURNS, a corporate and securities lawyer and a former Deputy Attorney General of the United States, as special counsel to the U.S.O.C., HARVEY W. SCHILLER, the executive director, announced yesterday.


Greenman Bros Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 3


Chip Maker Reports a Loss
The National Semiconductor Corporation today reported declining sales and a net loss for its first fiscal quarter, which ended Aug. 25.
National attributed the decline to softness in the personal computer and peripheral markets, as well as slow mainframe sales and said that it anticipated continued weakness in the market throughout 1991.
National's shares closed unchanged today on the New York Stock Exchange at $4.875.


Lidiya Ivanyushenko Wed in Moscow
Lidiya Vladlenovna Ivanyushenko, the daughter of Lieut.
Col. and Mrs.
Vladlen V. Ivanyushenko of Moscow, was married there yesterday in a civil ceremony to Randall Page Belknap, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norton Belknap of New York.
The couple, both 30 years old, work for the Soviet Pan Am Travel Effort in Moscow, she as a counselor and he as the manager for systems development.
The company is a travel service that helps emigrating Soviet citizens.
Mrs.
Belknap graduated from the Technological Institute of Light Industry in Moscow and from the Institute of Foreign Languages in Tashkent.
Her father is a retired Soviet Air Force officer.


SOVIET TURMOIL: Aid at Any Price; From Cuba to the Kuriles, the Soviets Hint at Deals for Much Needed Help
By offering to remove all Soviet troops from Cuba and hinting that four Kurile islands might after all be returned to Japan, Soviet and Russian leaders have, in effect, abandoned pride and begun begging for economic aid for their collapsing economies.
At the London summit meeting when they met to hear out President Mikhail S. Gorbachev last July, leaders of the seven most powerful capitalist countries concluded that until leaders in Moscow showed that they were willing to undo the Bolshevik revolution and institute a market economy, they should go slow and be cautious.


Stocks End Mixed as the Down Gains 4.47
The stock market ended with a rally yesterday and stock prices were mixed, as investors settled down to await the next round of economic data, beginning with today's release of the Producer Price Index for August.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 4.47, to end the day at 2,987.03, while the New York Stock Exchange composite index increased by 0.21, to 211.21.


Eaton Vance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Business and the Law; Suing Japanese In Patent Cases
BARRING an 11th-hour settlement, the latest in a series of bitter patent-infringement battles pitting American companies against Japanese manufacturers accused of stealing valuable inventions will move into court next week.
Honeywell Inc., the plaintiff in the current case, contends that it owns the technology used to focus the most popular 35-millimeter cameras automatically.
It will be asking a Federal jury in Newark to award it tens of millions of dollars in lost royalties -- and more than $500 million in punitive damages -- from the Minolta Camera Company.


For Two Xerox Officials, New Products Make a Point
The Xerox Corporation rolled out six products yesterday in splashy events held concurrently in New York and Cannes, France, making it a big day for many of the company's senior executives.
But two had a little extra on the line: Maurice Holmes, vice president in charge of color systems development for printers, and Gilbert Hatch, a chief engineer and Mr.
Holmes's counterpart in the copier group.
Xerox's tardiness in developing significant color products had been viewed by Wall Street as a sign of weakness in its competition with Japanese manufacturers and the Eastman Kodak Company.


Audio/Video Affiliates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


International Program For Visual Artists
The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund is starting a $3.1 million program to sponsor American visual artists in residencies worldwide.
In the three-year pilot program, which will be developed and administered by Arts International, a division of the Institute of International Education, artists will live and work in Latin America, Europe and Southeast Asia for three to six months and then share their experiences with communities in the United States.
The fund, which promotes the arts by encouraging interactions between artists and communities, provides annual grants totaling more than $20 million.
In the new program, 15 artists a year will receive an honorarium of $7,500 to $15,000, transportation and housing and studio space.
American community groups that are hosts for the artists' domestic residencies will receive grants of $2,000 to $20,000 for community activities related to the artists' international experience.


Sports of The Times; Don't Blame Boxing For Tyson
GO ahead, call off the fight, ban boxing, stop people from brain-bashing.
But don't do it because of Mike Tyson.
Tyson should stand on his own in court, a man charged with the ugly crime of rape.
And boxing should stand on its own in public, a dangerous business with more decent people than ominous slobs like Tyson.


Board Rejects 'Opt Out' Plan On Condoms
With the crowd hushed after long and vociferous debate, the New York City Board of Education's new president, H. Carl McCall, cast the deciding vote last night to defeat a resolution that would have given parents the right to exclude their children from the school system's plan to offer condoms to high school students.
"I believe the program ought to have a chance without being burdened with any new provisions," Mr.
McCall said at a 3 1/2-hour meeting in the board's meeting hall at 110 Livingston Street in Brooklyn.
"Therefore I vote no."


Tyson Pleads Not Guilty to Rape Charge
Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion who was indicted Monday on charges of raping a beauty pageant contestant, surrendered to authorities today and was freed after posting bail of $30,000.
Accompanied by Vincent Fuller, an attorney from Washington, and his local counsel, James Voyles, Tyson was arraigned this morning before Marion Superior Court Judge Patricia J. Gifford.


A Look for the 90's, To a Gregorian Beat
WELL, here it is almost two years into the Nineties, and the decorators are having quite a time finding a style that seems appropriate for the decade.
But not Craig Raywood. He is all set.


Houston-Bound Plane Crashes; 14 Die
A Continental Express twin-engine commuter plane flying to Houston crashed into a cornfield about 75 miles southwest of here today, killing all 14 people aboard.
The aircraft, an Embraer 120 Brasilia, is the same kind of plane that crashed April 5 near Brunswick, Ga., killing 23 people, including former Senator John G. Tower of Texas.


FOOTBALl; 29 Years Later, Giants Try Again
The last time the Giants won a football game in Chicago was in 1962.
The Bears made it close, 26-24, partly because their tight end, Mike Ditka, fell on a fumble in the Giants' end zone.
Since then, the teams have met five times in Chicago and the Bears have won every time.
Now, as the head coach, Ditka is preparing the Bears (2-0) to play the Giants (1-1) on Sunday at Soldier Field.


Money-Fund Yields Show Mixed Changes in Week
Yields of tax-free money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report rose in the week ended yesterday, while yields of taxable funds were mixed.
The average seven-day compound yield of tax-exempt funds was 4.20 percent in the week, while the simple yield was 4.12 percent.
Both yields were up 1 basis point, or hundredth of a point, from the week before.


Senate Backs Nationwide Data Linkup
The Senate unanimously passed a measure today that authorizes $1 billion over five years for development of a high-speed supercomputing network that would link Federal research centers, universities and corporations.
The measure, sponsored by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee, would pay for supercomputing programs at several agencies, led by the National Science Foundation and the National Air and Space Museum, and would finance development of the switching systems and software necessary to link the computers through high-speed information "highways."


Frederick Fox Is Dead; Set Designer Was 81
Frederick Fox, a scene designer for the stage, opera and television, died on Wednesday.
He was 81 years old and lived in Englewood, N.J.
He died after a stroke, said a statement by his firm, Frederick Fox Associates, of Englewood.


Quotation of the Day
"I would have given anything if I could have avoided what I've gone through this past year. Still, I have to face it. In the process, I'm going to work as hard as I can in an effort to try to preserve my good name." -- Clark M. Clifford.  [ D1:5. ]


Tulane Coach Gets a New Contract
The Tulane basketball coach, PERRY CLARK, agreed to a new contract that runs through the 1995-96 season.
Clark was the Metro Conference coach of the year last season after leading Tulane to a 15-13 record.
Terms of the contract were not disclosed.
Clark took over the program in 1989 when men's basketball was reinstated.
It had been suspended for four seasons because of a point-shaving scandal. (AP)


Israel Releases 51 Arab Prisoners; Hopes Rise for Lebanon Hostages
Taking a step that could prove pivotal for winning freedom for the remaining Western hostages in Lebanon, Israel released 51 Arab prisoners and turned over the bodies of 9 guerrillas today in return for word that an Israeli soldier long missing in Lebanon was dead.
In Beirut, a senior Shiite Muslim clergyman called on groups holding Western hostages to release more captives and said he expected results soon.


Bullet Is Shot Into a Synagogue in Crown Heights
A 9-millimeter bullet crashed through the window of an empty synagogue in Crown Heights in Brooklyn on Sunday night, hours before the start of services on the eve of Rosh ha-Shanah.
Lieut.
Vincent Ferrara, a detective in the 71st Precinct, said the police did not consider the shooting to be bias-related, because the synagogue had not been the prior target of threatening notes or graffiti.
He said the results of a continuing investigation could determine if the shooting was related to the recent violence in the area.


Decline Follows a 2-Decade Boom in Lower Manhattan
After one of the most sweeping urban revivals in the nation in the 1970's and 80's, the southern tip of Manhattan has sunk into an economic morass that has many business executives worried and has prompted a fresh round of study at City Hall.
The area, roughly a square mile of densely packed real estate below Chambers Street, underwent radical change that began with the completion of the World Trade Center in 1972.
It quickly became an example of how to mix housing with commercial buildings, and of how to open up a neglected waterfront for recreational use.
Towering Glass Structures
The mammoth development of the 1980's replaced old concrete and brick office buildings -- most of them built before 1930 -- with towering glass structures that dominate an area that was and remains the world's most powerful center for finance.
They housed offices, restaurants and nightlife and attracted a much more diverse variety of people to the area than the Wall Street workers who had made it their exclusive domain.


The Chinese Now Wish Deng Long Life; Flood Relief
To the Editor:
The devastating flood in China is desperately affecting the lives of more than 300 million people, more than the entire population of the United States.
A natural disaster of such magnitude needs a lot of help.
In Hong Kong, a concert raised more than $12 million, and so far more than $75 million has been raised, including single donations of as much as $6 million to a few dollars from children's piggy banks.
GEORGE K. WU Sunnyvale, Calif., Aug. 29, 1991


Review/Music; The Philharmonic Enters the Masur Era
New musical eras are often proclaimed with compositional polemics, breaks with tradition, revisionist or revolutionary fanfares.
But last night at Avery Fisher Hall, a new era was ushered in the most understated fashion.
After a two-year search rife with rumors of choices made and chances lost, and after more than a year of anticipation, Kurt Masur's debut as music director of the New York Philharmonic was a brief in favor of tradition, a declaration that a new musical era can sometimes be an old one.
A generation ago, this notion would have been scandalous.
In 1958, when Leonard Bernstein took over the Philharmonic and became the first American-trained, American-born music director of an American orchestra, the hope was for a brave new world; when the composer Pierre Boulez was brought in in 1969, the hope was to institutionalize new music, bringing it into the mainstream; when Zubin Mehta came in 1978, the hope was that there would be a explosion of charismatic podium-work, maestoso maestroing.
Now the hope, with Mr.
Masur, is that the tradition itself will simply return to its origins, with taste, solidity and good sense.
In interviews, Mr.
Masur has stated that his intentions include "a steadier musical life," and a "warm, human sound."


Sensormatic Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Writer Reveals the 'Dark Underside of Suburbia': Car Pools
MOTHERS in suburbia know the true meaning of September, and it has nothing to do with the changing colors of leaves or the migration of birds.
This is the time of year when a voice, bellowing across the country, issues a familiar command: "Ladies, start your engines."
There they sit, on the asphalt mommy track, with one hand grasping the wheel, the other poised to turn the key.
The gas tank is full, and it's time to hit the road.
The car pool season is here.


Clifford Defends Himself at B.C.C.I. Hearing


Hollywood Called Hypocritical by Actor Who Died of AIDS
The publication of an anguished indictment of the film industry as indifferent and hypocritical toward people with AIDS, written by the actor Brad Davis, who died of the disease on Sunday, has touched a raw nerve in a community that prides itself on openness and tolerance.
Mr.
Davis, who starred in "Midnight Express" and other films and plays, wrote his thoughts about Hollywood and AIDS as he drafted a proposal for a book to discuss the six years in which he carried the HIV virus.
Mr.
Davis kept his illness a secret from everyone but his wife, Susan Bluestein, a casting director, and a handful of friends, largely out of fear that it would shatter his career if Hollywood knew about it.


What Judge Thomas's Qualified Rating Means
To the Editor:
If the stakes weren't so high, perhaps the Bush Administration's response to the American Bar Association's evaluation of Judge Clarence Thomas might simply be amusing.
As you report (front page, Aug. 28), two of the 15 on the A.B.A. committee that evaluates judicial nominees rated Judge Thomas unqualified, at least one member did not vote, and the remaining members rated him qualified.
According to Marlin Fitzwater, White House spokesman, the Administration is "very pleased" with the A.B.A. evaluation and sees it as supporting the President's view that "Judge Thomas has excelled in everything he has attempted."


Pay TV Won't Drop Out Of Tyson-Holyfield Bout
Seth Abraham, the president of Time Warner Sports, knows that regardless of what he says about Mike Tyson's legal right to fight Evander Holyfield, TVKO will come off looking overly avaricious for continuing to participate in potentially the richest heavyweight fight ever.
The Nov. 8 bout, set for Time Warner's pay-for-view cable system, has been under criticism because of Tyson's indictment on a rape charge.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD Cason Wins Again
Andre Cason of the United States won a 100-meter race in 9.99 seconds to beat Dennis Mitchell, the world bronze medalist in the world championships last month, yesterday at an international track meet in Koblenz, Germany.
Cason, who beat Leroy Burrell, the world silver medalist, in Italy last week, became the seventh-fastest man in the 100 meters this year despite cool weather unfavorable for sprinting.
Mitchell was second in 10.23.
Michael Johnson, who won the 200 meters at the world championships in Tokyo and ran this year's fastest 400 meters, showed his versatility by taking third place in the 100 meters in Koblenz, also in 10.23, to make it an all-American medals sweep.
In the 400-meter hurdles, the world championship silver medalist, Winthrop Graham of Jamaica, held off Kriss Akabusi of Britain, who was third in Tokyo, to win in 48.99 seconds. (Reuters) TENNIS Novacek Is Upset
Unseeded Sandon Stolle of Australia beat top-seeded Karel Novacek of Czeckoslovakia, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4) yesterday in the second round of the $250,000 Philips Open tournament in Brasilia.
Novacek, ranked 10th in the world, had trouble with the fast surface as Stolle took the match by spraying baseline volleys across the court.
Earlier, 17-year-old Marcelo Saliola of Brazil, ranked 285th in the world, beat second-seeded Emilio Sanchez of Spain, 7-6 (7-5), 5-7, 6-2. (AP) Champion Gains: Fourth-seeded Thierry Champion of France beat Udo Riglewski of Germany, 6-1, 6-1, yesterday and reached the quarterfinals of the Bordeaux Open tournament. (AP)


People
*
Craig Gugel, 37, senior vice president at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, has been promoted to executive director of media research and technology, from media director. *
Tony Shor, senior vice president and director of broadcast operations at Ally &amp; Gargano, New York, has assumed the added responsibilities of creative-services business manager.


Owners Focus on Mariners' Future
The major league owners met here today to talk about business in general, but the health of the Seattle Mariners dominated discussion as the team continued to search for a way to save itself.
Jeff Smulyan, the owner of the Mariners, saying he was seeking a way to "finally end the death watch," reported on the state of the franchise during a meeting of the owners of American League franchises.


Accounts
*
Home Ltd., New York, a home-furnishings retailer, to Waring &amp; LaRosa, New York, for its flagship store, which opened yesterday in Chicago.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Hoechst-Roussel Pharmaceuticals, Somerville, N.J., to William Douglas McAdams Inc., New York, to advertise Mentane, a new treatment for Alzheimer's disease to be introduced in 1993.
Billings were not disclosed.


ABC Program on PBS
The Public Broadcasting Service will rebroadcast ABC News's "town meeting" interview with Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin tonight at 11.
The special, carried on ABC at 11:30 P.M. on Sept. 5, brought together Mr.
Gorbachev, the Soviet President, and Mr.
Yeltsin, the President of the Russian Republic, to answer questions from a cross-section of Americans in nine cities.


New Opponent Named for Holmes
ART CARD of Cleveland will pinch-hit for MARSHALL TILLMAN as the next opponent for the former heavyweight champion LARRY HOLMES on Tuesday in Orlando, Fla.


PHILIPPINES MOVING TO BAR U.S. BASES
The Philippine Senate opened debate today on a new American lease for the Subic Bay Naval Station and appeared ready to reject the pact and force an American withdrawal from Subic, the largest United States military base in Asia.
Opponents of the new treaty, which would allow the United States to remain at Subic for 10 more years, said the $203-million-a-year compensation package offered by the United States was insultingly low.


Finding Temporary Jobs for Designers and Such
DESIGN TEMPS INC. is a new Manhattan agency that specializes in placing architects, interior designers, product designers and graphic artists in temporary positions in the design industry.
It opened last month and is a spinoff of the Viscusi Group, an eight-year-old agency that finds permanent employment for designers.
"In the last year and a half, we saw that the design firms were in terrible shape, but we had an increase in calls for people to work on a per-project basis," said Stephen Viscusi, founder of the companies.
The database of the Viscusi Group lists 60,000 people.
Mr.
Viscusi discovered that 30,000 of them are currently unemployed.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.44
5.50
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.24
5.24
7.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.27
5.25
7.30
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.53
7.52
8.68
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.01
8.00
8.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
9.05
9.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.96
6.96
7.59
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Petroleum Helicopters reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


American Airlines Reins In Growth
Robert L. Crandall, chairman and president of American Airlines and long a prophet of growth, said yesterday that the nation's largest airline would substantially cut its capital spending over the next several years, including purchases of some new airplanes, because of uncertain profits.
"Unfortunately, while the growth has been helpful, profits simply aren't what they need to be," Mr.
Crandall told a gathering of airline stock analysts at a meeting in New York.
"As a consequence, although we think we have positioned ourselves very well for the future, we've decided to reduce our capital spending substantially during the next couple of years until we see a correction of some of the things which are preventing us from earning satisfactory returns."


Home Video
Offering Foreign Films
"Some of them are the most requested titles in our library," said George Feltenstein, a vice president of MGM/UA Home Video, which this month will release 17 foreign films, several of them for the first time on video.
Among those making their first appearance are Francois Truffaut's "Bride Wore Black"; "Fellini's Roma"; Rainer Werner Fassbinder's "Veronika Voss"; Peter Greenaway's "Draughtsman's Contract," and Ken Russell's "Music Lovers."
With a library full of all kinds of movies, one might not expect such a call for foreign titles, which are shunned in many video stores.
"Actually, there's always been a good audience for these films," Mr.
Feltenstein said.
"On the coasts, primarily New York and Los Angeles, but also Chicago and elsewhere. You also have isolated pockets of people in the industry who are highly educated in film, and there are retailers who are very savvy about what their customers want."
What customers want tends to be noted titles from established directors.
"I have close to 100 foreign films that I'll never put out because no one's ever heard of them," Mr.
Feltenstein said.
"They're not Bergman or Fellini." And while popular contemporary foreign films -- a "Cinema Paradiso," say -- can draw attention, the demand, he said, is for classics.
Much of the audience for foreign films used to see them in art houses that have now closed, particularly in smaller cities and university towns.
"Video killed that business," Mr.
Feltenstein said.
Now video is picking it up.
It is not a large market.
"We're not in that international cinematic renaissance we experienced 10 years ago when everybody was shoving foreign film down our throat," Mr.
Feltenstein said.
Today MGM/UA selectively chooses better-known titles and repackages them for collectors.
This month's rereleases also include Truffaut's "Small Change" and "Story of Adele H."; Edouard Molinaro's "Cage aux Folles"; Mr.
Fellini's "Ginger and Fred" and "Fellini Satyricon," and Jules Dassin's "Never on Sunday." The price is $19.98 each. 'Civil War' Is Back
PBS Home Video has announced that Ken Burns's "Civil War" series will again be available in certain stores on Oct. 24.
When the nine-cassette collection was offered in a limited edition of 10,000 last year, it sold out in two days.
This time, PBS said, the quantities will be unlimited.
The price is $179.95.
For information on the stores carrying them, call (800) 776-8300.
NEW VIDEO RELEASES
The Hard Way  1991.
MCA/Universal. $91.95.
Laser disk, $34.98. 1 hour 51 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.
Michael J. Fox is Nick Lang, an impregnably smug action-movie star who has all he can do to survive the exercise equipment in his health spa but nevertheless decides he wants to get into a real role for a change as a gritty big-city cop.
To train him for the part, the New York police assign a skeptical detective (James Woods) and the two begin tutorials in hot pursuit of a serial killer.
Though slapdash and silly, John Badham's comedy is "written, directed and performed with a redeeming, self-mocking zest" (Vincent Canby).
The Josephine Baker Story  1991.
HBO. $89.99. 2:09.
CC.
No rating.
Lynn Whitfield is a vibrant Baker in this portrayal made for television, but this isn't an easy character to pin down.
Traversing the performer's life from her St.
Louis childhood through the years of celebrity in Paris to her death in 1975, Brian Gibson's film does its biographical duty but paints only a hazy outline.
Efforts to make Baker a feminist or champion of race relations are unconvincing, and as the script reaches for uplift it leaves "a dignified and rather one-dimensional star, shorn of the original's wit and cunning" (John J. O'Connor).
The History of the 80's
1991. MPI. 10 cassettes, $19.98 each. 1 hour each. No rating.
Solidarity, Love Canal, Mount St.
Helens, Pan Am 103, Pete Rose, the Wall Street crash and the Berlin wall: ABC News lays out the decade in 10 chapters of tightly constructed documentary.
In the beginning there was the Iranian hostage crisis, Brooke Shields in her Calvins, Ab scam and the Chrysler bailout.
At the close there is Manuel Antonio Noriega, George Bush, the San Francisco earthquake and the collapse of the Soviet bloc.
The appeal of this series, which is almost always graphic and interesting, lies in pacing and intercutting of clips that portray events with a restrained taste for the dramatic.
Barnum  1990.
Water Bearer. $59.95. 1:53.
No rating.
Michael Crawford makes a lively impresario in a London stage production of the musical about the showman.
When fire levels Barnum's New York museum of attractions, "Barnum," with music by Cy Coleman and choreography by Joe Layton, gathers up the likes of Tom Thumb, Jenny Lind and the "world's oldest woman" (160) and takes the show on the road.
In the center ring there is the "female of the species," Barnum's practical wife, Charity (Eileen Battye), as both foil and partner in a production that has most of the flash and dash one expects from Phineas T., or Taylor, as Charity calls him.
TRADITIONAL VALUES
They ooze sentiment, to be sure, but hope and honest values were at the core of films by Frank Capra, who died last week at the age of 94.
Here are some Capra titles on tape.
All are black and white.
IT HAPPENED ONE NIGHT (1934).
Claudette Colbert is an heiress fleeing Papa and Clark Gable is a hard-boiled reporter after a scoop in this classic romantic comedy.
Columbia/ Tri-Star. $29.95. 1:45.
No rating.
MR.
DEEDS GOES TO TOWN (1936).
Jean Arthur falls for Gary Cooper, a bumpkin with a $20 million windfall he would like to give away to the less fortunate.
Columbia/Tri-Star. $19.95. 1:58.
No rating.
LOST HORIZON (1937).
Survivors of a plane crash in Tibet discover the peaceful land of Shangri-la.
Columbia/Tri-Star. $19.95. 2:12.
No rating.
YOU CAN'T TAKE IT WITH YOU (1938).
Jean Arthur and James Stewart star in the screen apaptation of the Moss Hart-George S. Kaufman Broadway musical about an eccentric family.
Columbia/Tri-Star. $19.95.
No rating.
MR.
SMITH GOES TO WASHINGTON (1939).
Appointed to the Senate, Jefferson Smith (James Stewart) battles for decency in what is generally considered Capra's most inspirational film.
Columbia/Tri-Star. $19.95. 2:10.
No rating.
WHY WE FIGHT (1942-44).
Capra gave a fight talk to the nation in this six-volume documentary about America's involvement in World War II.
MPI. $14.95 each.
Running times vary from 40 to 67 minutes.
No rating.
IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE (1946).
James Stewart is a small-town banker who rises from suicidal despair to discover the value of his life.
Next month the film will go into brief moratorium, to be rereleased on Nov. 7 in a 45th-anniversary edition.
Republic. $14.95. 2:09.
No rating.


Treasury Puts Curbs On Market
Responding to growing criticism over its handling of the scandal at Salomon Brothers Inc., the Treasury Department today announced new rules aimed at combating corruption in the market in which the Government borrows hundreds of billions of dollars annually.
The announcement came as the scandal continued to grow, with new disclosures by Richard C. Breeden, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, that other firms and banks may have misled Government-backed lending agencies -- including the Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae -- that raise money separately from the Treasury.


Executive at Bearings Will Become Chairman
Bearings Inc., the nation's largest independent distributor of bearings and power transmission components, has said its chairman, George L. LaMore, will retire in January and John C. Dannemiller, the president and chief operating officer, will succeed him.
Mr.
LaMore, who is 65, has served as chief executive of the company since 1988 and as chairman since last year.
Bearings said he would continue to serve as a director and as an adviser to management.
He has been with the company since 1942.


Jan Josef Lipski, Polish Dissident And Rights Advocate, Dies at 65
Jan Josef Lipski, a Polish Senator who was a leading anti-Communist and a human rights advocate, died on Tuesday in a hospital at Cracow, in southern Poland, the Polish P.A.P. news agency reported.
He was 65 years old and lived in Warsaw.
The agency said a heart ailment brought the death of Mr.
Lipski, who was also a historian and literary critic and held a Ph.D. degree in Polish Literature from Warsaw University.


MMI Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


Braves and Dodgers: Lone Rivals in Lone Race
The question: Who will win the National League West championship?
The answer: The Dodgers, naturally, because of their pitching.


Specter Returns to Uncomfortable Role of Republican Maverick
While his cross-examination of Judge Clarence Thomas today was by no means harsh, Senator Arlen Specter sounded like the grand inquisitor compared with other Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Polite yet insistent, Mr.
Specter put the Supreme Court nominee on notice that he had problems with aspects of his record, particularly his view of the role and performance of Congress.


Teachers Return, Many Without Contracts
After a decade of general harmony between teachers and local school boards, a record number of teachers' contracts remain unsettled at the start of the new school year across New Jersey and New York State.
In New Jersey contracts for teachers in about 140 districts -- including the striking teachers who picketed here today -- remain unsettled out of 256 that expired last June, about twice the usual rate, according to Edward Gallagher, director of communications for the New Jersey Education Association, the state's largest teachers' union.


Clifford Calls Himself A Dupe in Bank Case
His reputation on the line, Clark M. Clifford defended himself in public under oath for the first time today against accusations that he had betrayed his standing in political and legal circles by conducting shady dealings with a corrupt bank.
Lawmakers were unable to dent Mr.
Clifford's account, but those of both parties were clearly skeptical.


The How-To's Versus the Too-Muches
ENOUGH of yard sales, Bain de Soleil and apple wood.
September is the time when editors of design magazines show their stuff.
For readers craving tchotchkes and advice, there is nothing more intoxicating than the first sighting of the season's shelter magazines in the mailbox.
Imagine what Mars might look like if a well-heeled Martian managed to commandeer the current crop.
But the Martian might also get a migraine.
These are deeply confusing times for readers of home design magazines.


The Chinese Now Wish Deng Long Life
To the Editor:
The news of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's resignation as head of the Soviet Communist Party might or might not faze China's supreme leader, Deng Xiaoping, but those familiar with his thinking believe he was relieved at the failure of the Soviet coup.
This is based on a report by a reliable source (an exiled intellectual at the University of Chicago, who was close to the deposed Premier Zhao Ziyang) that Mr.
Deng not long ago called in Mr.
Zhao for a private chat.


Pay TV Won't Drop Out Of Tyson-Holyfield Bout
Seth Abraham, the president of Time Warner Sports, knows that regardless of what he says about Mike Tyson's legal right to fight Evander Holyfield, TVKO will come off looking overly avaricious for continuing to participate in potentially the richest heavyweight fight ever.
The Nov. 8 bout, set for Time Warner's pay-for-view cable system, has been under criticism because of Tyson's indictment on a rape charge.


CHRONICLE
The sound of music may well be the sound of a refrigerator, at least in St.
Paul tonight, when the Minneapolis Chamber Symphony presents the debut performance of "Variations on a Theme From Kindergarten." Before it plays the composition, which is based on the three best-selling books of folksy essays by ROBERT FULGHUM, the 40-piece orchestra will tune up to the hum of the refrigerator, which will be placed stage left between the bass and the harp.
Hmmmm.


Mafia Captain Is Prosecution Witness
His body scarred by 12 bullet wounds from an assassination attempt, an admitted Mafia captain appeared as a prosecution witness in a closely guarded courtroom today, testifying that he took part in a scheme to rig bids in New York City's window-installation industry.
The witness, Peter Chiodo, sat in a wheelchair at the witness stand with two stern-faced Federal agents stationed behind him and told of his life in the Lucchese crime family and how he had participated in four murders.
Judge Raymond J. Dearie told the jury only that the witness was "undergoing medical treatment, post surgically."


Store Salutes Italy and Italy Salutes Back
NOT for the first time, it's Italy's time at Bloomingdale's.
The store's annual fall salute to a country is hailing Italy for the third time since 1960.
A cocktail party last night in the Lexington Avenue store combined with a private screening of Federico Fellini's "Intervista" at Cinema One offered guests a preview of the promotion, which starts Sunday in all 14 Bloomingdale's stores.
For the next seven weeks, anyone strolling by the store's Lexington Avenue windows will see Giorgio Armani's clothing for men and women.
Those on Third Avenue will get a look at Romeo Gigli's new G Gigli collection.


Griffey Sr. Undergoes Neck Surgery
KEN GRIFFEY SR., the Seattle Mariners outfielder who has been on the disabled list since June, underwent surgery yesterday to remove a disk from his neck.
The two-and-a-half-hour procedure was performed by Dr.
WILLIAM TOBLER, a neurosurgeon at Christ Hospital in Cincinnati.
Griffey is expected to remain hospitalized for three days and the Mariners said he should be able to resume full physical activity in about three months. (AP)


HOME IMPROVEMENT
IN a house with an unheated basement or crawl space, adding insulation beneath the main floor can save on heating bills and increase comfort during the winter.
Usually, the job involves fastening strips of fiberglass or rock wool insulation between the joists supporting the floor; this is done by working from inside the unheated area.
The job is usually not difficult if there is plenty of headroom.
But if you must work lying on your back in a crawl space, consider obtaining bids from two or three insulation contractors before tackling the project yourself.
Installing insulation under these conditions is awkward and generally unpleasant.


Natural Law, Then and Now
Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee, has not so far been credible in his Senate testimony on a point of considerable concern.
Judge Thomas is trying to minimize speeches in which he extolled natural law, sometimes described as a "higher law" than the Constitution.
He characterizes those speeches now merely as musings in political theory that had nothing to do with his view of how a judge should decide hard constitutional cases.


Tyson's Judge Is No Fight Fan
She has never seen Mike Tyson, or for that matter, anybody else fight, either in person or on televison.
But when Tyson stands trial -- now scheduled for Jan. 27 -- on rape charges, Patricia J. Gifford, who is not a boxing fan, will preside in Room 4 of the Marion Superior Court, Criminal Divison, in Indianapolis.


Treasury Issues Decline in Price
Prices of Treasury securities dipped a bit in light trading yesterday, as market participants continued to wait for a widely anticipated reduction in short-term interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board.
But the Fed disappointed traders again yesterday, as it sent no signals that it has eased monetary policy.


Failed Trip Shows Dinkins's Weak Spots
The sudden collapse of Mayor David N. Dinkins's trip to South Africa has painfully exposed two of his most acute vulnerabilities: his overreliance on one overworked aide, Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch, and his propensity to reach for the grandest gesture, even when times seem to demand the simplest.
Mr.
Dinkins said he postponed the trip because Mr.
Lynch had been too busy putting out fires in New York to raise the half-million dollars needed.
A charter flight was to have taken the Mayor and several dozen city officials and business executives on a journey that had assumed the proportions of a royal tour.


U.N. Says Iraq Is Stalling on Arms Destruction
The head of a special United Nations commission overseeing the destruction of Iraq's chemical, biological and nuclear arsenals asserted today that Iraq was continuing to delay and obstruct the commission's work.
"We cannot say Iraq has cooperated in any of the major areas, unfortunately," said the official, Rolf Ekeus.


ESPN Is Said to Choose Lois/GGK for Account
Lois/GGK, New York, was awarded the advertising account of the ESPN sports-cable television network yesterday, according to advertising executives who insisted on anonymity.


From the Principal's Office
To The Home Section:
In his Aug. 29 Parent and Child column, Lawrence Kutner quotes Dr.
Jane C. Conoley, a professor of educational psychology, as saying, "Junior high school teachers tend to be more oriented toward teaching a subject rather than teaching a student."
This is a hasty generalization that probably will cause more worries among parents of children entering junior high than the facts warrant.
What often bothers children entering junior high is having to leave a smaller elementary school where they were with the same classmates and few teachers, and then to enter a larger school with new classmates from other neighborhoods and more teachers.


Adweek Plans Overhaul as a Sign It Is Alive and Well
AMID rising speculation about its fate, Adweek is about to get a new look.
The nation's second-largest advertising-trade publication, intent on persuading readers and advertisers that it will be sticking around, will include in its ambitious overhaul new and expanded columns and features.
The changes, effective with the issues of Adweek's six regional editions due out on Monday, come as advertising and media executives have been watching the weekly with the morbid curiosity typically devoted to an agency that is losing its largest clients.


More Woman's Work
IN 1878, Mrs.
William Choate, a Manhattan philanthropist, recognized that the Civil War left many widows who could cook, bake and sew but had no other form of income.
Mrs.
Choate put them to work by creating the New York Exchange for Woman's Work, where they could sell their homemade goods and take home 75 percent of the price.
The first exchange was in Mrs.
Choate's home.
The latest opened today at 1095 Third Avenue (at 64th Street).
Perhaps the most famous location was 541 Madison Avenue (54th Street), which operated from 1920 to 1980.
That exchange not only sold knitted booties but had a restaurant and the Crinoline Bar.
"Ladies could have their codfish cakes, chocolate cake and martini," said Catherine Dinehart, executive director of the exchange.


Auto Loans Back Chase Certificates
A $490.3 million issue of Chase Manhattan auto-loan pass-through certificates was priced yesterday at 99.854 to yield 6.91 percent through underwriters led by the Chase Securities subsidiary.
The yield spread over Treasuries with a similar maturity is about 69 basis points.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Montauk Journal; After Tuna Is Hooked, The Buyers Start Biting
Hours earlier, it had been just another fish in the sea, a 716-pound tuna gamboling obliviously (as much as a tuna can gambol) in the Atlantic.
Now it was dead, flat on its side in a dank shed on a dock here, heading toward its final incarnation: sushi on a plate.
In walked a tuna buyer, Dennis Gore, who deftly carved a sliver of meat from the fish's tail and telephoned his boss at Phillips Seafood in New Jersey.
Peering at the meat with a flashlight, he talked about its oils -- it seemed slightly dry.
He discussed its fatness -- O.K., if a bit lanky.
Color?
It was red, but maybe not the right shade.
He massaged the meat and kept on talking.


Pacific Telecom's Cellular Unit Sale
A unit of Pacificorp, a leading Oregon-based utility, said it had sold its cellular telephone business in Chile to a unit of the BellSouth Corporation for an after-tax gain of about $17 million.
Pacific Telecom Inc. sold shares in its Cidcom S.A. unit, its only large foreign business, to BellSouth Enterprises Inc.
While Pacific Telecom did not disclose the sale price, it did say that it would recognize the $17 million gain in its third quarter.


Are Jets Prepared To Take Beating?
The Buffalo Bills will come into Giants Stadium as the first team ever to open a National Footbball League season with back-to-back 500-yard games on offense, the league's leading quarterback, leading receiver and the top rusher.
The Bills opened the regular season by beating the Miami Dolphins, 35-31, and mauling the Pittsburgh Steelers, 52-34, while piling up 1,119 total yards.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17
The removal of Soviet troops in Cuba will soon be discussed with Fidel Castro, President Gorbachev said, in an effort to eliminate a major obstacle to increased American aid to the Soviet Union.
Page A1


BALTIMORE MAYOR LEADING IN POLLS
After a quiet, even lackluster primary campaign, Baltimore Democrats will go to the polls on Thursday to nominate a candidate for mayor, with the incumbent, Kurt L. Schmoke, the overwhelming favorite among the eight contenders.
Republicans will also choose a mayoral nominee, picking from six names on their ballot.


Campaign Trail; A Primary-Eve Dance: The Candidate Dodge
In the 44th City Council District, which stretches from Flatbush to Bensonhurst in Brooklyn, phone bank volunteers for Robert Miller, a City Council candidate, were making calls in Yiddish and Italian.
On the Lower East Side of Manhattan, a sound truck for Margaret S. Chin was blaring a get-out-the-vote message alternately in English, Spanish and Chinese.
At bus stops and subway stations in all five of New York City's boroughs, many of the 226 Council candidates were refining the science of the commuter handshake.
With equal aplomb, commuters were dancing the candidate dodge.


Ruling on Campeau Stores
At a hearing yesterday in Cincinnati, a Federal judge gave Federated Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation more time to negotiate an acceptable repayment plan with their creditors, and told the bankrupt retailers to file an amended plan by Sept. 25.
Federated and Allied, two units of the Toronto-based Campeau Corporation, filed for bankruptcy in January 1990, owing $8.2 billion to banks, apparel makers and other creditors.


Elcor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Greece and Turkey Fail to Agree Over Cyprus
Greek and Turkish leaders failed today to narrow their differences over the future of Cyprus, raising fears that a United Nations conference to end the 17-year-old division of the Mediterranean island will not take place as planned later this month.
Prime Ministers Constantine Mitsotakis of Greece and Mesut Vilmaz of Turkey were unable to find "sufficient" common ground after meeting for two and a half hours outside Paris today, according to diplomats.
In a joint statement, they referred to differences of opinion but said they would continue to take part in discussions sponsored by the United Nations.


50-Off Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Iran-Contra Witness Imperils North Case With New Responses
President Ronald Reagan's national security adviser, Robert C. McFarlane, stunned prosecutors today by repeatedly telling a Federal judge that his testimony in Oliver L. North's trial was inevitably "colored" by Mr.
North's account of the Iran-contra scandal before Congress in July 1987.
As a result of today's testimony by Mr.
McFarlane, a crucial witness in Mr.
North's 1989 trial, the two remaining Iran-contra criminal convictions of Mr.
North appeared imperiled.
Mr.
McFarlane swore that he had been swayed by statements Mr.
North made earlier under a grant of limited immunity, meaning that his words could not be turned against him in a trial.


Citizens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Young Rioters in Britain Challenge the Police
When mobs of youths set fire to shops and clashed with the police on Monday night in North Shields, a suburb of Newcastle-upon-Tyne in northeastern England, the rioters said they were taking revenge for the deaths of two young men, killed over the weekend in a high-speed chase after they stole a car.
By police accounts, the young men were "hotting," a current craze among restless, urban youths in Britain who set out to taunt the police and impress their peers by using city streets to perform high-speed stunts in stolen cars.Police campaigns to crack down on the growing incidence of car theft and hotting in Britain were one of the factors that contributed to outbursts of rioting and street violence among crowds of young people in at least two British cities over the last 10 days.


Philanthropists Aid Brooklyn Museum
The art collectors and philanthropists Iris and B. Gerald Cantor have made a challenge grant of $1 million over three years to the Brooklyn Museum, the museum announced yesterday.
The grant, to help the museum with its operating expenses at a time when its support from New York City has been reduced because of the city's financial problems, is to be matched by $3 million in private contributions.
"Throughout the past several months the Brooklyn Museum has struggled to maintain its high professional standards as the city has steadily whittled away its support," Mrs.
Cantor, who is a member of the museum's board, said in a statement.
"That a cultural institution of its stature should have had to close to the public for a week and temporarily lay off its entire staff, as it did in late August, is appalling and untenable."


Collision With Congress
The Bush Administration said today that it hoped that a Soviet military withdrawal from Cuba would lead to the downfall of Fidel Castro, but collided with Congress over how Washington should now press to achieve that central goal of American policy in the Western Hemisphere.
Clearly, word that the Soviet Union will soon open discussions to withdraw its military from Cuba produced a moment for the Bush Administration to savor.
The President's own impatience with the Soviets was obvious.


Burnup &amp; Sims Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Named Toby Oldham strength coach.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Signed Stephen Bardo, guard. FOOTBALL National Football League
BUFFALO BILLS -- Claimed Brad Daluiso, kicker, off waivers from Atlanta.
Waived David Bavaro, linebacker.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Re-signed Mike Brennan, offensive lineman.
Waived Bernard Clark, linebacker.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Placed Albert Bentley, running back, on injured reserve.
Signed Cedric Figaro, linebacker.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Billy Bell, cornerback.
Signed Robert Morris, defensive end, and Anthony Parker, cornerback, to the practice roster.
Waived Stephon Weatherspoon, linebacker, from the practice roster.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Signed Terry Crews, linebacker, and Chris Pike, defensive tackle.
Placed Frank Stams, linebacker, and Bill Hawkins, defensive end, on injured reserve.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Buford Jordan, fullback. Waived Scott Ross, linebacker.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Dennis Ransom, tight end, to the practice squad.
Waived Steve Clark, tight end, from the practice squad.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Signed Ralph Tamm, offensive lineman, and Clarence Vaughn, defensive back.
Placed Ed Simmons, offensive tackle, and Alvin Walton, defensive back, on injured reserve.
Canadian Football League
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Bill Goldberg, defensive tackle.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Signed Jim Paek, defenseman, and Bruce Racine, goalie.
Agreed to terms with Gord Roberts, defenseman.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Signed Gord Donnelly, defenseman, to a multiyear contract.
East Coast Hockey League
CINCINNATI CYCLONES -- Named Steve Benoit trainer and equipment manager and Don Helbig assistant public relations director and merchandising manager.


Time Warner Moves the President of HBO
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that E. Thayer Bigelow Jr., president of Home Box Office, would become president and chief executive of Time Warner Cable Programming Inc., a new entity formed to oversee most of Time Warner's interests in basic cable television program services.
Jeff Bewkes, 39 years old, executive vice president and chief financial officer of HBO, has been named president and chief operating officer of HBO, succeeding Mr.
Bigelow, 49.
The announcement was made by HBO's chairman, Michael Fuchs.


U.S. Team Wins Spot In Canada Cup Finals
In the Pittsburgh hospital, the radiation therapy went as well as can be expected when the 60-year-old patient is being treated for his second brain tumor in the last few weeks.
The patient is Bob Johnson, who last spring coached the Pittsburgh Penguins to the Stanley Cup and this summer assembled the American team as coach of Team U.S.A. in the Canada Cup tournament.


The Hearings On Television
The Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court will be shown on four channels today, beginning at 10 A.M.
Eastern daylight time.
The Public Broadcasting Service will have gavel-to-gavel coverage of today's Senate Judiciary Committee hearing, with no interruptions for commercials.


Bush Team Begins Lobbying for C.I.A. Choice
As the White House closely monitored Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination hearings, President Bush today huddled with top Republican lawmakers in an effort to smooth another potentially troublesome nomination, that of Robert M. Gates as Director of Central Intelligence.
The meeting, along with public comments by Mr.
Bush and White House aides, marked what officials said was an effort to elevate the public profile of the lobbying effort on behalf of Mr.
Gates after a slow start this summer.


Market Place; Rogaine's Hope: Women Buyers
IS fear of a shiny cranium the secret terror of American women?
The Upjohn Company is wagering that the answer is yes, and that millions of women next year will buy Rogaine, the company's much-heralded prescription treatment for thinning hair.


Corrections
A brief item yesterday about elections this week misstated the day of municipal primary elections in Connecticut.
They were yesterday.


Death of Bronx Girl, 8, Ruled a Smothering
Shemika Jennings, the 8-year-old Bronx girl whose body was discovered on Tuesday in a bag stuffed into a niche in the seawall below the Triborough Bridge, was smothered, the New York City Medical Examiner's Office said yesterday.
Shemika, who was to have begun the third grade yesterday, disappeared Sunday morning after leaving her uncle's apartment to return to her own home on the floor below.
She lived with her parents, Beverly Harrison and Daryl Jennings, at 1630 Undercliff Avenue in Morris Heights, the Bronx.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Mayor David N. Dinkins's postponement of his trip to South Africa misidentified the group that financed his trip to Israel during the Persian Gulf war.
It was the American-Israel Friendship League.
The Jewish Community Relations Council of New York only extended the invitation.


What Judge Thomas's Qualified Rating Means; Phobia of Phobias
To the Editor:
The real reason the liberal Democratic senators and their flunkies are against Judge Clarence Thomas is that Mr.
Thomas is black, a child of sharecroppers and refused to be enslaved in the liberals' social services welfare state, but worked hard, went to private schools, including Yale Law School, learned to think independently and became a conservative Republican against higher taxes, government waste and quotas, and in favor of the President and the troops and the death penalty for heinous murders, and against the destruction of the unborn with public funding of abortions on demand.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Responding to criticism of its handling of the Salomon scandal, the Treasury announced significant new rules aimed at combating corruption in the Government securities market.  [ Page D1. ]
Clark M. Clifford defended himself in public under oath for the first time against accusations that he had betrayed his standing in political and legal circles in dealings with B.C.C.I.  [ D1. ]


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 12


SOVIET TRADE PACT SENT TO CONGRESS
Administration officials presented Congress with an agreement today offering more favorable trade terms with the Soviet Union, but they said the pact did not include the newly independent Baltic countries and would have little effect on American trade.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d is to visit the Baltic countries on Saturday and is likely to announce then the Administration's position on trade relations with them, said Thomas Duesterberg, the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for international economic policy.


Sizing Up the Talk of 'Natural Law': Many Ideologies Discover a Precept
In constitutional law, as in politics, terms that are ostensibly value free can become buzzwords.
What has happened to politically neutral phrases like "law and order" and "states' rights" has also arguably happened to "natural law." It has been captured by the conservatives to buttress rights not articulated in the Constitution, just as liberals seem to have taken over "human rights" and "the right to privacy."


Mitterrand Urges Talks on A-Arms
Eager to show that France is not losing influence in Europe, President Francois Mitterrand called today for an early meeting of the four countries with nuclear weapons in Europe to tackle nuclear security problems raised by developments in the Soviet Union.
He said Paris had already discussed the idea with Washington and London and would do so with Moscow "when we know which of the Soviet Union's representatives to talk to" in the light of "the collapse of decision-making powers in the former Soviet Union."


Air Force Says B-2 Has Problems Eluding Radar
Tests of the Stealth bomber suggest that it may be less capable of evading detection by radar than was believed, Government officials said today.
The officials, both in Congress and at the Defense Department, said in interviews that the Pentagon had begun briefing Congressional leaders about the problem in an effort to head off a weakening of political support for the plane.


Opening Day for 216 New Principals
"Anybody know who I am?" Mary M. Smith asked Class 2-215 on its first day of school yesterday.
It was a tough question, and not many hands shot up.
For Ms.
Smith was one of 216 new principals taking command of New York City schools yesterday, and at Public School 106 in


THE THOMAS HEARINGS: Sticking to the Script; Confirmation Process Lets Judge Say As Much, or as Little, as He Chooses
Judge Clarence Thomas's second day before the Senate Judiciary Committee offered a graphic display of the limits of the modern Supreme Court confirmation process.
As part of the Senate's constitutional role of advice and consent, the committee can summon nominees, sit them down before the glare of television lights, probe their records and pepper them with questions.
The one thing the committee cannot do is make nominees provide substantive answers.


Pall Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Oryx Has a Successor For Retiring President
Robert L. Keiser, who has been directing the Oryx Energy Company's international operations from London since December 1989, will be coming back to the company's Dallas headquarters later this year as president and chief operating officer.
Robert P. Hauptfuhrer will remain chairman and chief executive of the nation's largest independent oil and gas company.
"We will be headed more and more into the international area, because that is where the reserves will most likely be found," Mr.
Keiser said in an interview.
"We are in the reserve business, so you have to go where you have the best chance."


Pay TV Won't Drop Out Of Tyson-Holyfield Bout
Seth Abraham, the president of Time Warner Sports, knows that regardless of what he says about Mike Tyson's legal right to fight Evander Holyfield, TVKO will come off looking overly avaricious for continuing to participate in potentially the richest heavyweight fight ever.
The Nov. 8 bout, set for Time Warner's pay-for-view cable system, has been under criticism because of Tyson's indictment on a rape charge.


Gold Falls Again as Rumors Of Soviet Sale Plans Persist
Persisent rumors that the Soviet Union is dipping into its gold reserve to buy food sent grain and precious metals markets scrambling yesterday.
Gold futures prices hit a 14-month low on the Commodity Exchange in New York before recovering some of their losses.


It's Little, Round And Protects Against Burglars
SOME people buy Doberman pinschers to guard their homes.
Others may prefer the Samsung Scout-About Home Service Robot, which will be available in April.
The robot, which constantly roams the house while you're out, has an infrared sensor, which gauges body heat, and an ultrasonic sensor, which reacts to motion.


U.N. Aide Calls Release Of Hostages Likely Soon
A United Nations official said tonight that pro-Iranian militants in Lebanon would probably release one or more of the 10 remaining Western hostages as early as Friday in response to Israel's release of Arab prisoners today.
Clearly buoyed by the new momentum of the hostage negotiations, the Iranian President, Hashemi Rafsanjani, emerged smiling and relaxed from a dinner with Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar and said Iran would continue doing "whatever is possible" to win the release of Western hostages and Arab prisoners held by Israel.


Dollar Advances Overseas But Eases in U.S. Trading
The dollar rose abroad but ended lower in American trading yesterday, weakened by recurrent expectations of cuts in domestic interest rates.
The United States currency's underlying trend has been weaker, because of trader expectations that the Federal Reserve will ease lending rates to stimulate the economy.
Such a move would reduce the dollar's value worldwide, and foreign investors would seek currencies that offer higher yields.


Books of The Times; A Love Story, With Intensely Cerebral Aspects
Mating  By Norman Rush 480 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Sports of The Times; Don't Blame Boxing For Tyson
GO ahead, call off the fight, ban boxing, stop people from brain-bashing.
But don't do it because of Mike Tyson.
Tyson should stand on his own in court, a man charged with the ugly crime of rape.
And boxing should stand on its own in public, a dangerous business with more decent people than ominous slobs like Tyson.


FINANCE BRIEFS
PREFERRED STOCK *
First Bank System, Minneapolis, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $100 million in convertible preferred shares, to be priced at $50 a share and offered through a group led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
COMMON STOCK


Contempt Charge Faced in Placement of Homeless
As the number of families needing emergency shelter in New York City continues to grow, a State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan said yesterday that she would "probably find the city in civil contempt" of court orders to provide appropriate housing to homeless families.
If the justice, Helen E. Freedman, does so, it would be her second finding of civil contempt against the city this year for such a violation.
A new finding could lead to monetary penalties for New York City and contempt of court findings against Mayor David N. Dinkins and other city officials as well.
The next hearing is set for Sept. 25.


Although Miles Apart, Rangers Focus on Richter
In the summer of hockey's discontent, the Rangers are the same as every other team, patching leaks and bouncing from resolution to crisis.
While General Manager Neil Smith and Coach Roger Neilson took a chartered flight today to Ottawa for an arbitration hearing on Adam Graves, an even more important matter awaited them upon their return.


For the Council: Rookies of the Year
Between 6 A.M. and 9 P.M. today, New Yorkers will nominate and in many cases virtually elect the City Council that has been moving steadily, step by step, toward its full, proper role governing America's largest city.
Democracy will be only partially served, however.
For one thing, although the Council is growing from 35 districts to 51, most districts are, like the city, overwhelmingly Democratic.
As a consequence, winning the primary is likely to guarantee election.


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT BUSH announced yesterday that he would nominate EDWARD P. DJEREJIAN as Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, The Associated Press reported.
Since 1988, Mr.
Djerejian has been the United States Ambassador to Syria, where he has been involved in efforts to free American hostages from Lebanon.
A foreign service officer, he was a White House spokesman on foreign affairs during the Reagan Administration.


Dinkins Backs Party Loyalists Over Coalition
With several endorsements of Democratic Party leaders and incumbents, Mayor David N. Dinkins has repeatedly demonstrated a loyalty to the party apparatus that he came from and has disappointed his progressive allies in the Majority Coalition, who oppose many of his choices.
Of the 11 endorsements he has made, Mr.
Dinkins has in eight cases backed the same candidate as Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone.
The Majority Coalition's main mission was to loosen Mr.
Vallone's control on the Council by taking advantage of the races for the expanded Council to elect more independent, liberal candidates.


Many Ellington Files Bought by Smithsonian
A century from now, the director of the National Museum of American History said today, it will be difficult to hear Duke Ellington's music as it was written "unless we do what we're doing here." The director, Roger G. Kennedy, was speaking of the museum's purchase of a 2,000-piece collection of manuscripts, photographs and memorabilia of Ellington's works.
The museum, which is part of the Smithsonian Institution, bought the material from Ellington's sister, Ruth Ellington Boatwright.
It supplements an even larger collection from Ellington's son, Mercer, that began the museum's archives of the American jazz composer and performer three years ago.


Florence Nightingale, Research Pioneer
To the Editor:
"Beyond Tender Loving Care, Nurses Are a Force in Research" (Science Times, Aug. 13) begins, "The Florence Nightingales of the nation are busily adding a Louis Pasteur research component to their profession." This shows not only lack of knowledge about Florence Nightingale but also, I suspect, an assumption that men and research, not women and research, are synonymous.


Restoring Old Windows
Seekircher Steel Window Repair Corporation
630 Saw Mill River Road, Ardsley, N.Y. 10502; (914) 693-1920.
When John Seekircher began repairing steel casement windows in 1977, he could only find part-time work.
Homeowners and co-op boards routinely replaced old steel frame windows with aluminum or vinyl-frame double-hung sash windows.
But these days restoring steel window frames is a full-time job.
"A lot of people buying Westchester Tudors are repairing the old windows instead of installing aluminum replacement windows," said Mr.
Seekircher, who recently repaired 160 steel frame windows on a huge Westchester house.
And most landmark buildings with steel casement windows, including many Central Park West co-ops, are required to either restore existing frames or find identical steel replacements.
"These windows have a distinctive look," said Mr.
Seekircher.
Steel casement windows, popular in late 19th-century Europe, were installed in countless New York-area homes and apartment buildings before World War II.
Old windows can often be revived with minimal repairs.
A professional cleaning can open windows sealed shut with age.
Hinges can be repaired.
Cranks can be replaced.
And frames can be realigned so windows close tight.
Storm windows and retractable screens can also be installed inside the windows.
Rotting steel sections can be repaired as well.
Mr.
Seekircher recently rebuilt the bottom of a steel-frame door for a Park Avenue apartment.
Basic adjustment and service starts at about $30 a window.
American Steel Window Service Company
108 West 17th Street, New York, N.Y. 10011; (212) 242-8131.
The American Steel Window Service Company, a 76-year-old family-run business, specializes in altering and repairing steel windows, including casement windows, factory-style windows and old-style metal windows with side chains.
But a big part of American Steel's business is supplying handles, hinges and other hard-to-find parts.
Peter Weinberger, the owner said his father, Dan, had purchased large amounts of hardware from several manufacturers going out of business.
Though they usually predate air-conditioners, steel casement windows can be adapted to accommodate most cooling units, Mr.
Weinberger said.
Basic repairs start at around $40 a window.
A &amp; S Windows
88-19 76th Avenue, Glendale, Queens 11385; (718) 275-7900.
Architects are designing buildings with steel windows again, said Louis Lehrbaum, whose 34-year-old company, A &amp; S Windows, manufactures steel window frames for both residential and industrial use.
Aluminum frames tend to be thick.
Steel, in contrast, "makes a nice narrow sideline for a different look," Mr.
Lehrbaum said.
"They're putting them in new schools and factories."
A &amp; S manufactures both steel windows and doors and does customized work.
Prices start at around $100 a window frame.
Finished windows are also available.


Maybe U.S. Open Should Just Be Moved Out of New York City
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Courage and Confusion at the Open" (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 4).
It is about time the press balanced praise for the United States Open with criticism of how poorly the tennis tournament is run.
However, you do not go far enough.


Trans World Music Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


49ers Say Montana Can Feel Secure
JOE MONTANA's future with the San Francisco 49ers is secure, ED DEBARTOLO JR., the team's owner, said in an interview published yesterday in response to the quarterback's fears that the team intends to phase him out.
Montana tore a tendon in the right elbow before the start of the season and faces possible season-ending surgery.
In an interview with The Washington Post earlier this week, Montana said he was concerned that the team was trying to ease him out.


GORBACHEV SAYS HE'S READY TO PULL TROOPS OUT OF CUBA AND END CASTRO'S SUBSIDIES
In an effort to remove a major obstacle to increased American economic aid to the Soviet Union, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev announced today that his country would begin discussions shortly with President Fidel Castro of Cuba about the withdrawal of the 11,000 Soviet military personnel on the island.
Mr.
Gorbachev, who announced the decision after a meeting here with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, also said that in the future Soviet economic ties with Cuba would be based strictly on free trade, eliminating the effective $2-billion-a-year subsidy that Moscow has been giving Havana by bartering Soviet oil for Cuban sugar on terms that greatly overvalued the sugar.


Bridge
The modern form of Blackwood has been happily adopted by nearly all experts in spite of the fact that it is permeated with ambiguity.
In the Roman Key-Card variety, with the trump king considered the equivalent of an ace, a response of five clubs to four no-trump may be made with three key-cards or none.
Similarly, five diamonds shows four key-cards or one.
But the ambiguities are easily resolved in practice.
Consider the diagramed deal from a duplicate game in West Orange, N.J.
The North-South cards were held by Robert Bowman and Norman Voigt, both of New Providence, N.J.
Using a style in which a two-over-one response is game-forcing, they advanced optimistically to six hearts.
It was virtually impossible for North to have an aceless hand lacking the heart king, so South correctly decided that his partner held three key-cards for his five-club response.
If South had been in doubt, he could have bid five hearts, expecting North to pass with no key cards and continue with three.


Excerpts From Clifford's Testimony on B.C.C.I.
Following are excerpts from the testimony of Clark M. Clifford, former chairman of First American Bankshares in Washington, to the House Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs on the Bank of Credit and Commerce International's involvement in First American:


Masur Makes Debut as Philharmonic's Chief


What Judge Thomas's Qualified Rating Means; Community of Believers
To the Editor:
In "I Dare to Hope," (Op-Ed, Aug. 25) Maya Angelou supports Clarence Thomas's Supreme Court nomination with doubtful premises: that his race will overcome his hostility toward civil rights remedies after he is confirmed, and that if he is defeated, his replacement will be white, more conservative and unbeatable.
Judge Thomas's tilt against affirmative action grew more pronounced after it assured his entry to law school and he entered government service in 1981, and has become stronger ever since.
If anyone has evidence he has been living a lie, which will be repudiated upon his confirmation, he or she should come forward with it now and allow those of us who oppose him to withdraw.


INSIDE
New Treasury Trading Rules
Criticized for its handling of the Salomon scandal, the Treasury set new rules to combat corruption in Government securities markets.
Page D1.
No Change in Condom Plan
New York City's school board rejected a provision to allow parents to exclude their children from a condom-distribution plan.
Page B1.


Corrections
A voters guide on Monday to the New York City Council elections today incorrectly described Louis Valentino, a candidate in the 38th District in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Valentino is executive director of the Political Action Fund of Local 1814 of the International Longshoremen's Association.
He is not an officer of the local itself, which is a target of Federal civil racketeering charges.


In Redskins Territory, Judge Admits He's a Cowboys Fan
Clarence Thomas may have made his first mistake at his Senate confirmation hearings by admitting today that he was a Dallas Cowboys football fan.
The Cowboys are bitter rivals of the Washington Redskins, whose fans include many senators.


Shuttle Set to Begin Environmental Mission
Preparations are running smoothly for the launching of the space shuttle Discovery Thursday night on a mission that officials say will be "the beginning of the environmental era of the space program."
Five astronauts aboard the Discovery plan to deploy a $710 million satellite designed to study Earth's upper atmosphere and investigate the thinning layer of ozone that protects the planet from harmful solar ultraviolet radiation.
The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite is designed to collect and transmit scientific data for the next two years.


Acklands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Drexel Sues Milken, Seeking Repayment
Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. yesterday sued Michael R. Milken, the financier whose mastery of high-yield junk bonds built the firm into a Wall Street powerhouse, then brought it down.
With the lawsuit, Drexel is seeking a judgment to force Mr.
Milken to return more than $1 billion in compensation he received, along with other money.


Review/Pop; The Grateful Dead's Continuing Metamorphosis
Monday night's show by the Grateful Dead, the second of nine at Madison Square Garden, sputtered a bit in the beginning, caught on during the last song of the first set, then took off after intermission.
The band, usually at its best during long, improvised sections and segues between songs, stuck to fairly short pieces instead.
With unusually precise and swinging drumming, it turned the pieces into taut, well-edited pop tunes.
The second set began with "Iko Iko," the New Orleans Mardi Gras song that, with its specific rhythms, was an inspired choice, locking Mickey Hart and Bill Kreutzmann, the Dead's two drummers, into a groove.
The band cruised through an energetic version of "Uncle John's Band" and the Rolling Stones' "Last Time," stopped momentarily for a chilly version of "Dark Star" that segued into "One More Saturday Night," and capped the set with a beautifully static "Walk Me Out Into the Morning Dew." The set also included the band's traditional two-drum duet, which metamorphosed into a slow arrhythmic group improvisation.


GE Capital Agrees to Buy Savings Assets for $1 Billion
The GE Capital Corporation, one of the country's biggest financial companies, has agreed to buy nearly $1.1 billion in troubled real estate loans that the Government acquired from failed savings and loans.
The purchase would be the largest such bulk sale of assets so far by the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency charged with selling them.
The deal was approved by the Resolution Trust board in a closed meeting on Tuesday and is subject to the execution of a final contract in about 10 days.
In the meantime, GE Capital is trying to arrange a joint venture to share the risk of owning the assets and is talking to the Robert Bass Group, which acquired a failed savings and loan from the Government in 1988.


Just Grab Your Books And Climb on Board
THE 57 students of the Munsonville School in Nelson, N.H., returned to classes in the spring to find that their school no longer looked like a school.
Instead, it resembled a train.
The school has a gabled main building that dates from the 1880's and a boxy wing from the 1950's.
Three years ago, the Nelson School Board decided to double its 3,500 square feet by adding three more classrooms, on a budget of $550,000.


Tenneco Plans Asset Sales And Cuts Dividend in Half
Staggered by deepening troubles at its J. I. Case farm- and construction-equipment unit, Tenneco Inc. said today that it planned to sell assets valued at $1.05 billion and that it would report a substantial loss for the second half of the year.
The company also said it would slash its yearly dividend in half, to $1.60 a share, saving $200 million a year.
The actions provided a hint of additional cutbacks and asset sales that Wall Street analysts hope to see from Tenneco's designated leader, Michael H. Walsh.


Jackson Looks to Bounce Back as a Knick
If last season did not change Mark Jackson's desire to remain with the Knicks, perhaps nothing ever will.
He was benched and he was booed.
He was mentioned in numerous trade rumors.
He was suspended from the Knicks for four days after an argument with Al Bianchi, then the general manager, and Coach John MacLeod.
Then this summer, Jackson's brother and a close friend suffered gunshot wounds in a drive-by shooting in Queens.
Jackson said that his brother, Harry Jackson, has recovered, but that Jackson's former business manager, Dave Snowden, remains paralyzed from the waist down.


Falcon Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday misidentified one of the family members seated behind Judge Clarence Thomas during his confirmation hearing in some copies.
The woman at the right was his sister, Emma Mae Martin, not his mother, Leola, who was seated partially hidden next to Ms.
Martin.


Chefs International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28


Stock Plan Is Offered By Merck
Merck &amp; Company said yesterday that it was giving each of its 37,000 employees a one-time option to buy 100 shares of Merck's common stock at $127.25 a share.
Although the options are now being distributed, the stock cannot be purchased until after Sept. 6, 1996.
Merck is the latest of a small but growing number of companies that are extending privileges like stock options, which were formerly reserved exclusively for executives, to all employees.
The companies include Pepsico, which says it was the first, in 1989, to offer stock options to all employees; Du Pont; Waste Management and Wendy's International.


Copley Merging San Diego Papers
The San Diego Union and its afternoon sister paper, The San Diego Tribune, said yesterday that they planned to merge early in 1992 into a single newspaper to be known as The San Diego Union-Tribune, which would have both a morning and afternoon edition.
The daily papers are the flagships of Copley Press Inc., a privately owned newspaper group based in La Jolla, Calif.
Copley's 12 daily papers are in California and Illinois.
The company also operates some weekly papers.
Lowering Costs
The merger will mark a further decline in the dwindling number of cities with competing newspapers operated by a single owner.
Already this year, owners of competing papers in Richmond and in Charleston, S.C., have announced plans to merge or close their afternoon papers.


Environmental Systems Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Jinotega Journal; If Contras Are Rearming, Can War Be Far Behind?
Surrounded by reporters on a muddy hillside 15 miles northeast of Jinotega, Jaime Zeledon expertly removed the ammunition clip from his nearly new AR-15 rifle to show that it was indeed loaded, then passed it around so everyone could feel its lightness.
"I owe my thanks to Mr. Reagan for this," he said.
"I wouldn't turn it in even if the Government offered me $10,000. My life depends on this weapon."


Appointment At Commerce
President Bush announced today that he had appointed John A. Shaw, 52 years old, to become the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Export Enforcement.
Mr.
Shaw, an expert on the Middle East and an associate deputy secretary at the department, replaces Quincy Mellon Krosby.
Mr.
Shaw's appointment is the latest of several personnel moves at the Commerce Department.
Eric Garfinkel, the Assistant Secretary for Import Administration, has been nominated to replace Dennis Kloske as the Under Secretary for Export Administration.
Shortly before he left the department last spring, Mr.
Kloske accused the State Department and the White House of authorizing exports of high-technology products to Iraq over his objections.


Review/Art; James Joyce's 'Ulysses' Translated for the Eye
Not many artists would tackle for their first solo show in New York City a subject as ambitious as James Joyce's "Ulysses." But the exhibition at the David Nolan Gallery in SoHo makes clear that Erwin Pfrang is not like many artists.
His suite of nearly two dozen drawings inspired by the book's Circe, or Nighttown, episode -- a phantasmagoria written in dialogue that takes place primarily in a Dublin brothel -- confirms the strong impression made two years ago when Mr.
Pfrang participated in a group show at the gallery.
The 40-year-old German artist brings to his work a combination of broiling energy, wild imagination and immense fluidity of touch that is matched to the subject at hand.
In their way, his drawings are as wry and hallucinatory as the passages by Joyce on which they are loosely based.


Officer Chasing Down Suspect Is Fatally Wounded in Bronx
A 26-year-old police officer was fatally wounded in a Bronx apartment courtyard yesterday when a suspect he was chasing suddenly whirled, opened fire with a high-powered pistol and cut him down in a fusillade of bullets.
He was the first New York City police officer to be slain in the line of duty since November 1989.
As he fell to his knees, shot through the stomach and back at points unprotected by his bulletproof vest and bleeding profusely from the mortal wounds, the officer, Hector Fontanez, returned the fire and shot his assailant, who was then captured in the courtyard at 3467 Eastchester Road, near Boston Road, the police said.


Software Toolworks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Our Towns
The Bedford Hills Correctional Facility looks just like a prison.
It has the towering fences with shining coils of razor wire.
It has the guard towers, sign-in books, metal detectors and thick windows that stifle communication.
It has sliding gates of steel bars, omniscient TV cameras perched on posts and instructions stenciled on the walls in institutional black: "Load and Unload Weapons at Shed."
But on second glance, this secluded place sprawling across the fall's fading green of Westchester County also has some unusual things: A nursery, a playroom, colorful wall murals painted toddler-tall and what sounds exactly like a baby crying down the linoleum-tiled hallway.
The place also has a nonstop nun named Sister Elaine Roulet, who thinks she's just about the luckiest person in the world to get up at 4:45 every day for a 110-mile round trip to spend the day locked inside New York's only maximum-security prison for women.


Corrections
A brief report by The Associated Press in the Company News columns of Business Day on Tuesday about plans by the Southwestern Bell Corporation to double its stake in Telefonos de Mexico referred incorrectly to the Mexican company's three classes of stock.
One existed before December 1990; only two have been issued since then.


At the Bar; A Man's Pride and Persistence Conquer the California Bar Exam's Most Famous Losing Streak.
It happened with the frequency and regularity of the equinoxes.
Every year, twice a year, year in and year out, Maxcy Filer took the California bar examination.
Every year, twice a year, he failed it.
Every year, twice a year, his wife, Blondell, filled out the form for the next go-round, and he'd begin studying again.
Along the way Mr.
Filer took every bar review course on either side of the San Andreas Fault, dropping $50,000 in fees.
He journeyed around California like Father Junipero Serra, taking tests in San Francisco, Glendale, Oakland, Riverside, Carson, Los Angeles and San Diego.
Someone approached his son once to say he'd taken the bar exam with his father.
That was no big deal, the younger Mr.
Filer replied; anyone who'd taken it in the last 25 years could make the same claim.


Yields On Bonds Plummet
Long-term bond yields fell yesterday to their lowest level since late 1989, as credit market participants reacted to a favorable inflation report and sharp declines in the money supply by bidding up the price of Treasury securities.
The upward price thrust began after the Government announced early in the session that the Producer Price Index rose by a modest two-tenths of a percent last month.
Excluding food and energy prices, the core inflation rate edged up by the same amount.  [ Page D4. ]


Review/Film; Hippiedom to Lawyerdom
The Providence, R.I., that is celebrated in "A Matter of Degrees" is a geographical location, but it's mostly a state of mind.
It's the undergraduate limbo enjoyed by Maxwell Glass (Arye Gross), who has just been accepted at law school but will not easily make the transition from late-1980's campus hippiedom to the corporate world.
An opening montage, replete with public figures ranging from Abbie Hoffman to Ronald Reagan, reflects the confusing array of influences that have shaped Max's consciousness and left him just barely able to get out of bed in the morning.
The idea of a grown-up law career seems remote at best.
"A Matter of Degrees," co-written by two Brown University alumni, Jack Mason and Randall Poster, with W. T. Morgan (who is the film's director), is extremely sympathetic to Max's predicament.
So the film adopts an attitude of anti-professionalism very like its hero's, to the point where any of the normal plot contrivances that might shape Max's story become suspect.
This means that "A Matter of Degrees" doesn't try very hard to tell a story.
Instead, it drifts with Max from classroom to junkyard to corporate party, touching all the bases of a counterculture on the verge of extinction but still clinging to a distinctive world view.
"Remember," someone remarks earnestly, "women and animals hold up two-thirds of the sky."


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about legislation to create a supercomputer network linking Federal research centers, universities and corporations misidentified an agency that would receive new financing.
It is the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, not the National Air and Space Museum.


Large Increase Is Predicted In Minorities in U.S. Schools
A new education report shows that the increasing racial and ethnic diversity of the United States is being reflected by dramatic increases in the number of Hispanic and non-white students in the nation's classrooms, so that by 1995 one-third of American public school students will be from minorities.
The two-year study, released today, was conducted by the College Board and the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education, and is the first to examine schoolchildren by racial and ethnic indentification, grade by grade, in each state and to project numbers of public high school graduates in each group through 1995.


Arbitrator Says Mallette Must Head for Edmonton
In his final hours today as a Ranger, Troy Mallette scored three goals -- his first hat trick in memory -- during a sloppy training camp scrimmage.
He ate a fast-food lunch, then turned on the television set in his hotel room.
When the phone rang, Mallette figured correctly it was General Manager Neil Smith.
He guessed the message.
The Rangers had won the arbitration.
They had retained a top prospect, Steven Rice, and Louie DeBrusk, but lost Mallette as compensation to the Edmonton Oilers for signing a free agent, Adam Graves.


Pennsylvania Prices Notes
Pennsylvania yesterday priced $1.45 billion in tax and revenue anticipation notes, through competitive bidding.
Underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs won $389 million of the issue, at a price to yield 4.75 percent.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-13
Israel's request for loan guarantees covering $10 billion should not be acted upon by Congress yet, President Bush said, threatening to use his veto to block any early Congressional action on the matter.
Page A1
The Middle East hostage drama continued to show signs of progress, but Israeli negotiators cautioned that, despite encouraging events, the process would take time.
A8


Traffic Alert
Christopher Street Fair: Christopher Street will be closed tomorrow from Hudson to West Streets from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
NAACP Street Fair: West End Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 86th to 96th Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


High Court Nominee's Testimony Continues to Frustrate Democrats
Judge Clarence Thomas faced his toughest questioning yet from exasperated Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee today, with the committee chairman, Joseph R. Biden Jr., calling one of the responses of the Supreme Court nominee "the most unartful dodge I have heard."
But committee Republicans mounted a vigorous counterattack after three days in which Judge Thomas has faced accusations that he has disavowed his extensive record to help win confirmation.
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, a Utah Republican, complained sharply that Democrats were badgering Judge Thomas and treating him far more harshly than they did Judge David H. Souter in confirmation hearings last year.


CHRONICLE
Fast forward 50 years: For Mr.
Ferrer, it is time for a reunion of the cast that included UTA HAGEN, ALFRED DRAKE and RED BUTTONS, so he plans a luncheon for Tuesday at the Players' Club "so that those of us who are still alive can reminisce." He went on: "Now it turns out that both Uta Hagen and Alfred Drake will be otherwise engaged and can't attend, and Red Buttons will probably be flying back to California."


Dollar Off in Most Trading; Prices for Gold Are Mixed
The dollar fell yesterday in another round of technical trading amid expectations that a new report showing moderate inflation will encourage the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates.
Gold prices rose in Europe but fell in New York.
At the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery was quoted at $344.30 an ounce, off $1.10.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted a late bid of $344.05, off $1.10.


Delay on Hearings for C.I.A. Pick Is Rejected
As President Bush promised today to stand by Robert M. Gates, the nominee for Director of Central Intelligence, Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, the Ohio Democrat, urged that his confirmation hearings be postponed until the conclusion of the criminal investigation into the Iran-contra affair.
But Senator David L. Boren, the Oklahoma Democrat who is chairman of the committee that is to question Mr.
Gates, refused Mr.
Metzenbaum's request to delay the hearings, scheduled to start Monday, according to David Hoffman, a spokesman for Mr.
Boren.


At Guggenheim Museum, Dialogue With Wright Never Ends; 'Corot to Monet'
To the Editor:
Your review of "The Rise of Landscape Painting in France: Corot to Monet" at the IBM Gallery of Science and Art (Aug. 2) makes no mention of Marilyn Hoffman, the Currier Gallery's director, who conceived and nurtured the exhibition over more than four years.
KIMON S. ZACHOS President, Currier Gallery of Art Manchester, N.H., Aug. 21, 1991


New York's Pollution Fight Aims at Consumer Products
Having already cracked down on the biggest sources of smog, like cars and factories, New York State is now moving to limit emissions from a variety of consumer products, from hairspray in aerosol cans to all-purpose cleaners in plastic bottles.
The proposal would require manufacturers to reformulate the products they sell in New York -- product changes that would be different from those made in aerosol cans in the late 1970's, when the Federal Government banned the use of a class of compounds known as chlorofluorocarbons.
The concern then was the depletion of atmospheric ozone; the issue now is ground-level smog.
Manufacturers Opposed
But consumers would pay for the cleaner air.
Reformulated products would cost more.
Hairsprays, deodorants, antiperspirants, air fresheners and all-purpose cleaners would rise an average of 45 cents for a 6- or 8-ounce container to cover increased manufacturing costs, the State Department of Environmental Conservation says.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Connecticut Health and Education Facility Authority priced $37.6 million in revenue bonds for the Danbury Hospital, through Cain Brothers, Shattuck &amp; Co.
The serial bonds were initially priced to yield from 4.30 percent for the nearby 1992 maturity to 6.15 percent for the year 2001.
The bonds with the longest maturity were the 6 1/2's of 2014, priced to yield 6.704 percent.
The financing is insured by MBIA Inc. and the bonds received triple-A ratings from Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Petroleos Mexicanos, known as Pemex, priced $150 million of seven-year bonds through the Swiss Bank Corporation at a price to yield 10.12 percent.


Healthwatch Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Commercial Sales Unite 3 TV Rivals
IT was not quite seeing the Montagues and the Capulets enjoy "West Side Story" together.
But yesterday, for the first time, programmers from the Big Three television networks joined forces to present their fall schedules and strategies to New York advertising agency executives.
For the trio from ABC, CBS and NBC to share a stage underscores the strikingly different and more competitive world in which the Big Three find themselves selling their annual $10 billion worth of network commercial time.
Even as they were preparing to fight one another fiercely in the 1991-92 season, which begins officially on Sunday, they were still promoting the benefits of advertising on network television.


California's Senate Passes Gay Rights Bill
The State Senate has approved legislation that would bar job discrimination against homosexuals, setting the stage for a difficult political decision by Gov.
Pete Wilson on whether to cast a veto.
The Senate's approval came Wednesday on a vote of 25 to 10 and sent the bill back to the Assembly, which passed a broader version in June but is expected to go along with the Senate measure.


Auctions
Airmail
The only autographed souvenir envelope known to survive from Amelia Earhart's 1937 round-the-world flight on which she disappeared is to be auctioned at 7 P.M. on Sept. 25 at Christie's in New York.
Autographed by Earhart and addressed to Mr.
E.
H.
Dimity, a parachute manufacturer who was her unofficial business promoter, the stamped flight cover is among 7,500 sold by Gimbels in Manhattan to raise money for the journey.
On March 17, 1937, when Earhart left Oakland, Calif., on her first attempt to circle the globe, the envelope was in one of the mail packages aboard her plane.
The plane's landing gear gave way in Honolulu, and when the plane was sent back to Oakland for repairs, the mail was returned with it.
Before Earhart left again on May 21, the damaged mail packages were rewrapped under the direction of the Post Office.
It was then, Elmer Dimity reported later, that he removed the envelope as part of a joke he planned to play when Earhart returned.
He said he had hoped to meet her with the envelope in hand, saying the mail had arrived before she did.
"Mr. Dimity sold the envelope in the 1960's on behalf of the Amelia Earhart Foundation to a dealer," said Scott R. Trepel, a Christie's consultant, who organized the auction house's sale.
The collector who bought the envelope from that dealer is the unidentified seller of the Earhart memento, which is to be sold with an affidavit from Mr.
Dimity.
Christie's estimates that the envelope will bring $20,000 to $30,000.
On the same evening, Christie's is to auction two blocks of one of the rarest United States postal stamps: the 24-cent Jenny airmail stamps from 1918 with an upside-down airplane.
Issued to commemorate the new use of the Curtiss Jenny, a biplane made famous in World War I aerial dogfights, as the aircraft that would initiate the world's first airmail service, the stamp appeared on May 14, 1918, a day before the scheduled inaugural flight.
It was an omen.
Among the dignitaries gathered in Washington to witness the takeoff of the wooden two-seater were President Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt, who was Secretary of the Navy.
The plane did not start because the fuel tank was empty.
After gasoline was siphoned from another plane, the Jenny rose and flew in the opposite direction from its destination, landing a short while later upside down in a field south of Washington.
The flipped image on the Jenny stamp -- one of the best-known errors in the history of philately -- was not discovered until William T. Robey, a 29-year-old collector, bought a sheet of 100 for $24 at a Washington post office just after the issue went on sale.
He sold it soon after for $15,000, and ever since these stamps have been bringing ever-higher prices.
The record for a block of four Jenny stamps is $1.1 million, the price paid at Christie's in New York in 1989.
Of the two examples of Jenny stamps to be auctioned next week, the more valuable one bears the initials S. De B., for Samuel De Binder, who laid out the printing plates for the upside-down Jenny stamps.
It is estimated to sell for $600,000 to $800,000.
The other block is expected to bring $500,000 to $700,000.
An Image of Kahlo
The third Frida Kahlo self-portrait from the 1940's to be auctioned in the United States in the last 16 months is to be offered at 7 P.M.
Thursday at Wolf's Fine Art Auctioneers in Cleveland.
Painted in 1941, shortly after the death of the Mexican artist's father, "Self-Portrait With Bonito" depicts a brooding Kahlo in black, her dark hair in braids and pulled back from her face, against a background of leaves, caterpillars and a butterfly.
A year later, Kahlo sent the oil-on-Masonite study to a gallery in Mexico City, which sold it to Syrie Maugham, the British decorator, who was the former wife of the writer Somerset Maugham.
Mrs.
Maugham hung the painting in her Manhattan shop, where a Cleveland collector bought it in the late 1940's.
He bequeathed it to his daughter, a Chicago woman who has not been identified and who is selling the painting, which measures about 21 by 17 inches.
Wolf's estimates it will bring $1.5 million to $2 million.
"It has a lot of things going for it, including its size," said Mary-Anne Martin, a Manhattan dealer in Latin American art.
She paid $1.4 million for Kahlo's "Diego and I," a much smaller self-portrait from 1949, in a sale in May 1990 at Sotheby's in New York.
"There are very few Kahlo paintings available that are this large."
Since 1985, Kahlo's works have been designated part of the national patrimony of Mexico, which halted their export and propelled prices upward.
Kahlo's 1947 self-portrait, three inches higher than the painting at Wolf's, brought $1.65 million at Christie's on May 15.
The price was a record for Latin American art.


Generation 5 Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Western Star Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A New York Trade Thrives on Red Tape
On many a weekday morning at, say, 5:30 or 6, a visitor to the New York City Department of Buildings will step out of an elevator into a series of empty corridors and stumble upon briefcases, standing in lines like toy soldiers, with their owners nowhere in sight.
That anyone would leave their briefcase unattended in New York for five minutes, let alone three hours, might come as something of a shock.
But then the briefcase line, marking the order of who gets first shot at seeing a building examiner, is just one of many tribal customs that have evolved over the years among expediters, to aid them in their daily battle with the Buildings Department.


Intersolv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sounds Around Town
Off-College Circuit
The Young Fresh Fellows and Dharma Bums, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
The Young Fresh Fellows, from Seattle, aren't so young anymore -- their new album, "Electric Bird Digest" (Frontier), is their sixth -- but they remain college-rockers at heart.
Onstage they kick up as big a buzz-guitar pop-punkish rumpus as possible while still managing to remain completely nonthreatening.
Long before it was hip, this foursome crossbred stupid humor and self-conscious retro gimmicks; "Electric Bird Digest" plies post-"Brady Bunch"-ers with such novelty lyrics as "Hillbilly Drummer Girl," "The Teen Thing" and "Sittin' on a Pitchfork." The Dharma Bums take college-rock stylings marginally more seriously.
Tonight at 10:30.
Tickets are $7.
Mudhoney's Indifference
Mudhoney, Marquee, 547 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 929-3257.
Mudhoney's gig generally seems to be that its members just don't care, whether rock-and-roll lives, whether television rots your brain, whether you're listening.
The anthem of the group's latest album, "Every Good Boy Deserves Fudge" (Sub Pop), is called "Let It Slide," and the lead singer, Mark Arm, sounds as though he can barely drag his voice up a note or two to follow the band's primitive punk melodies.
Somewhere between apathy and sexual frustration, their dual guitars collide into a bleak, black drone as violently compelling as the Velvet Underground's chaotic epiphanies.
Tomorrow night at 9; tickets are $12.


American Home Gets Some Help
A finding that the female hormone estrogen can sharply reduce the risk of heart attacks in middle-aged and elderly women was greeted with cheers yesterday at the American Home Products Corporation, which has a near-monopoly on estrogen treatment for postmenopausal problems.
Analysts said sales of Premarin, American Home Products' estrogen drug, would be $475 million this year and could reach $1 billion in 1995.
"The study is very good news about Premarin, which is the leading form of estrogen replacement therapy in the U.S.," said John Skule, a spokesman for the New York-based company.
Fifty million American women of the baby-boom generation are approaching menopause.


Mountain Medical Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Reluctant to Move To Hasten Castro's Fall
Although the Bush Administration believes that Moscow's plan to withdraw its military from Cuba may weaken Fidel Castro, it is reluctant to move to hasten his fall because it does not want to make Cuba a sour point in Soviet-American relations or risk antagonizing Washington's Latin American allies, Administration officials said today.
On its face, the Administration's hesitation to make any major policy changes after President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's announcement about Cuba on Wednesday seems odd against the backdrop of history.


USR Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Medicore Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about the Rosh ha-Shanah ceremony of casting sins into the water misidentified the avenue that the people were crossing on their way to the East River.
It was East End Avenue, not Second Avenue.


North Korea Tries to Block Any Effects of Failed Soviet Coup
Citing the dangers of a cholera epidemic in South Korea, North Korea canceled a meeting with officials from Seoul last month.
Then last weekend, the North Koreans tried to confine presumably diseased delegates from the South to their hotel rooms in Pyongyang.
Cholera, of course, is hardly seen as the problem.
What is feared by one of the world's last Stalinist redoubts, it seems, is contamination by the breakup of the old Soviet empire and the final dissolution of its once dependable alliance with Moscow.


Abroad at Home; Doubting Thomas
The most disturbing trend in the contemporary Supreme Court is its exaltation of Presidential power.
The Court has tilted the constitutional balance toward the executive, at the expense of Congress and individual rights.
Clarence Thomas will almost certainly intensify that trend if the Senate confirms his nomination to the Court.
For in his public comments over the last few years he has displayed hostility toward Congress and a worship of the Presidency going beyond even this executive-minded Court.


Work Stations Score in Survey
Silicon Graphics Inc. and Next Inc. scored highest in a quarterly survey of computer work station user satisfaction announced yesterday by Dataquest, a San Jose, Calif., market research firm.
The survey, called the Score Report is based on telephone interviews with more than 900 work station customers.
It will be performed quarterly by the company.


Breaching Barriers in Crown Heights
It was simple enough -- 34 young men, half of them black, half of them Hasidic Jew, meeting in a public school in Crown Heights last night until some stereotypes were eroded and some barriers came down.
"It was like, 'Why do you wear that?' 'Why do you play ball there?' " said Richard L. Murphy, the city's Commissioner of Youth Services who, along with Richard Green, director of the Crown Heights Youth Collective, had organized the meeting.
They hoped that it would be the first of a series of such gatherings in a community torn by misunderstanding.


Art in Review
Christian Garnett  Pamela Auchincloss Gallery 558 Broadway (near Prince Street) Through Oct. 9
Judging from his second solo exhibition in New York City, Christian Garnett's bright, lyrical and impeccably executed abstract paintings have two primary problems.
One of them is Gerhard Richter, an artist Mr.
Garnett evidently admires -- and with good reason -- but whose influence he should make more obscure.
The other is a certain emptiness of meaning.


Cuba III
Fidel Castro was not the only person rattled by Mikhail Gorbachev's announcement that Soviet military forces are to be withdrawn from Cuba.
Ever since Cuba I, the disastrous 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, and Cuba II, the horrifying 1962 missile crisis, Cuba has been viewed by Washington as an offshore threat and by Moscow as a strategic toehold in the Western Hemisphere.
But now hard-liners still worried about the last traces of cold war are robbed of yet another verity.
If there's ever to be a Cuba III, it's likely to be a strictly homegrown affair in which Cubans decide among themselves the future of their society.


S.E.C. Names Lawyer To Head New York Unit
The Securities and Exchange Commission has named Richard H. Walker, a Manhattan lawyer, as administrator for its New York regional office.
Mr.
Walker's responsibilities will include supervising staff and executing programs in the region, which includes New York and New Jersey.
The New York office, with a staff of 230, is the largest S.E.C. regional branch.
It is also one of the most significant regional offices because of its proximity to Wall Street and the financial markets.
Its activities include the S.E.C. enforcement program, the broker-dealer inspection program and general regulatory responsibilities.


Erly Industries reports earnings for Year to March 31


Johnson's 101 R.B.I. Do Not a Season Make
The baseball screamed into right field, the pair of runs crossed the plate in the seventh inning and Howard Johnson's total for runs driven in climbed from 99 to 101.
Johnson stood on second base, calculating what it all meant.
The achievement meant great personal satisfaction for Johnson, and stood to earn him increased respect and additional money in the future.
Still, as the right fielder for the Mets enjoyed his moment in the September sunlight at Wrigley Field, the equation he couldn't escape was that all the runs he had produced added up to nothing for the Mets.


AIDS Peril Doubtful, Minority Women Say
A majority of women in racial and ethnic minority groups mistakenly believe that they have little or no risk of contracting AIDS, according to a new survey.
Dr.
Dorothy I. Height, president of the National Council of Negro Women, which sponsored the study, said that was a "fearsome revelation," especially when combined with information from the survey showing that many minority women do not regularly receive medical care.


How to Reassure the Hesitant Plaintiff
To the Editor:
The most important items of the Solicitor General's proposals for reducing litigation, presented by Vice President Dan Quayle to the American Bar Association convention (front page, Aug. 14), is a proposed general rule for awarding reasonable compensation for litigation expenses to successful litigants.
I am concerned about cases in which defendants are forced to spend vast sums for a successful defense, without being able to recover anything from the opponent to cover expenses.


Courier Dispatch Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rigidity Gone, Soviet Schools Learn Dissonance
"Well, they have to change the geography lessons now," said 12-year-old Alyosha Prokofyev, a seventh-grader at Moscow's School No. 716.
"The borders of this country aren't the same any more."
Alyosha's remarks, made as he and his schoolmates in the advanced mathematics class gathered for a watermelon feast, might be echoed in the fields of Soviet history and literature, although you could also get an argument on that point.


Channel 13 to Show Film on AIDS Protest
Channel 13 announced late yesterday that it would broadcast "Stop the Church," a documentary chronicling the 1989 demonstration and disruption of Mass at St.
Patrick's Cathedral by the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (Act Up), tonight at 11:35 P.M.
In August the film was dropped from national distribution by the Public Broadcasting Service, which had originally scheduled it to be shown in the "P.O.V." series of independently made documentaries.


Quotation of the Day
"There is a tremendous sense of euphoria and the feeling that we have begun a new era in the Cuban drama. People see this as the beginning of the end of the Castro regime." -- Tomas Regalado, news director of a Spanish-language radio station in Miami.  [ A13:1. ]


Aide to Cuomo Warns of Need To Control Press
In what will likely add embarrassment to the goodwill Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo hopes to take to Japan later this month, an economics adviser to the Governor has urged him to talk tough with the Japanese to avoid appearing naive on foreign affairs, and to take steps to "control" media coverage during his trip.
An internal memorandum, which Cuomo admininistration officials sought to dismiss today as "inane" and "presumptuous," was written by Stephen Schlesinger.
He is the research director for the international division of the Department of Economic Development and has worked for Mr.
Cuomo since 1983.
The memorandum dwelled on possible media coverage of the Governor's five-day trip, which begins Sept. 28, warning that "the persistent criticism that you know nothing about foreign affairs has endured."


At Guggenheim Museum, Dialogue With Wright Never Ends
To the Editor:
While those of us who worked hard to realize the new addition to the Guggenheim Museum applaud the enterprise, your Aug. 12 article contains statements and omissions that lead to erroneous conclusions.


DEP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ray Berry Burton Jr.; Executive, 52
Ray Berry Burton Jr., a founding principal of the New York investment-management firm of Trevor Stewart Burton &amp; Jacobsen Inc., died on Tuesday at Lawrence &amp; Memorial Hospitals in New London, Conn.
He was 52 years old and lived in Niantic, Conn., and Manhattan.
He died of complications from liver disease, a company spokesman said.


Rocky Mountain Helicopters reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


On Stage, and Off
Strings Strike Back
If you've recently walked past "Grand Hotel: The Musical" at the Martin Beck Theater, you were probably urged to think pink, which is making the show's producers see red.
Members of Local 802, the musicians' union, have been handing out pink fliers entitled, "Grand Hotel: The Ripoff." They are angry about the producers' decision last week to lay off the show's entire string section, a total of eight musicians, and replace them with a synthesizer.
The move is saving the Tommy Tune show a much-needed $10,000 a week in expenses.
But the musicians call the decision a "ripoff." John Glasel, the president of Local 802, says: "What they're doing is consumer fraud. They have debased a show that won Tony Awards and are charging $60 a ticket for it. The public has a right to know that they're getting an el cheapo product."
Some pretty serious charges, to be sure, and they are not being taken lightly, either by the show's producers or by the League of American Theaters and Producers, the organization of Broadway producers.
They say that they've played by the rules and that the musicians are sore losers.
The house minimum for the Beck -- the minimum number of musicians the union will allow -- is 16, and the layoffs reduced the orchestra to 16 from 24, so the contract has not been violated.
But the musicians cite their union's bylaws, which state musicians can't be replaced with a synthesizer.
They took the producers to a union arbitration and lost because the orchestra has not been cut below the minimum.
Undeterred, the musicians started the leaflet campaign.
Mr.
Glasel says: "The producers could find other ways to save money. They could ask for waivers of royalties from the creators." Does he know for a fact that they haven't?
Well, no, but he says, "I assume it hasn't been done."
Marvin Krauss, the general manager and a co-producer of "Grand Hotel," says its creators are all in a royalty pool that automatically rations the profits according to the weekly gross, insuring that no one's profits can hurt the show's health.
More to the point, he says, is that "the musicians' union is trying to abrogate the contract because they didn't like the outcome of the arbitration."
Mr.
Glasel sent a letter about the leaflets to all Broadway musicians last week, in which he says, "Patrons are generally sympathetic and some have asked for their money back." Absolutely false, says Mr.
Krauss.
"No one has asked for their money back," he says.
"Not a single peso."
O.K.
Disputes between producers and unions are nothing new.
But what about the larger question, of whether live musicians might ever be an endangered species on Broadway?
Probably not, say producers who maintain that the only reason this issue has got so much attention is a matter of money; when synthesizers are used in place of live musicians at other shows, union members must still be put on the payroll, because the producer must honor that house miminum.
Caryl Churchill fans, take note: New York Theater Workshop will present the American premiere of her play "Mad Forest" at the Perry Street Theater from Nov. 22 through Dec. 29.
Miss Churchill wrote the piece in 1989 after accompanying students from the Central School of Drama in Britain to Bucharest, Romania, where they all stayed with drama students and their families to "develop the piece," says the theater's artistic director, James C. Nicola.
He says that the play begins before the 1989 revolution and follows one family through it and its aftermath, "the kind of poisonous atmosphere of finger-pointing internalized by people and not so easily overthrown as a government." "Mad Forest" was produced last fall at the Royal Court Theater in London, where it was directed by Mark Wing-Davey, who will also direct it here with an American cast.
Information: (212) 302-NYTW.
The Bar of the Show
The Broadway opening that's generating the most excitement in the theater this week isn't a play.
It's a bar.
Look for the Edwin Forrest Bar to open next door to the Eugene O'Neill Theater where the new Cameron Mackintosh revue, "Five Guys Named Moe," is to open on April 8.
Because the show calls for action in the bar area during intermission, Jujamcyn Theaters, which owns the O'Neill, has arranged to lease the space next door in the Hotel Consulate that was most recently occupied by the restaurant Columbus on Broadway.
Paul Libin, the producing director of Jujamcyn, says that both the O'Neill and the Consulate were originally named the Edwin Forrest and joined by two entrances at the theater's rear.
He says that they will be reopened, and that after each show, the Forrest, as the bar will be known, will be open to the public.
If business is good, Mr.
Libin says, they might serve lunch and supper, too.
From Walls to the Boards
A rap writer and graffiti painter named Seth Zvi Rosenfeld?
It's true, and he grew up to be a playwright.
The 29-year-old writer's new play, "Servy-N-Bernice 4Ever," starts performances at the Provincetown Playhouse on Oct. 5 under the direction of Terry Kinney, a co-founder of the Steppenwolf Theater Company.
D.
B.
Sweeney co-stars with Lisa Gay Hamilton, Cynthia Nixon and Eric King in what is described as an interracial love story with a twist.
Mr.
Rosenfeld has written a screen adaptation of his first play, "The Writing on the Wall," which was developed at Ensemble Studio Theater, for New Line Cinema.
Joey Vasquez ("Hangin' With the Homeboys") will direct.
Another new play with a race-related theme is "Distant Fires," by Kevin Heelan, which will begin previews on Oct. 11 at the Atlantic Theater Company, directed by Clark Gregg.
The play is about two laborers, one black, one white, who are competing for the same union post.


Keeping Up With the Joneses' PC
In a move that speaks volumes about the changing computer industry, I.B.M. recently began letting consumers trade in their old personal computers for a discount on a new one.
Thus is the personal computer business becoming akin to selling automobiles.
Like the car, the personal computer is turning into a replacement product, because many businesses and homes that are most likely to use computers already have them.
After a decade of rapid growth from selling computers to new users, companies big and small are increasingly reliant on selling replacement machines or improved versions of software.


New Museum of TV Opens
The Museum of Television and Radio opened its new 17-story building yesterday at 25 West 52d Street in Manhattan.
The structure, which is nearly four times the size of the museum's previous space at 1 East 53d Street, was designed by the firm of John Burgee Architects, with Philip Johnson as design consultant.
The museum offers 96 radio and television consoles for public use, a 200-seat theater, a 90-seat theater, two 45-seat screening rooms, a museum shop, a radio listening room and gallery space for changing exhibits.
To inaugurate its new building, the museum will present "Seven Decades of Radio and Television," a yearlong series of exhibitions, programs and seminars based on the museum's collection of more than 40,000 programs.
The museum's hours are Tuesdays through Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.; except Thursdays, when the museum stays open until 8 P.M., and Fridays, when the theaters are open until 9 P.M.
Suggested admission is $5 for adults, $4 for students and $3 for the elderly and children under 13.
Information: (212) 621-6800.


Polaroid to Buy Back Fund's Large Holding
The Polaroid Corporation said yesterday that it would use most of the $400 million remaining from the settlement of its successful patent battle with the Eastman Kodak Company to buy back the preferred stock holdings of Corporate Partners, an investment fund that rescued Polaroid from a takeover attempt in 1989.
The company also said that it would increase the sum it planned to spend on repurchasing common shares to $150 million, $26 million more than previously announced.
And $30 million after taxes will be distributed to employees under the company's profit-sharing plan.


Beirut Father Still Awaits Daughters' Release
Mohammed Awada lit another cigarette today as he paced the entrance of the offices of An Nahar, the Beirut newspaper where he works as doorman.
Restlessly, he fiddled with the dial of a small radio he was holding to his ear as he listened to a broadcast of the names of prisoners whom Israel had released on Wednesday.
As the announcer went down the list of 51 inmates freed from the Israelis' Khiyam prison in southern Lebanon, beads of perspiration gathered on Mr.
Awada's forehead.
When the announcer reached the last name, Mr.
Awadah collapsed on a nearby chair, covered his face with his hands and wept silently.
His two daughters, ages 22 and 25, were not on the list.


Pavichevich Brewing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Accounts
*
The Italian Trade Commission's Italian wines account to McCaffery &amp; Ratner, New York, to create $7 million-plus worth of advertising for wines from Italy's 20 wine-growing regions.
The agency said Della Femina, McNamee, New York; Geer, DuBois, New York, and Armando Testa Advertising, Milan, were also finalists in the review.


Books of The Times; Judaism, Anti-Semitism And Freud: A New View
Freud's Moses  Judaism Terminable and Interminable  By Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi 159 pages.
Yale University Press. $25.


General Host reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 11


SENATE VOTES BILL TO LET CLINICS GIVE ABORTION COUNSEL
Flirting again with the threat of a Presidential veto, the Senate today approved a measure overturning a ban on abortion counseling in federally financed clinics and allowing Medicaid to pay for abortions for poor women who are the victims of rape and incest.
The bill passed, 78 to 22, with 25 Republicans joining 53 Democrats in support of the measure.
The vote was well over the two-thirds margin the Senate would need to override a veto by President Bush.
But because the bill provided money for many popular programs, each of which brought its own support to the overall measure, that tally was no indication of the potential for overriding a veto.  [ Senate roll-call, page A16. ]


Worthington Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Restaurants
Contrapunto
Nine-year-old Contrapunto, the vibrant pasta palace across Lexington Avenue from Bloomingdale's in the middle of the East Side cinema district, has more energy than an Arnold Schwarzenegger thriller.
The reason is simple: pleasing and moderately priced pastas, salads and seafood in a congenial setting.
It's no wonder there is a wait for tables -- usually a short one, though -- virtually every night.
Contrapunto has not changed noticeably since the first time it was reviewed in 1984, in either strengths or weaknesses.
The all-white, tightly assembled dining room with an open kitchen and spotlighted tables can be clamorous at times, but rarely overwhelming.
The young servers keep on top of things with relative success, but don't expect refined service (table-cleaning, wine-pouring, knowing who gets what).
You start with slabs of moist, chewy country bread with good olive oil for dipping and marinated black olives.
The sourdough loaves make excellent crostini when toasted and heaped with a mixture of broccoli, roasted peppers, onions and sun-dried tomatoes.
The kitchen knows how to dress a salad, too, something so many restaurants neglect.
The arugula salad with radicchio and goat cheese is a sprightly example, as is the house salad with mixed organic greens, balsamic vinegar and olive oil.
Spongy fresh mozzarella goes well with translucent sheets of prosciutto, olives and chives, although the combination needed more olive oil, and pepper.
Salty dried ricotta is a snappy match for roasted red peppers and tomatoes.
The a la minute cooking technique for pasta works with certain ingredients, particularly seafood, but occasionally the rushed method is insufficient to create a cohesive, flavorful sauce.
For instance, the tagliatelle tossed with marinated olives, tomato, basil, crushed red peppers, garlic, Parmesan and olive oil was not at all integrated; you tasted only what you happened to be chewing.
The same problem diminished the tagliarini forte, tossed with arugula, pancetta, tomatoes, jalapenos and Parmesan.
Yet more dishes succeed than fail.
One example is the tagliarini conga d'oro, with sweet peppers, zucchini, eggplant, tomato, lots of garlic and olive oil.
One reason this worked is that all the ingredients were finely chopped and then cooked evenly and thoroughly.
Other winners were rigatoni with a concentrated tomato sauce, tart dried ricotta, eggplant and basil; fettuccine aragosta, with lobster, sage and butter, and fusilli pollo, with moist pieces of chicken breast, carrots, radicchio, onions and Parmesan.
Both non-pasta dishes I sampled excelled: a nicely browned broiled veal chop with roasted red potatoes and braised escarole, and a split, broiled Cornish hen with sliced garlic and a delicious broth of lemon juice, olive oil, white wine and butter.
Contapunto's limited wine list could be better selected to match the prices of the food.
Nine of 14 whites and eight of 12 reds are $25 or over.
Desserts here have never been special in my experience; nor are they now.
Blueberry crumb pie with vanilla ice cream was the best sampled.
Chocolate spice cake was a bland Gibraltar devoid of spice, and instead of bitter-orange ice cream, we received coconut.
When I pointed this out to the waiter, he replied: "They all look alike back there. Probably somebody mixed them up." He then walked away.
Five minutes later, a dish of nondescript orange ice cream was plunked on our table by a waitress, with no apology, no explanation.
Contrapunto continues to serve a high-profile function in this vibrant neighborhood.
With just a little refinement, its reputation could soar beyond Bloomiesland.
Arcadia
It's not easy in these financially difficult times to charge $55 for a prix-fixe dinner, especially at a restaurant with a relatively small menu, a limited wine list, and a charming but not sumptuous setting.
Yet Arcadia manages to fill the house nightly with well-heeled fans of the contemporary all-American cooking of Anne Rosenzweig, the chef and owner.
And, it is interesting to note, the prix fixe has not changed since the restaurant was last reviewed, in 1988.
The 40-seat main dining room is indeed enchanting, with its bucolic wraparound mural, soft peripheral lighting and comfortable banquettes.
The bar area can be intimate at off hours, tumultuous when patrons are coming and going en masse.
You can savor a bit of the waning summer with an appetizer of fresh tomato soup, ripe and concentrated, served with little sandwiches of goat cheese on warm brioche.
Vichyssoise, though, was watery and tasteless.
A salad of field greens was beautiful to look at but inadequately dressed, and Arcadian Caesar salad with arugula and brioche croutons suffered the same problem.
A sublime starter is foie gras over slices of brioche toast with a white raisin chutney.
Creme fraiche and caviar are scintillating, too, served with thick, moist corn cakes.
Pasta appetizers change frequently, but the two that I sampled were unexciting: ribbon pasta with tomatoes, olives and basil desperately needed seasoning, especially salt, and fettuccine with buckwheat, greens and a compote of figs was so bullied by the buckwheat that I tasted nothing else.
Arcadia's wine list features quality labels, some of them uncommon finds, but bargains are as rare as free parking outside the restaurant.
Among the better deals in whites are the 1988 Schleret riesling, herbal and crisp ($28), and the fresh, tart Frog's Leap 1990 sauvignon blanc ($24).
In reds, a 1988 Gigondas, Domaine du Gour de Chaule, is elegant and full of fruit ($25), as is the 1988 Bridgehampton merlot ($26).
The waiters at Arcadia are sharper now than the last time the restaurant was reviewed.
Even at peak hours, dinner moves at a comfortable, leisurely pace.
The best main courses are the most straightforward ones.
Roast boneless chicken, a special, had a thin, brittle skin and came with potato pancakes and delicious crinkly kale.
Grilled duck breast was pink and flavorful, served with grilled slivers of sweet potatoes and well-seasoned spinach.
One of Ms.
Rosenzweig's signature dishes is called chimney-smoked lobster, in which smoked lobster meat is served in the shell, along with a tasty layered noodle cake and zucchini.
The lobster, which appeared to be only about a one-pounder, was fresh and perfectly cooked.
But to my mind it did not merit a $7 supplement to the $55 menu.
A special one evening was seared tuna over a zesty mix of black beans, white beans, tomato and herbs.
It was garnished with buckwheat-coated oysters, which could have been wrapped in burlap for all the oyster flavor that came through.
Poached salmon, though, was nicely executed with a saffron beurre blanc and sugar snap peas.
The whimsical soft-shell crab "club" is not really a sandwich, but rather a tower of small, deep-fried soft-shell crabs over a sprightly corn-and-tomato relish with crunchy fried plantains scattered around the plate.
Another fish on the menu, sauteed breaded blackfish, was well cooked but bland.
The first-rate desserts are as all-American as a George M. Cohan medley: warm peach crumble with blueberry ice cream; sweet ripe cherries with cherry-almond ice cream over a light biscuit; strawberry shortcake with strawberry ice cream and blueberry garnish, and apricot tart on a phyllo dough crust.
Arcadia is one of those institutions that endear regular patrons with homespun beguilements.
That it slips up occasionally doesn't really matter.
For them, Arcadia is like home.
Contrapunto *
200 East 60th Street, Manhattan, (212) 751-8616.
Atmosphere: All-white, close and sometimes clamorous dining room.
Service: Reasonably efficient, but don't expect the fine details to be taken care of.
Wine: Limited list with prices relatively high compared to the food.
Price range: Lunch: appetizers $5 to $9, main courses $12 to $20; Dinner: appetizers $6 to $10; main courses $13.50 to $22.50.
Credit cards: All major cards.
Hours: Lunch: noon to 5 P.M.
Monday to Saturday; dinner, Monday to Saturday, 5 to 11:45 P.M.
Sunday dinner: noon to 11:45 P.M.
Reservations: Not accepted.
Wheelchair accessibility: Two flights of stairs to dining room. Arcadia **
21 East 62d Street, Manhattan, (212) 223-2900.
Atmosphere: Charming, intimate dining room with a bucolic wraparound mural.
Service: Prompt and efficient.
Recommended dishes: Corn cakes with creme fraiche and caviar, tomato soup with goat cheese sandwiches, grilled duck breast with grilled sweet potatoes, poached salmon with saffron beurre blanc, soft-shell crab "club," roast chicken with potato pancakes and kale, warm peach crumble with blueberry ice cream, sweet ripe cherries with cherry-almond ice cream over a light biscuit, strawberry shortcake with strawberry ice cream and blueberry garnish, and apricot tart on a phyllo dough crust.
Wine: Well-selected, moderate-sized list, skewed toward expensive wines.
Price range: Lunch: appetizers: $7 to $14, main courses $16 to $23; dinner, prix fixe $55.
Credit cards: American Express, Visa, Mastercard.
Hours: Lunch: noon to 2 P.M.
Monday to Friday; dinner: 6 to 10 P.M.
Monday to Saturday; closed Sunday.
Reservations: Necessary.
Wheelchair accessibility: Everything on one level.
What the stars mean: (None) Poor to Satisfactory *
Good **
Very Good ***
Excellent ****
Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambiance and service taken into consideration.
Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months.
Touch-line telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).


Westbridge Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Strife, Too, Forms Part Of Wilson's Legacy
To the Editor:
After noting Woodrow Wilson's careless loosing of the term "self-determination" on the world and Secretary of State Robert Lansing's perceptive criticism of it, Karl E. Meyer in "Woodrow Wilson's Dynamite" (Editorial Notebook, Aug. 14) still lauds the benefits to "a billion people whose liberation has been speeded by a doctrine enshrined in the first article of the United Nations Charter."


Inmac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Sony Shows Data Discman
The Sony Corporation yesterday formally introduced its hand-held information computer, the Data Discman.
The device, which will cost $550 and be available in stores in November, plays small compact disks capable of containing the equivalent of 100,000 pages of text.
Three disks, including encyclopedias and a foreign language translator, will be included with the computer.
More than 20 other titles, including a single disk containing a national Yellow Pages directory and the Official Airline Guide flight schedule will also be available.
The guide will provide travelers with a monthly update for $149 a year.


Sketches of the 5 Astronauts Aboard the Shuttle Discovery
John O. Creighton:
Mission Commander
Captain Creighton, a 48-year-old Navy pilot, made his first trip into space six years ago as the pilot of the shuttle Discovery.


Grain and Soybeans Higher On Prospect for Soviet Aid
The prospect of food shipments to the Soviet Union and the threat of a diminished crop in this country sent grain and soybean futures prices higher yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.
After the close of trading, however, the Agriculture Department released new data estimating that the harvest of major crops would be about what had been expected.


EX-C.I.A. OFFICIAL DENIES 10 CHARGES
A defiant-looking Clair E. George pleaded not guilty today to charges arising from the Iran-contra affair, opening a potentially long and circuitous legal battle between the independent prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, and the most senior Central Intelligence Agency official to be charged in the affair.
In legal papers and courtroom remarks today, lawyers for Mr.
Walsh indicated that they expected Mr.
George's trial to raise the same thorny questions about the disclosure of state secrets that crippled the long prosecution of Oliver L. North, a central figure in the scandal.


Fidelity National Financial reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


The Hearings on Television
The Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court will be shown on four channels today, beginning at 10 A.M.
Eastern daylight time.
The Public Broadcasting Service will have gavel-to-gavel coverage of the hearing, with no commercial interruptions.


CHRONICLE
Hollywood seems to be in a marrying mode, with two star-caliber weddings last weekend.
On Sunday, GENE WILDER married KAREN WEBB, a hearing specialist who helped prepare him for the role of a deaf man in the 1989 film, "See No Evil, Hear No Evil." The ceremony, at their home in an undisclosed location in Connecticut took place in the presence of close family members.
No details were divulged, The Associated Press reported.
It was the third marriage for Mr.
Wilder, who is 55 years old, and the second for Miss Webb, who is described by his publicity agent as in her 40's.
Mr.
Wilder's second wife, Gilda Radner, died of ovarian cancer in May 1989.


2 Firms Had Losses in Salomon's Squeeze
Two member firms of the New York Stock Exchange lost "millions and millions" of dollars when Salomon Brothers squeezed the Treasuries market in May, a Big Board official told Congress yesterday.
The official, Edward Kwallwasser, executive vice president for the Big Board's regulatory group, also said several traders at the firms had lost their jobs because their bosses believed they had made bad trading decisions that cost their firms money.


Panic Over Giants? No. Nitpick? By All Means.
The Giants lost last Sunday to the Los Angeles Rams, and they could lose this Sunday to the Chicago Bears.
The offense has been shaky and the defense has been left with bad field position.
There are little cracks in the wall.
What does it mean?
Well, it hardly means that the Super Bowl champions, with a 1-1 record, are doomed to a losing season or will not make the playoffs.
It does not mean there should be or will be panic.
It does mean that there are concerns, that all is not smooth in dreamland, that small problems may become big problems.


Efraim Racker, Who Discovered Traits in Cancer Cells, Dies at 78
Efraim Racker, a leading researcher on energy storage in living cells and its implications for cancer, died on Monday at University Hospital in Syracuse.
He was 78 years old and lived in Ithaca.
He died of a stroke, said a spokeswoman for Cornell University, where Dr.
Racker was on the faculty.


Toreador Royalty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Colonial Municipal reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Strike the Gold, Through Cordero's Eyes
Angel Cordero Jr. stood outside Barn 9 at Belmont Park not long after dawn yesterday and aimed his video camera on the chestnut colt striding toward the track with Jamie Sanders on his back and Nick Zito, his trainer, walking alongside.
This was no ordinary race horse: This was Strike the Gold, who won the Kentucky Derby four months ago.
And Cordero was no ordinary visitor aiming his camcorder: He replaced Chris Antley as the horse's jockey last month, and he will be in the saddle Sunday when Strike the Gold challenges six senior stars in the $500,000 Woodward Stakes, one of the classics of New York racing and the climactic event in the 10-race American Championship Racing Series.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business Page on Sept. 5 about the awarding of the Sanofi Beauty Products advertising account listed one finalist erroneously.
Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, the incumbent agency, resigned from the account in April and did not participate in the review.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly AD HOC COMMITTEE TO REVIEW AFRICA RECOVERY PROGRAM -- 3 P.M.
ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF DPI FOR NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Producer Price Report Is Encouraging on Inflation
In a heartening report on inflation, prices at the producer level rose two-tenths of 1 percent in August, a modest increase caused mainly by higher oil prices that have since subsided, Labor Department figures showed today.
The report, which was somewhat better than expected, touched off a rally in the market for fixed-income securities as investors and traders viewed it as increasing the chances of a new and prompt easing of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve.
"The economy would benefit from additional monetary stimulation, and there's very little chance of stirring up inflation by doing so," asserted Ron Schreibman, vice president of the National Association of Wholesaler-Distributors.
The trade group's members closely follow the Producer Price Index since it reflects transactions with their suppliers.
Expectations of the Fed
The Federal Reserve generally seeks to avoid appearing to respond to any particular piece of economic news but analysts said today that the next, long-anticipated round of rate cuts could come at any time.
On Friday morning the Government is to publish its comprehensive report on retail sales during August and on inflation at the consumer level.
Both are expected to reflect sluggish economic conditions.
"This prepares the way some more for the Fed to ease," said Samuel D. Kahan, chief financial economist for Fuji Securities in Chicago.
Comparing a cut in short-term rates to an apple fully ripened on a tree, he said, "Today, tomorrow, we know it's going to fall."
The most recent Fed easing came in early August on the heels of weak employment data.
The two-tenths of 1 percent rise in the index for finished goods followed modest declines for June and July, but analysts noted that prices would have been unchanged if energy prices are excluded.
They added that political uncertainty in the Soviet Union, the world's biggest oil producer, was a chief factor for a 4.6 percent jump in gasoline, which had dropped 5.5 percent in July.
Oil Prices Letting Up
Recently, oil prices have eased and economists said they did not expect overall energy prices -- up 1.8 percent last month -- to prove an obstacle to further reductions in inflation.
The so-called core rate of inflation, which eliminates food as well as energy, also rose two-tenths of 1 percent in August.
This was the same pace as in July and in May, with June unchanged.
The Labor Department revised downward today the pace of inflation it reported earlier for April and May.
Of further encouragement to analysts was the fact that the producer price indexes for goods at the intermediate and crude stages of production were also held in check.
Intermediate goods rose four-tenths of 1 percent over all, but just one-tenth without energy; crude goods were unchanged over all, but 1.1 percent lower without energy.
A dress or suit of clothes would be an example of a finished good, an item that will not undergo further processing and is ready for sale to the final user, either an individual consumer or a business.
In this case, a bolt of cloth would be the intermediate good and the raw cotton or wool the crude good. 'Inflation Is Under Control'
"These figures conclusively demonstrate that inflation is under control," said Jerry Jasinowski, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, noting that core inflation at the producer level has remained at about 2.5 percent since February.
The 1.8 percent jump in finished energy prices last month, which included a decline in residential natural gas, was significantly offset by a four-tenths of 1 percent decline in consumer foods.
Beef and veal fell 4.7 percent, and prices also fell for fish, fresh and processed fruits and vegetables, soft drinks and pork.
But passenger cars and tobacco prices both advanced 1.1 percent as did women's apparel, household appliances, prescription drugs, glassware and textbooks.
Automobile prices fell four-tenths of 1 percent before seasonal adjustment.
Prices for Manufacturers
Among intermediate goods, materials for nondurable manufacturing, like paint and chemicals, rose three-tenths of 1 percent, the first increase for this category since November, the report showed.
Materials for durable manufacturing, like copper and brass mill shapes, fell seven-tenths of 1 percent following a one-tenth of 1 percent decline in July.
Finished capital equipment rose one-tenth of 1 percent for the second straight month, as increases for cars, civilian aircraft, agricultural machinery and construction machiner more than offset lower prices for computers, oilfield machinery and trucks.
For the first eight months of the year, prices of finished goods have fallen at an annual rate of 1.1 percent, the report also showed.
Since August 1990 there has been a 2 percent advance.


Amrep Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Northern Telecom
Northern Telecom Ltd. said its STC Submarine Systems unit was awarded a $65 million contract to supply the first international undersea fiber-optic cable connection to the Soviet Union.
The cable will provide a 750-mile multimedia telecommunications link to support new international data, vision and voice telecommunications services.


Review/Film; Smoldering Blend From Unlikely Raw Material
The plot of Mike Figgis's seductive "Liebestraum" is sheer madness, as crazy as the swing-time rendition of a Franz Liszt piano composition from which the film takes its title.
Yet Mr.
Figgis is very capable of teasing a voluptuous blend of danger and sexual possibility out of improbable raw material, as he made clear in his earlier "Stormy Monday" and "Internal Affairs."
This time, a watchful young architectural writer, a restless wife, a dying mother and a cast-iron department store become caught up in a mystery that harks back to a murder of nearly 40 years ago.
As in Kenneth Branagh's current "Dead Again," the crime is born of sexual jealousy and lives on mysteriously to haunt a whole new generation.
But if Mr.
Figgis's film, which opens today at Village Theater VII, has an overabundance of the steaminess that is so absent from "Dead Again," it has a lot less in the way of narrative logic.
The far-fetched denouement of "Dead Again" is small potatoes compared with the resolution that "Liebestraum" has in store.


INSIDE
Israel Says Time Is Key To End Hostage Crisis
More pieces fell into place in the diplomatic puzzle of ending the Mideast hostage crisis, but Israeli negotiators said the process would take time.
Israel said it had received the body of an Israeli soldier who was missing in Lebanon, and it sent a Palestinian exile home.
Page A8.
Officer Killed in Bronx
A 26-year-old police officer was killed in a shoot-out with a suspect he was chasing in a courtyard.
The suspect was in serious condition.
Page B1.
Friedman Sentence Reduced
Stanley M. Friedman, the once-powerful Bronx politician, will not have to serve a separate state prison sentence after his Federal one.
Page B1.
Behind the Condom Vote
Mayor Dinkins played a key role in the school board vote to let high school students receive condoms without any say by parents.
Page B1.
Age of Computer Trade-Ins
With so many personal computers in use, I.B.M. and others must find new ways of selling, like offering dis counts for trade-ins.
Page D1.


Strober Organization Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Prepares for Admission of Baltic Countries


International TV From Banff Festival
Highlights of the Banff Television Festival will be shown this weekend at the Hotel Macklowe Conference Center in Manhattan.
The Center for Communication, a nonprofit organization that produces workshops and seminars on communications, is showing 30 hours of international programs, all from winners at the Canadian festival in Banff, Alberta.
In addition to the programs from the festival, the center is presenting seminars on international television this morning and afternoon.
The seminars will be held at the General Electric Auditorium, 570 Lexington Avenue, near 51st Street, in Manhattan.
The screenings, at the Hotel Macklowe Conference Center, 145 West 44th Street, are free and run from 9:30 A.M. to 6 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
For seminar reservations and a screening schedule, the number is (212) 836-3050.


Congress Is Given Plan To Alter S.&amp; L. Rescue
A top Treasury official said today that the Bush Administration had reluctantly agreed to accept a new approach suggested by the nation's senior banking regulator for running the savings and loan bailout.
Appearing before a House Banking subcommittee, the Deputy Treasury Secretary, John E. Robson, said that he and L. William Seidman, the chairman of the Resolution Trust Corporation, had come up with "something we would find acceptable" to restructure the agency.


Brixham Journal; For Fishermen, an Economy as Cruel as the Sea
No one knows why the Ocean Hound went down in thick fog off Dover last month, taking all five hands with her.
When divers found the wreck of the 73-foot boat on the seabed her tangled nets were still bulging with fish.
Among the hundreds who gathered recently in an ancient stone church to raise hymns and sad, sweet prayers for those lost at sea, the ritual had a numbing familiarity: more boats and men have gone down off the coast of Britain this year than any other year in recent memory.


One Liberty Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; Dreaming of a Better Life In a Melodramatic Comedy
"Blood and Concrete," opening today at the Village East Cinemas, is a melodramatic comedy about Joey (Billy Zane), a good-looking, incompetent young Los Angeles hood, and Mona (Jennifer Beals), a sweet, vacuous, would-be rock singer, each of whom dreams of a better life.
They meet cute.
Having just been stabbed by a man whose television set he was stealing, Joey runs into a cemetery to hide.
Mona is sitting on the ground, burning snapshots of faithless lovers as she prepares to cut her wrists.
When he collapses on top of her, she asks, "Are we dead?" He says he doesn't think so.


Silvan A. Tesoriere; Dean, 76
Silvan A. Tesoriere, a retired dean of the Fordham University School of Business Administration, died on Sunday at Southampton Hospital.
He was 76 years old and lived in Southampton, L.I.
He died of bone cancer, his family said.


Selfix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Admar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Market Place; Amex Plans a New Market For Trading Small Stocks
The American Stock Exchange, seeking to compete with the over-the-counter market, said yesterday that it would start a new, separate listing of companies that meet sharply lower requirements in terms of size and market capitalization.
The move, if successful, could provide the Amex with a roster of new listings in what it dubbed an "emerging company marketplace," which it will try to portray as superior to the lower levels of Nasdaq.
The hope is that some companies will eventually graduate to the regular Amex.


Semtech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4


Divorce Retaliation Supplies New Lead in '83 Murder
Testifying in a Queens divorce case, a woman yesterday accused her former husband of arranging the unsolved 1983 killing of a millionaire consultant, helping to revive a celebrated case whose investigation had stalled long ago amid hints of international arms and drug deals.
The State Police, who had exhausted all leads in the tangled case, said yesterday that the woman's accusations and other recent tips had provided new avenues of investigation in the death of George M. Perry, whose body was found in a lake in Orange County, N.Y., in April 1983, three months after he vanished from a Manhattan hotel.
He had been shot in the head, weights had been attached to his legs and investigators had said his body might have been dropped into the lake from a helicopter.


How to Reassure the Hesitant Plaintiff; Missing Lawyers
To the Editor:
Floyd N. York, chairman of Roslyn Savings Bank, suggests (letter, Aug. 21) that lawyers are the real culprits behind the savings and loan debacle.
In a perverse way, he is correct in his belief that lawyers are a part of this scandal, but not the way he suggests.


Art in Review
Al Held: The Italian Watercolors  Andre Emmerich Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through Oct. 12
These two dozen watercolors signify a shift in the work of this important abstract artist.
They were painted in Italy.
Their palette and in some cases their imitation of the format of altarpieces and predellas suggest that Mr.
Held was influenced by Italian Renaissance art.


A Dewhurst Triumph
To the Editor:
Colleen Dewhurst's obituary (Aug. 24) overlooks what many Dewhurst fans consider her most memorable and riveting performance -- that of Studs's mother in the television film version of "Studs Lonigan," James T. Farrell's classic.
In this meaty role, Miss Dewhurst disports herself on screen for four-and-a-half magnificent hours as an Irish-American monster who was not created by Eugene O'Neill.
MICHAEL JOHN DORN Princeton, N.J., Aug. 24, 1991


S. E. Peal, 68, Is Dead; Ex-Envoy From Liberia
S.
Edward Peal, formerly Liberia's Ambassador to the United States and dean of the African diplomatic corps in America, died yesterday in a hospital in Arlington, Va.
He was 68 years old.
His family said he died of complications from hepatitis, which he had contracted this summer while on a trip to Liberia to deliver a check for relief aid.


One Aquino's Painful Stand on Bases
Among the Philippine senators prepared to vote to shut down the largest American military base in Asia, none makes quite the same sacrifice as Senator Agapito Aquino, brother-in-law of President Corazon C. Aquino and younger brother of her slain husband, Benigno S. Aquino Jr.
Since he announced his opposition last month to a new 10-year American lease for the Subic Bay Naval Station, Senator Aquino says his relationship with the President -- a woman he describes affectionately as his "surrogate mother" -- has grown decidedly cool.


A Book Fair That Features Everything, Even Books
LAST year at this time, a young man wandered over to Fifth Avenue, stuck his head through a life-sized cardboard cutout of Jimmy Stewart, and in a milky voice disrupted by an affecting stutter, recited these words: "Ma! Ma! It's me, George. Where's Harry? Whaddya mean, Harry's dead? I think you're crazy. I think you're all crazy!"
For his paraphrased rendition of this powerful scene from Frank Capra's third greatest film, the man was lustily applauded and awarded a copy of "The 'It's a Wonderful Life' Book." But he grew cynical.
Why, he wondered, was Alfred A. Knopf, the publisher of H. L. Mencken and John Updike, sponsoring a contest for Jimmy Stewart imitators at the New York Is Book Country fair?


No More Football
Two days before its scheduled season opener, Brooklyn College announced yesterday that it was dropping football because it does not have enough players.


Officials of Tucson Electric Quite to Aid Bankruptcy Plan
John P. Schaefer, chairman of the Tucson Electric Power Company, and two other board members of the utility resigned yesterday, hoping to help their company emerge from bankruptcy protection.
The utility, facing financial difficulties because it is unable to sell surplus power and because of a failed merger with the San Diego Gas and Electric Company, was forced into Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceeding by creditors in July.
A Federal court in Tucson has granted a 90-day stay while the creditors and the utility try to work out their differences.


Shuttle Is Launched on a Mission to Study Pollution's Effects on Atmosphere
The space shuttle Discovery was launched tonight on a mission to deploy an environmental research satellite for the first detailed study of the effects of man-made pollution on Earth's upper atmosphere.
One of the main objectives of the 14,500-pound Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, equipped with 10 remote sensing instruments, will be to measure the life-protecting ozone layer enveloping the planet and to investigate the physical and chemical processes that cause its formation and are leading to its alarming depletion in recent years.


Art in Review
David Salle: Photographs  Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through Oct. 12
Enfant terrible and art star of the 1980's, David Salle is well known for his melanges of images, paintings in which disparate styles and themes are blended into an allusive mix.
A central and controversial element of these paintings has been their use of pictures of nude women in kinky or risque poses.
In earlier works, these were often presented as outlined figures, ghostly images on the cultural tabula rasa of the canvas.
More recently, they have been printed as photographs, on separate canvases embedded into the work.


The Hostage Glacier Moves
After weeks of deadlock, the hostage impasse in the Middle East appears to be yielding to diplomacy.
On Wednesday, Israel released 51 Arab prisoners and the bodies of nine Lebanese guerrillas in return for definitive information on the death of one of seven missing Israeli soldiers.
Yesterday two guerrilla groups in Lebanon released photographs of Terry Anderson, the American who has been held captive for six years, and Jack Mann, a Briton who was feared dead.
And Israel received the remains of a soldier.


Colgate to Cut Plants and Jobs
Saying it must consolidate its far-flung international operations to keep profits strong, the Colgate-Palmolive Company announced yesterday that it would shrink operations or close nearly a third of its factories.
The moves will eliminate 2,000 jobs in its worldwide work force of 24,800.
The company, which makes such familiar brands as Colgate toothpaste, Ajax cleanser, Fab detergent and Irish Spring soap, said the closings would help the work of its 91 factories be more efficient.
Colgate-Palmolive also said it anticipated taking advantage of falling trade barriers in Europe and North America, which would permit fewer plants to produce more goods for entire trade regions.


Max &amp; Erma's Restaurants reports earnings for 12wks to Aug 4


TOKYO IS CAUTIOUS ON SOVIET DISPUTE
A senior Japanese official said today that recent statements by Russian leaders about the need for concessions to resolve a territorial dispute with Tokyo had created a "better environment" but that the improvement did "not mean we are closer to a solution."
Sounding a cautious note amid rising hopes for an end to the dispute that has long aggravated Soviet-Japanese relations, the official said it was possible that a solution could be negotiated in the next two or three months but added, "My hunch is that it's not going to be that easy."


Uniquest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A New C.I.A., Without Gates
No matter how the K.G.B. is disassembled, Moscow will retain an active military and political espionage service.
And the U.S. still needs an effective, comprehensive intelligence service.
But the K.G.B. and C.I.A. have largely kept each other in business as justification for much of their activities.
As Communism and the Soviet state structure crumble and as secrets of Eastern European spy networks are disclosed, it has become increasingly evident that none brought their own side that much advantage.
So the U.S. should think carefully before stumbling on with the C.I.A. as it exists.
There is an opportunity for a fundamental review of what the C.I.A. can and cannot do well, what it should and should not do.


Goldman Part Of R.T.C. Deal
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and the Blackstone Robert Group have agreed to buy some $275 million in real estate assets from the Resolution Trust Corporation.
The assets, which are being bought for cash, were sold for about 30 cents on the dollar.
They are from the Savers Savings and Loan Association, Little Rock, Ark., and consist of 73 properties mainly in Texas.


Sounds Around Town
Sax and Flute
Robert Dick and Ned Rothenberg, the New Music Cafe, 380 Canal Street, Manhattan, (212) 941-0900.
Robert Dick, a flutist, and Ned Rothenberg, who plays saxophone and other winds, each push their instruments further, probably, than their makers ever envisioned.
They bend notes, summon eerie harmonics and extend their instruments' ranges; more important, they link their extended techniques to musicality rather than display, so that the sounds evoke feelings and ideas.
Tomorrow at the New Music Cafe, Mr.
Dick and Mr.
Rothenberg will each play solos; Erik Friedlander on cello, and Gerry Hemingway on drums will join them for trios and, finally, a quartet.
Music begins at 9:30 P.M.; there is an $8 cover and a two-drink minimum.
Weston's Big Band
Blues to Africa: the Randy Weston Big Band, Alice Tully Hall, (212) 721-6500, and the Prospect Park Band Shell, near Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, Brooklyn, (212) 875-5580.
The pianist Randy Weston is a master of the riff.
His two main American influences, Duke Ellington and Thelonious Monk, each suggested ways to link harmony and propulsion, lush chords and splintered edges; the many trips Mr.
Weston has made to northern Africa have taught him the hypnotic, iterative power of Moroccan music.
For the first fall concert of Lincoln Center Jazz, Mr.
Weston's music will be played by a big band, with dynamic arrangements by Melba Liston.
Tonight at 8 at Alice Tully Hall, tickets are $25 and $30; Sunday at 3 P.M. in Prospect Park; admission is free.
African Rocking
Les Tetes Brulees, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, Manhattan, (212) 243-4940.
Les Tetes Brulees (literally, the "burnt heads," or hotheads) wear backpacks and kick around soccer balls onstage, and their face paint and haircuts would do a collegiate-rock band proud.
But they wield their electric guitars to play music with firm traditional roots; their Bikutski rock, based on rhythms from rural Cameroon, is one of Africa's newest and most exuberant hybrids.
Sets begin tomorrow at 11 P.M. and 1:30 A.M.; admission is $16.
Week's Rock Album
"Mr. Bungle" (Warner Brothers): Even in twisted times, Mr.
Bungle stakes out some kind of extreme.
Mr.
Bungle is a band of pseudonymous moonlighting rockers featuring Mike Patton, the singer from Faith No More.
They have collaborated on songs that work overtime to offend.
In songs like "The Girls of Porn" and "Love Is a Fist," the lyrics try to leave no taboo untweaked, mocking sex, violence, decay and death.
But the music is no joke.
It goes genre-hopping from hard-rock to funk to thrash to ska to progressive-rock, often with a different style in every verse of a song.
Behind the amalgam of puerile humor and complex, mercurial music is the spirit of Frank Zappa, updated with the short attention span and nihilistic glee of the video-game generation.


Bracknell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Network General reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Inns Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Soviets Drafting a Detailed Aid Plan
The transitional Soviet Government said today that it was preparing a detailed proposal for Western emergency aid to prop up the stricken nation through another winter of crisis.
Ivan S. Silayev, chairman of the Government's economic management committee, said the aid proposal would be completed within a month, to coincide with plans for the Soviet republics to create a new economic union dedicated to free-market principles.


Bernard Alfred Welch; Professor, 82
Brother Bernard Alfred Welch, who retired in 1974 after 38 years on the faculty of Manhattan College, died on Tuesday at De La Salle Hall, a Christian Brothers residence in Lincroft, N.J.
He was 82 years old.
He died after a long fight with cancer, college officials said.


Prism Entertainment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Discovery Technologies reports earnings for Year to June 30


Chicago Concert Is Off As Union Pact Expires
A labor dispute forced the cancellation of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra's performance of Beethoven's Missa Solemnis in Chicago last night.
The concert, which would have opened the orchestra's 101st season, was also to have inaugurated Daniel Barenboim's term as music director.
It was called off when the players and management reached an impasse in their contract negotiations yesterday afternoon.
Also canceled are performances scheduled for tonight and tomorrow.
No determination has been made about next week's performances.
The orchestra's three-year contract expired on Sunday.
Although the musicians continued to rehearse, they had said that they would not play the concert without a contract.
Negotiations between the Chicago Symhony Orchestral Association and the American Federation of Musicians Local 10-208 began in July and continued until noon yesterday.
A spokeswoman for the Orchestral Association would not comment on the issues, which were described in a statement as "largely economic." The treasurer of the union, Ed Ward, said that there was disagreement on matters of salary, pension, health care and the orchestra's work schedule.
The orchestra's season was last interrupted by a strike in 1982.
That one lasted three weeks.


Quotation System Sought For Active Junk-Bond Issues
Officials at the Securities and Exchange Commission have concluded that automating the entire high-yield junk-bond market might discourage fraud and illegal insider trading, but that any new electronic system should focus on only the most actively traded securities.
In a report completed earlier this month and made public today, the commission's division of market regulation said that it would not be worth the cost of introducing a quotation system for the entire $200 billion junk-bond market because most of the issues are not regularly traded.


Red Sox Inch Closer; Yanks Sink Lower
Kevin Morton pitched the worst game of his young major league career six days ago.
He faced eight batters against Seattle, allowed five runs, never saw the second inning and wondered if he was ready for all this pennant race business.
Morton came home last night and proved to the Red Sox that he is ready.
Home was Yankee Stadium, which is the closest big league baseball location a kid from Seton Hall can claim, and Morton tamed the team he used to cherish.
He stopped New York on five hits while pitching into the seventh inning and powering Boston to a pivotal 7-2 victory.


TV Weekend; The Good News? James Garner Is Back
Of all the familiar faces returning to television this fall, none will generate warmer vibrations than James Garner's.
His rugged good looks and easy-going charm have contributed mightily to weekly series, most notably "The Rockford Files," and quality television movies, the most recent being "Decoration Day." Mr.
Garner is an old-fashioned star, his fine performances always conveying something of his own integrity.
And now the bad news.
Somehow Mr.
Garner was persuaded to return to series television in "Man of the People," having its premiere on NBC at 8 Sunday evening.
He plays Jim Doyle, a self-described small-time grifter, once married to a city councilwoman and now content to spend most of his time placing horse bets and hustling innocents in pool halls.
When his former wife dies, Doyle is appointed to fill her seat by the mischievous Mayor Lisbeth Chardin (Kate Mulgrew).
The cocky Doyle, looking forward to a chauffeured limousine, sets up shop in the blue-collar district, much to the horror of Constance (Corinne Bohrer), the devoted staff member of Doyle's late wife.
The situation: devil-may-care Doyle in predictable combat with disapproving Constance.
The most immediate problem is that Mr.
Garner is at least 15 years too old for the role.
His disarming rogue is a touch creaky in the joints, and dyed eyebrows, no matter how carefully trimmed, are anything but flattering.
Mr.
Garner's disarmingly direct style of reading a line can still do wonders for distressingly ordinary dialogue, but there's little he can do about a flat concept.
Doyle gets to play his little scams -- nailing a pompous sucker in a card game, deflating a hotshot realtor with an elaborate con game -- but the rogue keeps ending up looking considerably more tired than irrepressible.
Some of his best moments are played off against his streetwise secretary, Rita (Romy Walthall), a Madonna fan.
The first three episodes of "Man of the People" add up to little more than mildly amusing trifles.
Mr.
Garner needs far heftier material if he expects to survive against Angela Lansbury in "Murder, She Wrote" on CBS.
Another distinguished acting veteran, Ms.
Lansbury was considerably more shrewd in selecting a late-career annuity vehicle. 'Nurses'  NBC Tomorrow at 9:30 P.M.
The makers of "Empty Nest," Witt/Thomas/Harris Productions, now offer another weekly series set in the same Miami medical complex.
This one revolves, as you might expect, around a nurses station and its core team of dedicated workers.
There's the sarcastic divorcee, the fretting mother, and so forth.
Nothing much new in the concept, but the show was created by Susan Harris ("Soap," "Golden Girls"), a very clever and funny woman.
Keep an eye on Jeff Altman as the nurse with a compulsion to insult doctors, and Mary Jo Keenan as the rookie riddled with phobias.  'Miss America Pageant'  NBC Tomorrow at 10 P.M.
Sexist relic?
Not anymore, promise the producers.
Being brought on as hosts for the first time are Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford, daytime talk mavens, who insist that they are out to have a little fun.
Leonard Horn, the executive producer, talks of an effort to "get behind the makeup and hairdos, to let the public see what the judges have seen, rather than simply emphasizing physical attractiveness and talent." The swimsuit parade, however, is still a part of the pageant and will now be presented as a production number.
Some things in show business are sacred.  'Billy Connolly: Pale Blue Scottish Person' HBO Tomorrow at 11 P.M.
Long popular in England, Ireland, Canada and Australia, Billy Connolly emerged promisingly on the United States scene in the waning episodes of the series "Head of the Class." Then he did a forgettable HBO comedy special with Whoopi Goldberg.
He bounces back confidently on this solo outing, taking bawdy swipes at everything from folk singers to critics to HBO.
The title is plucked from his musings on skin tone: "I'm not white, I'm pale blue. The Irish run pinkish; the Scottist are more powder blue." That's one of his printable quotes.
Man of the People  Created by R. J. Stewart; director of photography, Bob Seaman; costumes by Catherine Adair; music by Steve Tyrell; production designer, Ed Laporta; produced by Marvin Miller and George Beckerman for Neal and Gary Productions in association with NBC Productions Inc.; Gary Hoffman, Neal Israel, executive producers.
At 8 P.M.
Sunday on NBC.
WITH: James Garner, Corinne Bohrer, George Wyner, Romy Walthall, Taylor Nichols and Kate Mulgrew.


Michigan Banks Announce Plan for $552 Million Merger
The First of America Bank Corporation, Kalamazoo, Mich., announced plans yesterday to acquire the smaller Security Bancorp, Detroit, in the first of what analysts expect to be several marriages involving the seven large banking companies that dominate the state of Michigan.
The merger of the state's second- and seventh-largest banking companies, both of which are financially strong and profitable, is a sign of how second-tier banking companies are consolidating at the same time as the largest banks.
The merger would create the 35th largest of the nation's nearly 10,000 banking companies.


Britain's Third Party Takes Heart From Its Gains
For the faithful who gathered here this week for the annual conference of the Liberal Democrats, Britain's third political party, there was good reason to celebrate.
Over the last year, the party has gained more than 500 seats in local government councils, won two special elections for Parliament and seen its standing in public opinion polls climb into the midteens from single digits.


PDA Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


At Guggenheim Museum, Dialogue With Wright Never Ends; Visionary's Engineer
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 12 article on the Guggenheim Museum restoration implies that our father, the late George N. Cohen, was essentially a "cost-cutting" contractor in building the museum, rather than a highly skilled engineer, without whom Frank Lloyd Wright's visionary renderings would have remained on paper.


Pop/Jazz; A New Orleans Tribe Showing Its Colors
It's quite a sight when New Orleans Indian tribes, dressed in intricately detailed costumes that combine brightly colored beadwork and huge arrays of feathers, hit the streets during Mardi Gras.
The tribes, really black social clubs, dance and sing and play the intricate percussion that underpins much of what is New Orleans music.
These tribes don't make it out of New Orleans often, but this weekend three members of the Guardians of the Flame, led by Donald Harrison Jr., will perform at Tramps.


For Children
Storytelling  Hans Christian Andersen statue Central Park 72d Street and Fifth Avenue entrance (212) 360-1309 Recommended ages: 5 and up Tomorrow
The storyteller Diane Wolkstein likes a lot of action when she's telling a story -- sometimes.
"I move and I jump and I leap, depending on what's going on in the story," she said.
In her performance tomorrow, Ms.
Wolkstein will at one point portray a frog flying above a river of fire.
In her seventh appearance this summer, as part of the storytelling program sponsored by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation, Ms.
Wolkstein will read from her recently published book, "Oom Razoom" (Morrow).
Oom Razoom is the name of a servant who befriends Alexis, a young archer who has been sent on a mission to go "I know not where and bring back I know not what" for a king with ulterior motives.
Oom Razoom has wonderful powers, and helps Alexis to come to his senses and realize the value of home where his beautiful, birdlike wife awaits him.
Ms.
Wolkstein says this story is part of a collection of Russian fairy tales by Aleksandr Afanasyev.
She chose to retell the tale in a book because of its high morals.
"It's all about sharing, and that's what we all need to do now, nurture and share," she said.
The author and storyteller also enlarged the character of Olga, Alexis's wife, whom she named and made more prominent in the story.
The free storytelling, starting at 11 A.M., takes about an hour, and is held rain or shine.
Seating is provided, around the statue of Hans Christian Andersen.
Adults are asked to stay with the children during the hour.
Running Races Central Park West 72d Street entrance Manhattan (212) 860-4455 Recommended ages: 2 and up Sunday
So you think 2-year-olds are too wobbly to compete in races?
Well, the New York Road Runners Club doesn't.
The club is sponsoring a "pee-wee" contest on Sunday, with a one-block race for 2-year-olds.
Will they make it?
As part of the club's Youth Fitness Junior Road Runners Club race series, toddlers and older children, up to 18, will get the chance to compete and to receive ribbons at the end, no matter what they have or haven't accomplished.
Starting at 8:30 A.M., children 6 to 10 will run in a one-mile race, as will 11- to 18-year-olds in a separate race at 8:45.
At 9:05, the 2-year-olds get their chance, then 3-year-olds (who will run two blocks) at 9:20, 4-year-olds at 9:30, 5-year-olds (one-quarter-mile race) at 9:35 and lastly, 6-year-olds at 9:45.
The big race, 5 kilometers (3.1 miles), is designed for adults at 10:10 A.M.
Children need to be registered, either at the New York Road Runners Club, 9 East 89th Street in Manhattan, today from noon to 7 P.M. or tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., or at 8 A.M. on Sunday at the West Side Y, 5 West 63d Street in Manhattan.
Then all you need to do is show up at Tavern on the Green at the appropriate time.
The race area is small and contained and monitored by club members, making it hard for children to stray.
Upon registering, instruction guides will also be handed out.
Well-fitting running shoes are suggested for footwear.
Registration fee: $3 a child.
Native American Heritage Festival  Inwood Hill Park West 218th Street Manhattan (212) 427-4040 or (212) 598-0100 Recommended for all ages Tomorrow
Inwood Hill Park, at the junction of Spuyten Duyvil Creek and the Hudson River, has a very old and legendary history.
The 200-acre grounds were inhabited by American Indians as long ago as A.D. 1000.
The land was purchased piecemeal by New York City from 1917 to 1928 to preserve its archeological heritage, according to Larry Scoones, director of special projects for the Urban Park Rangers.
This makes it an appropriate venue for the annual Native American Heritage Festival, an event sponsored by 12 organizations, including the National Museum of the American Indian.
"Inwood Park has recognizable, somewhat intact, habitation sites of Native Americans, including what we know to be Algonquin-speaking Indians and those related to the Delaware Indians," Mr.
Scoones said.
For example, on site are garbage heaps of thousands of oyster shells, a staple in the Indians' diet.
For the festival, American Indians representing about a dozen different tribes will perform traditional music; dance in traditional and fancy-dress costume; cook (fried bread, bean soup, stuffed clams), and sell pottery, jewelry and blankets.
Children can create traditional accessories by using natural found objects, and families can trail along with Urban Park Rangers, who will point out the supposed spot where Peter Minuit, the Dutchman who bought Manhattan, arranged his purchase under a tulip tree (which is now gone).
To get to the park, which is also ideal for picnicking, you can take the A train to 207th Street or the No. 1 train to 215th Street; Boy Scouts will be on hand at both stations to guide you in the right direction.
The festival will be held from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. (Sunday is the rain date.) Restrooms are also available.
Bicycle Rentals  Willets Point-Shea Stadium subway stop or Meadow Lake in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park Flushing, Queens (718) 699-9596 or (718) 699-9598 Recommended ages: 4 and up Through mid-October
The best way to see all of Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, including a stop under the Unisphere, is by bicycle.
Two concessions rent one- and three-speed men's and women's bikes, tandem and dirt bikes, and bikes with training wheels.
The park's broad walkways can take you to Meadow Lake and farther east to Willow Lake, a recently enhanced wetland meadow with nests of migratory birds, muskrat huts, wildflowers and native grasses.
Then you can turn around and sweep past the New York State Amphitheater (also called the Gertrude Ederle Amphitheater), a Greeklike ruin built for the 1939 World's Fair.
Riding to the park's center, you will pass a group of sculptures by Robert Ressler and eventually end up at the Unisphere and the Queens Museum of Art.
Behind the museum is the zoo, which is closed for renovation, and the carousel.
The bike-rental concession is open from 11 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. daily.
Prices start at $5 an hour ($10 for a tandem) with a 10-minute grace period; each additional half-hour is $2 (or $4 for a tandem).
Plan to leave a credit card, a driver's license or $100 cash as a deposit.
Pilar Rioja Repertorio Espanol Gramercy Arts Theater 138 East 27th Street Manhattan (212) 889-2850 Recommended ages: 5 and up Through Sept. 29
Pilar Rioja brings the mysteries of tight, concise Spanish dancing to this intimate 76-year-old theater, with its French doors and romantic balcony.
Children may enjoy watching Ms.
Rioja move through her dances -- bolero and flamenco among them -- amazed that such little actual movement conveys so much narrative and passion.
Children are also fond of castanets, which Ms.
Rioja uses in some of her dances; youngsters learn, for example, through the short, between-performances talks, that the left castanet is referred to as the male and the right one, with its higher "voice," as the female.
As 8-year-old Liza Nadler, who was attending a show with her grandmother, said, "I wanted to see the Spanish lady because I like how she claps those things and goes around in a circle." Ms.
Rioja's first group of dances is a combination of bolero, Andalusian and modern dance styles, in which she bends and contorts to the lush, nocturnal Spanish music.
In the second half of her performance, Ms.
Rioja flairs up with a traditional flamenco dance, moving gallantly about the stage.
Children seem enamored of this dance form because of its spirit and dramatic music that speaks of bullfights and tense crowds.
It's a fitting ending, with Ms.
Rioja dressed in black tails, dancing in one place but making the whole theater reverberate.
Young aficionados will undoubtedly appreciate, too, Ms.
Rioja's endless wardrobe of shimmering, swaying dresses, as she changes from one to the next as easily as one strums a guitar.
There is a 15-minute intermission.
Tickets are $18 and $25 for adults and $12 for children under 12 years old.
Performances are Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M., Saturdays at 3 P.M. (and on Sept. 21 at 8 P.M., Sept. 22 at 3 P.M. and on Sept. 29 at 7 P.M.).
Young audience members interested in dance may meet Ms.
Rioja in her dressing room after the show.
KEEP IN MIND
"A (BUILDING) BLOCK PARTY," where children ages 5 to 11 (and their parents) can create buildings or furniture from geometric wooden blocks similar to the ones used by Frank Lloyd Wright.
Tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. at the American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
Workshop fee, $6 for one adult and one child (includes museum admission) and $2 for each additional child.
Reservations: (212) 956-3535.
CHILDREN'S BENEFIT, with a performance by the folk singer Tom Chapin, for the World Summit for Children Keeping the Promise campaign, an international educational movement.
Tomorrow at 11 A.M. at Steve McGraw's, 158 West 72d Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $25 for adults and $15 for children, with a food minimum of $8 per adult and $6 per child.
Information: (212) 874-1997.
"ALL STARS TALENT SHOW," with young performers who will sing rap and reggae music and perform hip-hop dancing and in skits.
All of the peformers auditioned for Harlem's Community Literacy Research Project, a nonprofit education program.
Tomorrow at 7 P.M. at the Harriet Tubman School, 250 West 127th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets, $6.
Information: (212) 941-5800.
"WING IT," a birding workshop sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers, who will explain why some birds head south and others stick around for the winter.
Sunday at 2 P.M. at Crocheron Park, Park House, 35th Avenue and 216th Place, Bayside, Queens.
Free.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
"MAGAZINE MURDERS," about a mirthful murder that takes place when Babble, a teen magazine, is going to press.
It was written by Barbara Arnstein for children age 6 and up.
With audience participation and lunch.
Tomorrow at 1 P.M. at Saul's, 478 Ninth Avenue, between 36th and 37th Streets, Manhattan.
Play and lunch, $25 for adults, $16 for children.
Information: (212) 563-5572.
100TH-ANNIVERSARY FALL FAMILY FAIR, with jewelry and hair-ornament making, hat decorating, picture-frame designing, a treasure hunt and a child-adult karaoke show.
At the Rhinelander Children's Center, a creative-arts school, Sunday from noon to 4 P.M., 350 East 88th Street, Manhattan.
Admission, free.
Activities, $1 to $3.
Information: (212) 876-0500.


U.S. Investigates Arizona Governor's Tie to Failed S.&amp; L.
The Governor of Arizona, Fife Symington, is under investigation by Federal authorities for possible self-dealing in connection with a failed savings association in Phoenix from which he borrowed heavily and on which he served as a director, a senior regulator said today.
L.
William Seidman, chairman of the Resolution Trust Corporation, which oversees the savings and loan industry, said in an interview tonight that some investigators at his agency had concluded that Mr.
Symington, a Republican, may have violated Federal or state laws as a director of the Southwest Savings and Loan Association.
But Mr.
Seidman quickly added that the agency had not reached any conclusions.


They're Not Dead Yet
"I heard you were dead," is an uncommon greeting among competitors at United States Tennis Association national and regional senior tournaments, but REESE PATTERSON, 65, and his doubles partner, STAN FORD, 67, have been hearing it for the last eight months.


Dinkins Shores Up Power in Condom Vote
The startling vote by the New York City Board of Education to let high school students receive condoms without any say by their parents highlights how important the issue has become for Mayor David N. Dinkins as he tries to hold his fragmenting political power base together.
A key moment in that vote on Wednesday night was a last-minute telephone call between the Mayor and one board member, who promptly changed her mind and voted to oppose any form of parental consent after months of supporting such an amendment.


On My Mind; The Third Side
When the slaughter begins again in China, the West will be horrified and indignant.
After all, we are not made of stone.
Of course, this time we will not actually see much of the murders by Communist troops.
Beijing's rulers have learned one lesson from their warm-up at Tiananmen Square -- blind the cameras.


Art in Review
David Graham  Laurence Miller Gallery 138 Spring Street Through Oct. 5
David Graham is a collector of bad taste, and judging by the color photographs in this funny show, there's a lot of it around.
There's the house in Providence with giant crayons pasted to the side, and paint scribbled across it as if in a coloring book.
In Yuma, Ariz., a grinning Shriner in a bright green jacket and red fez drives a miniature red Ford Mustang past a real-life model of the car in the background.
Mr.
Graham loves incongruities of scale of this sort, as do the people who carry them out in the first place.
A giant milk bottle in Raynham, Mass., houses a restaurant, as does a mammoth hamburger in Los Angeles.
In Seattle, a gas station is shaded by a cowboy hat that's at least a 10,000-gallon model; cowboy boots alongside serve as restrooms.


THREATENS A VETO
Speaking in unusually vehement terms, President Bush demanded again today that Congress delay debate on Israel's request for $10 billion in loan guarantees and threatened to use his veto to block any early Congressional action on the matter.
At a hurriedly scheduled news conference, the President clearly raised the likelihood of a bitter dispute with Israel and its supporters in this country.
He asserted that the request for loan guarantees to help build housing for Soviet immigrants should not be considered now because the world stood "on the brink of a historic breakthrough" that could lead to direct negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbors.


Enclean Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 People Burned to Death in S.I. Car Fire
Two people were burned to death last night when a car traveling toward Brooklyn on the Staten Island Expressway burst into flames, apparently from an explosion, the police said.
Officer Joseph Hickey in Staten Island said the blast apparently "blew out part of the rail guard" along the expressway.


Oops! There Went Grandparents' Day
Last Sunday was Grandparents' Day. First you've heard of it? Join the crowd.
Macy's, which starts breathing hard weeks before Mother's Day and Father's Day, missed Grandparents' Day entirely.
The White House, the day's official sponsor, hasn't put out an official proclamation since 1979.
And even at $19.95, the Dancin' Grannies exercise video had only a minor surge.
About the biggest celebration came when one grandfather did a bungee dive on national TV to mark the occasion.


Who Is Tyson, and What May Happen Next?
Mike Tyson has finally managed to cross over, to transcend boxing, to join Jack Johnson, Joe Louis and Muhammad Ali as a social as well as a pugilistic symbol.
It is a measure of his time and personality that Tyson needed a rape charge to break into the public consciousness as more than a troubled celebrity athlete.
Even when he sat, looking drugged and simple, beside Robin Givens in a grotesque parody of "The Newlywed Game," even when he was exhibited by Don King as an example of black pride, even when novelist Joyce Carol Oates intellectualized him as primal scream with a punch, Tyson was never quite able to stir talk-show debate in absentia.
Now, suddenly, even as Freddy Kreuger appears in his last "Nightmare on Elm Street," Mike Tyson has cracked into our subconscious: He is what we are afraid of, and we created him.


Corrections
An article yesterday by Shlomo Avineri raised questions about the silence of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn over recent events in the Soviet Union.
Late yesterday, an Associated Press dispatch quoted Mr.
Solzhenitsyn as saying that events were moving too fast for him to comment.


Wilder Decision Due; Lawmaker Eyes Race
The race for the Democratic Presidential nomination gathered steam today when Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia set an announcement of his plans for Friday and Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma said he might enter the campaign.
Mr.
Wilder's long-awaited announcement as to whether he will seek the nomination is to be made on the steps of the State Capitol in Richmond on Friday afternoon, his office said.


Nord Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wainoco Oil reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


S. E. Peal, 68, Is Dead; Ex-Envoy From Liberia
S.
Edward Peal, formerly Liberia's Ambassador to the United States and dean of the African diplomatic corps in America, died yesterday in a hospital in Arlington, Va.
He was 68 years old.
His family said he died of complications from hepatitis, which he had contracted this summer while on a trip to Liberia to deliver a check for relief aid.


Alone in a Crowd Of Other Selves
MOVIEGOERS who saw Oliver Stone's overproduced screen adaptation of Eric Bogosian's one-character play "Talk Radio" (1988) may still have only the dimmest impression of Mr.
Bogosian's remarkable talents as a monologuist.
At long last those talents are now to be seen, front and center, in "Sex, Drugs, Rock &amp; Roll," the splendid concert-film adaptation of Mr.
Bogosian's one-man Off Broadway show.
The film, written by Mr.
Bogosian, was directed by John McNaughton, whose last work was "Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer." The two get along just fine.


Velcro Industries NV reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hostage Issue: Test for Iran's President
Western diplomats here said today that a full solution to the hostage crisis in Lebanon, which now seems possible, will strengthen President Hashemi Rafsanjani against hard-liners.
Mr.
Rafsanjani is trying to restore capitalism in Iran and attract foreign investment after years of revolutionary confiscations and a destructive war with Iraq.


Marrow-Tech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Serbs Cut Off Croatian Capital From South Coast
The fighting in Croatia took a dramatic turn today, after army-backed Serbian guerrillas in effect cut off access between Zagreb, the republic's capital, and its Dalmatian coast, once a popular tourist destination.
The seizure of a key bridge by the Serbian guerrillas sealing off the region occurred as Croatian leaders refused to obey a federal Government order to resume supplying crude oil to Serbia, and a helicopter bearing a European peacekeeping envoy was forced to land when it was shot at by Croatian forces.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about stock market trading on Tuesday omitted part of a comment by Guy Moszkowski, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, on rumors about Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Although he had said there were rumors that the firm was somehow implicated in the scandal involving Treasury auctions, he further said that the rumors appeared completely groundless.


Pan Am Shift At Top Hinted
Pan Am Corporation creditors and Delta Air Lines hope to replace Pan Am's three top executives soon with a management team, a laywer for the creditors said yesterday in Federal Bankruptcy Court.
"There's no captain of the ship -- you've got to have a captain," said the lawyer, Marc Richards.
But the Pan Am managers, the chairman and chief executive, Thomas G. Plaskett; the chief financial officer, Richard H. Francis, and the chief operating officer, Peter T. McHugh, were apparently not ready to say yesterday that they were stepping aside.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.44
5.44
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.19
5.24
7.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.19
5.27
7.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.42
7.53
8.68
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.92
8.01
8.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.05
9.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.94
6.96
7.58
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mired in Debt, a Boston Suburb Is Taken Over by Massachusetts
Gov.
William F. Weld appointed a receiver today to take over the government of Chelsea, only hours after the Massachusetts Legislature approved his emergency proposal to assume state control of the the small, fiscally troubled community on the northern edge of Boston.
Governor Weld, a Republican, selected James Carlin, a wealthy businessman and a former state Secretary of Transportation, to be Chelsea's receiver.
Mr.
Carlin will replace the city's elected mayor for up to five years and have sweeping powers to cut municipal spending and break contracts with the police, firefighters and teachers unions.


Georgia Bonded Fibers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yields Lowered On Two Issues
An indication of the downtrend in interest rates came yesterday with municipal bond repricings involving North Dakota and Santa Fe, N.M., issues.
Smith Barney repriced North Dakota Housing Finance Agency single-family mortgage revenue bonds, lowering yields five basis points for maturities from 1996 to 2001.
A basis point is one-hundredth of 1 percent.


Economic Scene; Urgent Remedies For the Soviet Ills
WHERE big money is at stake, politics dominates economics.
And when runaway inflation breaks loose, when productive systems break down, when economies split apart and wealth disappears, the sickness lies in the body politic.
Soviet inflation is now galloping.
Wholesale prices are 100 percent higher than a year ago, according to official data.
The consumer price index is meaningless, since the prices people really pay are in the black market, where the ruble's rate has now fallen to 60 to the dollar from 25 at the start of the year.
The ruble's official commercial exchange rate is still, laughably, 1.8 for a dollar.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Long-term bond yields fell to their lowest level since late 1989, as credit market participants reacted to a favorable inflation report and sharp declines in the money supply.  [ D1. ]


Poultry Plant Fire Survivors Testify Before Congress


Istec-Industries &amp; Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Trying to Clarify What He Is Not, Thomas Opens Question of What He Is
In his testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Judge Clarence Thomas has repeatedly talked about the process of transforming himself from an executive-branch official and fighter of ideological battles into a judge.
He has spoken of his efforts to "shed the baggage of ideology" and to "stop accumulating new opinions" in the year and a half since he was confirmed, at the age of 41, to his current seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 13


Who Is Tyson, and What May Happen Next?
Mike Tyson has finally managed to cross over, to transcend boxing, to join Jack Johnson, Joe Louis and Muhammad Ali as a social as well as a pugilistic symbol.
It is a measure of his time and personality that Tyson needed a rape charge to break into the public consciousness as more than a troubled celebrity athlete.
Even when he sat, looking drugged and simple, beside Robin Givens in a grotesque parody of "The Newlywed Game," even when he was exhibited by Don King as an example of black pride, even when novelist Joyce Carol Oates intellectualized him as primal scream with a punch, Tyson was never quite able to stir talk-show debate in absentia.
Now, suddenly, even as Freddy Kreuger appears in his last "Nightmare on Elm Street," Mike Tyson has cracked into our subconscious: He is what we are afraid of, and we created him.


Koll Management Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Inquiry on Texas Crash Focuses on the Airplane
Federal investigators today focused on the possibility that a mechanical or structural failure caused a Continental Express commuter plane to burst into flame in midair on Wednesday, killing all 14 people on board.
Agents of both the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms were at the site of the crash about 75 miles southwest of here today in an effort to determine whether foul play was involved.


12-Year Term for Assassin of Chilean Envoy
A Cuban exile was sentenced today to 12 years in prison for his part in the death of Orlando Letelier, former Chilean Ambassador to the United States, who was killed by a remote-controlled car bomb on Washington's Embassy Row 15 years ago.
Judge Aubrey E. Robinson Jr. of Federal District Court sentenced the 39-year-old defendant, Virgilio Paz Romero, to the maximum term that was allowed under an agreement with Government prosecutors in which Mr.
Paz pleaded guilty in July to a conspiracy to assassinate Mr.
Letelier.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Signed Tom Kelly, manager, to a two-year contract extension.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Activated Gerald Alexander, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Announced the resignation of Steve Schott, executive vice president.
BASKETBALL Continental Basketball Association
LACROSSE CATBIRDS -- Named Mike McCollow assistant coach and John Becker assistant marketing director.
Global Basketball Association
ALBANY -- Signed Al Smith, forward.
FAYETTEVILLE -- Named Kevin Mackey head coach. FOOTBALL National Football League
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Activated Alonzo Highsmith, fullback, from injured reserve.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Placed Bill Schultz, offensive guard, on injured reserve.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Placed Larry Centers, running back, on injured reserve.
Signed Terrence Flagler, running back.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Theo Adams, offensive lineman, to the practice roster.
Released Kevin Thompson, safety, from the practice roster.
GENERAL
NEW JERSEY SPORTS AND EXPOSITION AUTHORITY -- Named Helen Strus manager of media relations for the Meadowlands Arena and Giants Stadium.


New Voices to Mold Power Balance in the New City Council
A Dominican teacher, a gay former stockbroker, a black community leader and a slew of party regulars won races in the Democratic primary yesterday, virtually assuring that they will be the new voices shaping the balance of power on the newly expanded Council.
On first glance, the newcomers to the city's political arena appeared to fulfill the revamped city charter's promise of a broader Council that mirrors New York's population.
But it was too early to tell yesterday whether they were unusual politicians or merely unknown.


The Canada Cup Final: U.S. Will Face Canada
For the past few days, the bridges at the international border near here have been scenes of strife, as striking Canadian public workers have disrupted traffic from the United States with demonstrations.
Beginning Saturday night, the conflict between these two nations will move indoors, to Canada's favorite sport, as Canada plays the United States in the championship round of the Canada Cup.


Central Holding Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


At the Movies
'Rocky Horror' to 'Queen'
From Henry James to a follow-up to "The Rocky Horror Picture Show."
That's the course Michael White, the producer, intends to follow in the coming year.
Right now, though, Mr.
White is most visible as the executive producer of "The Pope Must Die," the imported comedy about an obscure Italian priest who becomes Pope David I through a clerical error and nearly brings the Roman Catholic Church to ruin.
"I've had this tradition of being very involved with England's comic life over the last 25 years," said Mr.
White, who lays claim not to discovering Monty Python but to turning the group professional by putting it on the London and New York stage in a hit revue called "Cambridge Circus." "At that point they were all going to be lawyers and doctors and accountants," Mr.
White said.
But after London and New York, "they liked the taste of comedy."
In recent years, Mr.
White has been working with a group called the Comic Strip, which he described as "eight loosely affiliated young actors and actresses in England who have been doing 30-minute films for the BBC for the last six years with considerable success." Among the actors was Robbie Coltrane, who stars in "The Pope Must Die." The group, Mr.
White said, was founded by Peter Richardson, who directed the film; and Mr.
Richardson and his collaborator, Pete Richens, wrote the screenplay.
"It always appeals to me to take something very serious and make it into a joke," said Mr.
White, who is not chuckling over the current state of comedy.
"I'm troubled by the fact that so much is unadventurous. When one thinks back, which one has to, to people like Lenny Bruce, there doesn't seem to be anyone around with his kind of razor edge."
In the fall in England, Mr.
White expects to be at work on "Turn of the Screw," the Henry James ghost story about two children haunted by a couple of servants.
Rusty Lemorande, who wrote "Electric Dreams," is to direct, from his own screenplay, Mr.
White said, and the cast includes Patsy Kensit, Janet Suzman, Julian Sands and Martin Kemp.
And early next year, Mr.
White, who co-produced "The Rocky Horror Picture Show," hopes to be at work on "The Revenge of the Old Queen," a musical written by Richard O'Brien, who wrote the 1975 horror film send up that has become a cult favorite.
"It's in the same style as the other one," Mr.
White said.
"It has reflections of the past in it."  Intimate Competition
Everyone in movies has to face the competition.
But in a few weeks, Mary Agnes Donoghue will be competing with herself.
On Wednesday, Touchstone Pictures plans to release "Paradise," a film written and directed by Miss Donoghue.
On Sept. 27, Touchstone also plans to release "Deceived," based on Miss Donoghue's screenplay.
"Paradise," starring Don Johnson and Melanie Griffith, is an American version of the poignant 1987 French film "Le Grand Chemin." In it, a little boy comes into the lives of a couple who are being torn apart as they struggle to accept the accidental death of their 3-year-old son.
"Deceived" stars Goldie Hawn and John Heard in the story of a New York book editor who discovers when her husband dies that his identity was a fake.
"Paradise" is the directing debut of Miss Donoghue, whose writing credits include such films as "Beaches," which starred Bette Midler and Barbara Hershey, and "The Buddy System," which starred Richard Dreyfuss and Susan Sarandon.
"I think every writer's lament is that you envision something in a script, and when someone else directs it, they bring what they see to it; and you feel frustrated because you don't see exactly what it is you wanted to see," Miss Donoghue said.
Adapting a French film for an American production, she said, is very difficult.
"Americans think differently from the French. There is a kind of seriousness about Americans, a lack of sophistication on a certain level. People who have been through wars on their territory have a different attitude toward life. I wanted to write about people who had suffered a tragedy and were trying to find a way to live again. It's not something you get over. And they never get to eat those fabulous meals you always see in French movies."
With her first directing stint behind her, Miss Donoghue said: "I discovered it's not nearly as easy as the writer in me thought it was. I think most writers are infuriated when they see things change. There was a point where I was like a schizophrenic. The director would be frustrated with the writer for not having written a scene a certain way, for having missed a certain point. What I think is fantastic is to be able to do both."
Miss Donoghue, whose husband of 15 years is the writer Christopher Robbins, the author of the book "Air America," said the idea for "Deceived" came to her this way: "You're sitting there at night and look over at your husband or your wife and think: Who is this person?
"I was fascinated by the idea of having a middle-class safe existence, predictable; and then certain events take place that let you know that you know nothing about your own life and the people in it. It's about betrayal at its most profound."  Behind the Scenes
Ginger Rogers, Douglas Fairbanks Jr., Tony Randall and Liv Ullmann are among the stars who are to appear in the three-part "Silver Screen" series this fall and winter at the 92d Street Y, where the host will be John Springer, the longtime publicity agent, author and producer.
The series, providing a behind-the-scenes look at film making through discussions, presentation of film clips and audience questions, opens at 8 P.M.
Oct. 19 with "All Talking! All Singing! All Dancing!," an overview of musicals.
Besides Miss Rogers, the participants that evening are to include Betty Comden and Adolph Green.
On Nov. 18 at 8 P.M., guests for the program "Forgotten Films to Remember" are to include Mr.
Fairbanks, Geraldine Fitzgerald, Farley Granger and Patricia Neal.
The series concludes Dec. 21 with "Someone in the Spotlight, Someone in the Shadows," with Mr.
Randall, Sylvia Sidney and Ms.
Ullmann as the guests.
Subscriptions are $40, individual programs $15.
They may be bought at the Y box office at 1395 Lexington Avenue in Manhattan or by calling Y-Charge at (212) 996-1100.


John Fletcher Wilson; Professor, 68
John Fletcher Wilson, professor emeritus of speech and theater at Lehman College in the Bronx, died Tuesday at Bellevue Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The college reported that he died from complications following the recent implantation of a cardiac pacemaker.


Mired in Debt, a Boston Suburb Is Taken Over by Massachusetts
Gov.
William F. Weld appointed a receiver today to take over the government of Chelsea, only hours after the Massachusetts Legislature approved his emergency proposal to assume state control of the the small, fiscally troubled community on the northern edge of Boston.
Governor Weld, a Republican, selected James Carlin, a wealthy businessman and a former state Secretary of Transportation, to be Chelsea's receiver.
Mr.
Carlin will replace the city's elected mayor for up to five years and have sweeping  powers to cut municipal spending and break contracts with the police, firefighters and teachers unions.


U.S. Phone Pact Queried
The General Accounting Office said today that the Federal Government's main contract to buy long-distance telephone service will force it to pay $148 million above commercially available rates over the next two years.
But A.T.&amp; T., one of the two principal contractors, denounced the conclusion by the Congressional watchdog agency and said it was based on questionable data.


Review/Film; Extracting Love From a Cruel Joke
As her first film since her astonishingly fine debut as the director and co-writer of the independently produced (and independent-minded) "True Love," Nancy Savoca has made "Dogfight." It was not a great choice.
"Dogfight" is a wan love story about Birdlace (River Phoenix), a baby-faced marine, and Rose (Lili Taylor), the sweet spunky girl he finds in San Francisco the night before he ships out for -- are you ready? -- "a little country near India, called Vietnam."


Sports of The Times; A Sudden Twinge of Conscience
AT 32 years of age and in his 11th season in the National Football League, Lawrence Taylor has apparently found religion.
In an interview with Sports Illustrated published this week, Taylor, perhaps the most dominating defensive pro football player of the 1980's, made some pointed observations about race and racism.


Sun Coast Plastics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dinkins Visits Crown Heights Schoolmates of Gavin Cato as New Accusation Is Made


Televideo Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 28


CHRONICLE
"There will be hardly anyone in the room tonight who does not have a reminiscence or a secret connected to this place," BARBARALEE DIAMONSTEIN-SPIELVOGEL said yesterday as she prepared for a dinner celebrating the reopening of the St.
Regis Hotel.
Her sentimental association?
"I was courted there and married there." Asked how long ago, she replied, almost without hesitation, "118 months and 16 days ago." Her husband is Carl Spielvogel, chairman of Backer, Spielvogel, Bates Worldwide, the marketing and advertising company.


Carl Karcher Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 12


Review/Art; The Faces of Death: A Multi-Media Meditation
Death is one of art's great underlying themes.
But in recent years, it has come to the surface with particular frequency; its daunting profile probably looms larger than it has at any other point since the postwar era, when existentialism seemed the only logical reponse to a Europe that lay in ruins.
This is understandable.
On one hand, the re-emergence of the figure, first in painting in the early 1980's, then in sculpture and installation art, has opened the floodgate to such overtly grand subjects as history, sexuality, the body and memory, as well as death.
On the other hand, the hard facts of contemporary existence -- from political strife, economic instability and urban violence to the AIDS epidemic -- often seem more intractable than ever before.
They have turned artists working in all styles, not just figurative ones, toward darker subjects.


Ruling Eases Prison Term For Friedman
Stanley M. Friedman, once one of New York City's most powerful politicians, moved closer to freedom yesterday when a state appeals court ruled that he did not have to serve a separate state sentence for his 1988 bribery conviction.
Mr.
Friedman, who is 55 years old, could be paroled from Federal prison in July after serving four years of a 12-year term.
Mr.
Friedman was to have been turned over to state prison officials after completing a Federal term for his part in the city's Parking Violations Bureau scandal.
He was sentenced to 2 1/3 to 7 years in prison in State Supreme Court for the bribery conviction.


Manatron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Toro Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Chamorro Upholds Sandinista Giveaway
In a move putting her at loggerheads with the coalition that brought her to power, President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro has vetoed legislation intended to roll back the property giveaway arranged by the Sandinista Front before it handed over power last year.
She asserted in her veto announcement on Wednesday that the measure reversing what is widely called "la pinata," after the container of gifts and candy used in Latin American festivals, was unconstitutional.
But the political leaders who were her allies throughout a decade of opposition to the Sandinistas accused her of caving in to Sandinista pressures and threats.


4% to 6% Rise Expected In TV Ad Revenues
A forecast to be released today by the Television Bureau of Advertising predicts that total television advertising revenues should rise next year by 4 to 6 percent.
The bureau estimates that revenues in 1992 will reach $29.1 billion, which would be a 5 percent increase from the $27.7 billion the bureau estimates for 1991.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the country's 562 money market mutual funds increased $6.25 billion, to $464.87 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 207 institutional funds increased by $4.95 billion, to $140.48 billion.
The assets of the 262 general-purpose funds were up by $604.9 million, to $176.49 billion.
The 93 broker-dealer funds increased by $693.8 million, to $147.90 billion, the institute said.


Noise Cancellation reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DVI Financial Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


School Bells Ring, Nervously
New York City schools reopened this week, welcoming nearly a million children in a mixed atmosphere of uncertainty and optimism.
The city's faltering economy has forced cutbacks at a time when promising reforms like school-based management were just starting to take hold.
But even though conditions in many schools will be far from idyllic, officials have made admirable efforts to shield students from the worst consequences of the budget cuts.
The opening of school is always marked by promise.
It's a new start in a new grade.
But in some schools there weren't enough supplies.
And 128 teaching vacancies remain, mostly in hard-to-fill subjects like speech therapy.
As with other city services, education has suffered; the schools have been forced to cut $430 million from a nearly $7 billion budget.


Art in Review
Tom Friedman  Feature 484 Broome Street Through Sept. 28
In his first solo show in New York City, the Chicagoan Tom Friedman puts a tiny but unmistakable spin on a number of current interests and trends.
Like many of his contemporaries who are bent on avoiding preciousness and ostentation, Mr.
Friedman works with only the most inexpensive and everyday materials.
But he acts upon them with such a bizarre and obsessive purity, that a kind of low-cost preciousness accrues.
It's all in the doing.


Fine TV Can Educate, but Terrible TV Doesn't; British Restraints
To the Editor:
In a whimsical column on public television fund-raising ("Irate Stirs the Reader," Aug. 31), Russell Baker questions why United States public television can't match the quality of British programming.
He notes, "the BBC has guaranteed public funding without political interference."


Cott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


John L. Jerro; Shoe Manufacturer, 89
John L. Jerro, a retired shoe manufacturer, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital on Staten Island.
He was 89 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Jerro, a native of Aleppo, Syria, came to this country in 1921 and was the co-founder, with his three brothers, of Jerro Bros.
Inc.
Jerro women's shoes and high-heel bedroom slippers were sold nationally in department stores and boutiques, and Mr.
Jerro served as president until the company was sold in 1963.


Soviet Pullback From Cuba: A Red Letter Day in Miami
On the streets of Little Havana and over the airwaves of this city's Spanish-language radio stations, there was jubilation and more than a bit of gloating today, as the news that the Soviet Union plans to withdraw its troops from Cuba was passed from mouth to mouth and analyzed on talk shows.
"This is the best news that Cuban exiles have received in 32 years," said Tomas Regalado, news director at Radio Mambi, a popular Spanish-language station.
"There is a tremendous sense of euphoria and the feeling that we have begun a new era in the Cuban drama. People see this as the beginning of the end of the Castro regime."


Gencorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Officials of Tucson Electric Quite to Aid Bankruptcy Plan
John P. Schaefer, chairman of the Tucson Electric Power Company, and two other board members of the utility resigned yesterday, hoping to help their company emerge from bankruptcy protection.
The utility, facing financial difficulties because it is unable to sell surplus power and because of a failed merger with the San Diego Gas and Electric Company, was forced into Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceeding by creditors in July.
A Federal court in Tucson has granted a 90-day stay while the creditors and the utility try to work out their differences.


Council's New Era Takes Shape in New York Vote
A tiny minority of New York City voters quietly capped a decade of contentious legal challenges and government overhaul yesterday by nominating candidates whose victories in November will dramatically expand black and Hispanic representation on the newly invigorated City Council.
They will change the Council's complexion, but not necessarily its political ideology.
The primary, which broadened minority representation from 25 to 40 percent of the Council, also guaranteed the election of the Council's first openly gay member, Thomas K. Duane, from Greenwich Village.
In nine other races, the apparent victors were leading in unofficial returns by fewer than 170 votes.


The Spoken Word
WALKING TOUR AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Peddler's Pack" walking tour, Sunday at noon; "Hua Fu" Chinese heritage walking tour, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Check It Out" lecture on peddling past and present, Sunday at 2 P.M.; walking tour fees, $12 each ($11 for students and the elderly); lecture: $7 ($6 for the elderly, $5 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art," by Vivian Bobka, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari," by Ms.
Bobka, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.; free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
LECTURE, "Festival of Animation 1991," Cinema Village, Third Avenue at 12th Street, Manhattan.
The cartoonist and illustrator Bill Plympton will speak.
Tonight, tomorrow and Sunday at 7:30 and 9:45 P.M.
Tickets are $8.
Information: (212) 505-7320.
WALKING TOURS, Adventure on a Shoestring.
Walking tour of Beekman Place and Sutton Place, tomorrow at 4 P.M.; walking tour of Chelsea, Sunday at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $5 a person for nonmembers.
Information: (212) 265-2663.
LECTURE, American Jewish Congress Travel Lecture Series; Stephen Wise Congress House, 15 East 84th Street.
"Of Lands Legends and Laughter: Tales From the National Geographic," by Carolyn Bennett Patterson.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 879-4588.


Swaggart Found Liable For Defaming Minister
A state civil jury found tonight that the evangelist Jimmy Swaggart had defamed a fellow television minister, Marvin Gorman, whose career collapsed five years ago in a swirl of accusations that he was an adulterer.
Finding both Mr.
Swaggart and his television ministries liable for damages, the jury awarded Mr.
Gorman's television and crusade ministries $9 million.
In addition, it awarded Mr.
Gorman $600,000 for defamation and $400,000 for intentional infliction of emotional distress.


Top Warburg Official Is Given New Posts
Lord Cairns, vice chairman of the S. G. Warburg Group, one of Britain's leading investment banks, yesterday was appointed chief executive and deputy chairman, effective Oct. 1.
The appointment was made by Sir David Scholey, Warburg's chairman and thought by some to be the likely next governor of the Bank of England in 1993.


BRIEFS
*
ABB Flakt Inc., Atlanta, a maker of products for the power industry, said its ABB Environmental Systems unit in Norwalk, Conn., had been awarded a $166 million contract by Pennsylvania Electric Co., Johnstown, Pa., to make two flue gas desulfurization systems. *
Bob Evans Farms Inc., Columbus, Ohio, a maker of convenience foods, said it would acquire substantially all of the assets of Mrs.
Giles Country Kitchens, Lynchburg, Va., a maker of delicatessen products.
Terms were not disclosed.


Dow Rises 20.80 on Strong Economic Data
Stock prices got a solid lift yesterday from a better-than-expected report on inflation, with the Dow Jones industrial average again bobbing above the 3,000 level.
The Government reported that producer prices rose two-tenths of 1 percent in August, sending the Dow up 20.80 points, to 3,007.83.
"Yesterday's market was not a sweeping euphoria, but it was a good day on Wall Street across the board," said Hugh A. Johnson, a senior vice at the First Albany Corporation.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Dr.
Robert J. Stoller, a psychoanalyst, misstated the title of his book published this year.
It is "Pain and Passion: A Psychoanalyst Explores the World of S &amp; M."


Oncogene Science reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Viceroy Homes reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Circadian Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


EXECUTIVES
*
Bank South Corp., Atlanta, a bank company, named Lee M. Sessions Jr. senior executive vice president for retail and consumer banking. *
C.
R.
Bard Inc., Murray Hill, N.J., a maker of health-care products, named William H. Longfield president and chief operating officer.


In Trying to Clarify What He Is Not, Thomas Opens Question of What He Is
In his testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Judge Clarence Thomas has repeatedly talked about the process of transforming himself from an executive-branch official and fighter of ideological battles into a judge.
He has spoken of his efforts to "shed the baggage of ideology" and to "stop accumulating new opinions" in the year and a half since he was confirmed, at the age of 41, to his current seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.


Ellery Sedgwick Jr.; Corporation Chief, 82
Ellery Sedgwick Jr., a former president and chairman of the Medusa Corporation of Cleveland Heights, Ohio, a leading cement maker, died suddenly on Sunday at his home in Gates Mills, Ohio.
He was 82 years old.
His physician, Dr. Scott Inkley, said the cause of death was a heart attack.


Coleman Facing Leg Surgery
Vince Coleman, the center fielder for the Mets who has been sidelined for most of the season, could well have to undergo surgery to fix his injured hamstring.
Coleman said today that he had advocated surgery to remove a troublesome cyst at the back of his left leg at least a week ago, but had been advised by the team's medical staff to allow its program of medication and treatment to run its course.
He said an updated determination of the leg's status would be made next week.


Consumer Group Criticizes Travel by House Members
Members of the House of Representatives accepted nearly 4,000 trips in 1989 and 1990 that were paid for by corporations or trade groups, with Chicago the top destination, according to a report made public today.
Three Democrats, Patricia Schroeder of Colorado, William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania and Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, were listed as taking the most trips, according to the report, "They Love to Fly, And It Shows," by Public Citizen, a research organization founded by the consumer advocate Ralph Nader.


Great Adventure: Highs and Lows
HAVING fun is never easy, and at Six Flags Great Adventure here it can verge on the impossible.
It can also be as simple as screaming with ecstatic terror as your roller coaster car narrowly misses an overhead strut and then loops into the alluring sky.
The 2,200-acre park, whose season stretches from March to November, combines acute thrills with endless lines, mediocre food, tacky souvenirs and amateur entertainment.
Nevertheless, it can be a diverting family experience on a fall Saturday or Sunday (the only days it is open now), without summer heat to make feet swell and turn children (and parents) cranky.


Pop/Jazz; A New Orleans Tribe Showing Its Colors
It's quite a sight when New Orleans Indian tribes, dressed in intricately detailed costumes that combine brightly colored beadwork and huge arrays of feathers, hit the streets during Mardi Gras.
The tribes, really black social clubs, dance and sing and play the intricate percussion that underpins much of what is New Orleans music.
These tribes don't make it out of New Orleans often, but this weekend three members of the Guardians of the Flame, led by Donald Harrison Jr., will perform at Tramps.


TCA Cable TV Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Who Is Tyson, and What May Happen Next?
Mike Tyson has finally managed to cross over, to transcend boxing, to join Jack Johnson, Joe Louis and Muhammad Ali as a social as well as a pugilistic symbol.
It is a measure of his time and personality that Tyson needed a rape charge to break into the public consciousness as more than a troubled celebrity athlete.
Even when he sat, looking drugged and simple, beside Robin Givens in a grotesque parody of "The Newlywed Game," even when he was exhibited by Don King as an example of black pride, even when novelist Joyce Carol Oates intellectualized him as primal scream with a punch, Tyson was never quite able to stir talk-show debate in absentia.
Now, suddenly, even as Freddy Kreuger appears in his last "Nightmare on Elm Street," Mike Tyson has cracked into our subconscious: He is what we are afraid of, and we created him.


Wallace Computer Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


G.A.O. Study on Deposits
Congressional auditors have found that the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve operated "in accordance with Treasury regulations" in allowing the troubled Bank of New England to hold as much as $1.8 billion in deposits of Federal tax payments.
The Boston-based bank collapsed earlier this year and news reports and some in Congress raised questions about the use of Federal funds to improve the liquidity of failing banks.
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, reviewed the use of Treasury tax and loan accounts, which are jointly administerd by the Treasury and the Federal Reserve, at the Bank of New England and the Freedom National Bank in Harlem, which failed last year.


New Voices to Mold Power Balance in the New City Council
A Dominican teacher, a gay former stockbroker, a black community leader and a slew of party regulars won races in the Democratic primary yesterday, virtually assuring that they will be the new voices shaping the balance of power on the newly expanded Council.
On first glance, the newcomers to the city's political arena appeared to fulfill the revamped city charter's promise of a broader Council that mirrors New York's population.
But it was too early to tell yesterday whether they were unusual politicians or merely unknown.


Fireman Critically Hurt in Blaze; Squatter Is Held on Arson Charge
A probationary firefighter was seriously injured early yesterday when a section of roof collapsed on him as he was searching for people in a burning building in Brooklyn.
Authorities later charged a 23-year-old woman with setting the fire.
The firefighter, Kevin Kane, 31 years old, the son of a retired assistant fire chief, was airlifted by police helicopter to the burn unit at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, where he was listed in critical condition with second- and third-degree burns over 80 percent of his body.
"Right now we're praying for a miracle," said James J. Boyle, president of the Uniformed Firefighters Association.


Fine TV Can Educate, but Terrible TV Doesn't
To the Editor:
Is television of any use?
Can it teach anyone anything?
Nick Quinn Rosenkranz argues in "The Feel-Good Tube" (letter, Aug. 23) that television is entertainment, that "education is not entertainment," and that therefore television cannot help teachers teach.
Russell Baker in "Alms for the Love of Gore" (column, Aug. 20) attempts to wring humor from the tragic consignment of public television and radio to the patronage of squalid "beggathons" -- just where our leadership wants it.


Gorbachev Asks A Huge Increase In Food Relief
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union sent urgent letters to the European Community and the head of the Group of Seven industrial democracies today seeking food aid on a scale dwarfing previous Western commitments.
In a letter to Jacques Delors, the president of the European Community, Mr.
Gorbachev said the Soviet Union needed $6 billion to $7.3 billion worth of free food for the coming winter, said Ella Krucoff, a spokeswoman here for the community.


Proler International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Art in Review
David Levinthal: 'Modern Romance'  Janet Borden Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) Through Oct. 5
Last season, David Levinthal followed up his earlier photographs of cowboy dolls and toy soldiers with a provocative series of large-scale photographs of tiny Japanese erotic dolls, shown at the Laurence Miller Gallery.
Now he returns with a series, made in 1987 and presented in New York for the first time, devoted to what might at first blush seem a more intimate view of relations between the sexes.


Review/Music; The Masur Era at the Philharmonic
New musical eras are often proclaimed with compositional polemics, breaks with tradition, revisionist or revolutionary fanfares.
But Wednesday night at Avery Fisher Hall, a new era was ushered in the most understated fashion.
After a two-year search rife with rumors of choices made and chances lost, and after more than a year of anticipation, Kurt Masur's debut as music director of the New York Philharmonic was a brief in favor of tradition, a declaration that a new musical era can sometimes be an old one.
A generation ago, this notion would have been scandalous.
In 1958, when Leonard Bernstein took over the Philharmonic and became the first American-trained, American-born music director of an American orchestra, the hope was for a brave new world; when the composer Pierre Boulez was brought in in 1969, the hope was to institutionalize new music, bringing it into the mainstream; when Zubin Mehta came in 1978, the hope was that there would be a explosion of charismatic podium-work, maestoso maestroing.
Now the hope, with Mr.
Masur, is that the tradition itself will simply return to its origins, with taste, solidity and good sense.
In interviews, Mr.
Masur has stated that his intentions include "a steadier musical life" and a "warm, human sound."


Goals for Military Research Ignite Debate
A leader of the intelligence community in both the Carter and Reagan Administrations and a high-ranking economist in the Reagan Administration clashed today over whether the Government should do more to strengthen the nation's technology base to enhance both national security and economic competitiveness.
Bobby R. Inman, a retired admiral who was both Deputy Director of Central Intelligence and Director of the National Security Agency, urged Congress to broaden the mandates of the National Security Council and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Pentagon.
Mr.
Inman argued that "if we don't make changes, the Department of Defense is going to pay much more to access needed technologies."


Diner's Journal
Swedish Venture
The owners of Aquavit, the Scandinavian restaurant at 13 West 54th Street in Manhattan, plan a new venture called Snaps (pronounced snopps, it is Swedish slang for aquavit) in a former Goldome bank at 230 Park Avenue, at 46th Street, in Manhattan.
Hakan Swahn, a principal owner along with SSRS, a Swedish hotel company, said the emphasis would be on Scandinavian food, but with exceptions.
"We have decided to give ourselves some flexibility and may even serve a steak or a pasta on occasion," Mr.
Swahn said.
He added that Snaps was expected to open around the end of the year.
The Changing Scene
NEW CHEFS: Andrew Pappas, the executive chef of the Post House in Manhattan since 1985, is now the executive chef at the Regency Hotel's restaurant, 540 Park.
His replacement at the Post House is Robert Mignola, a former sous-chef there. . . .
The Polo in the Westbury Hotel in Manhattan has a new chef: Grant Langdon Brown, formerly of the St.
Clair Inn in St.
Clair, Mich.
Stefan Simkovics, the Westbury's general manager, said the Polo would feature American cuisine in a more casual atmosphere, at moderate prices.
OPENING: Lespinasse, the restaurant in the St.
Regis Hotel, 2 East 55th Street, Manhattan.
The chef, Gray Kunz, was the chef at Adrienne in the Peninsula Hotel.


Philadelphia Journal; Public Art Tackles Graffiti, and Wins
Patricia Aponte doesn't need to give her address to most visitors.
People who don't even know her do know her home by its towering image of a local hero.
Rising 40 feet, a vibrantly rendered mural of Julius (Dr. J.) Erving has turned Miss Aponte's home on the gritty northern edge of Center City into a landmark.


Our Towns
The Bedford Hills Correctional Facility looks just like a prison.
It has the towering fences with shining coils of razor wire.
It has the guard towers, sign-in books, metal detectors and thick windows that stifle communication.
It has sliding gates of steel bars, omniscient TV cameras perched on posts and instructions stenciled on the walls in institutional black: "Load and Unload Weapons at Shed."
But on second glance, this secluded place sprawling across the fall's fading green of Westchester County also has some unusual things: A nursery, a playroom, colorful wall murals painted toddler-tall and what sounds exactly like a baby crying down the linoleum-tiled hallway.
The place also has a nonstop nun named Sister Elaine Roulet, who thinks she's just about the luckiest person in the world to get up at 4:45 every day for a 110-mile round trip to spend the day locked inside New York's only maximum-security prison for women.


Art's Way Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 24


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Value Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Owners Say They'll Review Draft
Major league baseball owners have decided to review the ways in which baseball conducts its annual June draft of high school and college athletes, introducing the possibility of securing more leverage in negotiations and changing the relationship between amateurs and professionals.
Emerging from a joint session of American and National League owners on the final day of quarterly meetings, Commissioner Fay Vincent said major league baseball had agreed to review the rules governing the amateur draft.


For Noriega Jury: Many Are Called, None Chosen
Jury selection had barely begun in the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega late last week when Judge William M. Hoeveler asked if anybody in the pool of more than 100 potential jurors actually knew the deposed Panamanian dictator.
"Yes," said Lesbia Reyna, the wife of a Panamanian doctor, rising from her seat, looking directly at General Noriega and speaking passionately in heavily accented English.
"I know him as a violator of human rights."


Restaurants
Contrapunto
Nine-year-old Contrapunto, the vibrant pasta palace across Lexington Avenue from Bloomingdale's in the middle of the East Side cinema district, has more energy than an Arnold Schwarzenegger thriller.
The reason is simple: pleasing and moderately priced pastas, salads and seafood in a congenial setting.
It's no wonder there is a wait for tables -- usually a short one, though -- virtually every night.


Tektronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 24


With Kelly Coming Into Town, Jets May Bring Out McMillan
With Buffalo's Jim Kelly expected to fill the air in Giants Stadium with footballs on Sunday, would this be the ideal time for the Jets to bring Erik McMillan, their leading active pass interception leader, out of mothballs and back to free safety?
While Pete Carroll, the Jets' defensive coordinator, wouldn't say McMillan would start but he did say he "is going to get into the game this week in the nickel and dime, because some of the things they do, we think Erik has the stuff to cover."


Klingler Sees A Rout From The Other Side in Miami
The University of Miami's football game against Houston tonight was billed as a showdown of high-powered offenses.
At least, the Hurricanes did their part.
Miami dominated throughout in a 40-10 rout of the Cougars, who in their opening game defeated Louisiana Tech, 73-3.


Foodarama Supermarkets reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


New Steps in Middle Eastern Hostage Diplomacy
More pieces fell into place today in the intricate diplomatic puzzle of resolving the Middle East hostage crisis, but Israeli negotiators cautioned that, despite encouraging signs, the process would take time.
Israel, playing a central role in a series of reciprocal releases of captives, said it had received today the body of one of seven Israeli servicemen who had been missing for years in Lebanon.


THE THOMAS HEARINGS: TV Critic's Notebook; Bork as Analyst: Past Loser Gives View of Today's Game
While the shadow of Robert H. Bork floats over the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on the Supreme Court nomination of Clarence Thomas, Mr.
Bork in the flesh can be seen on the Court TV cable channel commenting on the proceedings, on Judge Thomas and, inescapably, on himself.
Sports fans may recognize the format as the common one of bringing on an old-timer to assess the performance of the young hopeful.
To news buffs, it may seem more like Saddam Hussein handing out tips on tactics to Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf.
Remembrances of unhappy hearings past may have been on Mr.
Bork's mind.
In an exchange with Fred Graham, the new channel's main anchor, Mr.
Bork defended Judge Thomas against the charge of "confirmation conversion," which he too had endured before being rejected by the Senate in 1987.Then he cracked, "The first time you express an opinion in your life, you're stuck with it forever."


Hanoi Leaders to Visit China as Ties Revive
China and Vietnam announced today that Vietnamese leaders would visit China this year, in a meeting that is expected to lead to a normalization of relations between the two neighbors.
While they have a territorial dispute and have been at odds since a brief border war in 1979, the two countries have been drawn together lately by the collapse of Communism elsewhere around the world.
Relations between Hanoi and Beijing have been improving rapidly, and the warming is likely to improve the prospects for a peaceful settlement of the Cambodian war.


Bernard Blickman, 76, Engineer and Inventor
Bernard I. Blickman, a civil engineer and inventor, died on Sunday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


The Prefight Fight
JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ, the World Boxing Council lightweight champion, was smiling when LONNIE SMITH started to bait him yesterday during the final news conference in Las Vegas before their championship bout Saturday at the Mirage.


Critic's Choice/Dance; Creach and Koester: Dancing as Adventure
Terry Creach and Stephen Koester began to dance together in 1980.
Since then, the two men have created a company with a perspective that is distinctively literate yet adventurous.
They are interested in exploring the way men dance, together and apart, and the physical, emotional and societal ramifications of that dancing.
There isn't a bit of sentimentality to what they do.
There is, however, a good deal of wit, sometimes wry, high-energy dancing and tenderness.
The four-man company Creach/Koester performs tonight at the Dia Center for the Arts in a characteristically wide-ranging program of three new dances.
The guest choreographer, Ann Carlson, has contributed "Untitled No. 1," a duet for the compact Mr.
Creach, who moves like a bullet, and the taller and more lyrical Mr.
Koester.
The dance is set to excerpts from von Flotow's opera "Martha."


The Knicks Say They'll Be Listening
If the Knicks are still willing to trade center PATRICK EWING, it is likely they will do their best this weekend at the National Basketball Association annual meetings in Palm Desert, Calif.
But just because they will listen doesn't mean they will make a trade, said ERNIE GRUNFELD, the team's vice president of player personnel.


California Seeks Agency For Smoking Campaign
The California Department of Health Services, which started an aggressive, high-profile antismoking campaign last year, said yesterday that it would soon begin searching for an ad agency to continue the campaign.
The account would be awarded for two years at a spending level of about $16 million each year.
The new agency, which the department hopes to select by Dec. 1, would replace Keye/Donna/Pearlstein, a Los Angeles agency that dissolved earlier this year.


THE THOMAS HEARINGS: TV Critic's Notebook; Bork as Analyst: Past Loser Gives View of Today's Game
While the shadow of Robert H. Bork floats over the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on the Supreme Court nomination of Clarence Thomas, Mr.
Bork in the flesh can be seen on the Court TV cable channel commenting on the proceedings, on Judge Thomas and, inescapably, on himself.
Sports fans may recognize the format as the common one of bringing on an old-timer to assess the performance of the young hopeful.
To news buffs, it may seem more like Saddam Hussein handing out tips on tactics to Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf.
Remembrances of unhappy hearings past may have been on Mr.
Bork's mind.
In an exchange with Fred Graham, the new channel's main anchor, Mr.
Bork defended Judge Thomas against the charge of "confirmation conversion," which he too had endured before being rejected by the Senate in 1987.Then he cracked, "The first time you express an opinion in your life, you're stuck with it forever."


Milton Harris, 84, Who Created Anti-Shrinking Method for Wool
Milton Harris, a prominent chemist whose research ranged from finding ways of keeping wool from shrinking to a substitute for sperm whale oil, died on Thursday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 85 years old.
He died of stomach cancer, said his son, John A. Harris, of Potomac, Md.


Patents; Goggles Used to Treat Learning Disabilities
A professor of education at the University of Houston and two psychologists have invented a set of goggles with flickering lights that they contend can help train brain activity in children with certain types of learning disabilities.
The professor, John L. Carter, said the goggles were an outgrowth of earlier research on ways to enhance skills of children who experience big differences between their verbal and nonverbal skills.
Such children often have learning difficulties that result from persistent anxiety about their performance in one area or another.
"We found that if the kids calmed down, they had better access to their memories," Dr.
Carter said.


Editorial Notebook; One Tough Cop, Canned
Colombia's President, Cesar Gaviria Trujillo, wants support for his efforts to deal with drug traffickers in his own country in his own way.
His willingness to ban extradition to the United States and negotiate terms of incarceration, he says, ought not to be taken as a sign of weakness.
But last week he gave skeptics a powerful new reason for doubt: He dismissed Gen.
Miguel Maza Marquez, head of the Department of Administrative Security, Colombia's F.B.I.


Excerpts From the Hearings On the Thomas Nomination
Following are excerpts from the transcript of today's session of the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court with questioning by Senators Patrick J. Leahy; Arlen Specter; Joseph R. Biden Jr., the committee chairman; Howell Heflin; Paul Simon, and Herb Kohl.
QUESTIONS BY SENATOR LEAHY
Q.
None of us are asking you how you are going to rule on an upcoming case. . . .
But it is appropriate for us to ask you how you think, what your background is, what kind of a Justice you might be, if the advice and consent clause means anything. . . .
Judge, you entered law school 20 years ago this year, and in that 20 years, as both you and I would agree, there has been some extraordinary cases in the Supreme Court.
They have actually decided hundreds of cases, made rulings perhaps in hundreds more in that 20 years.
Some may be routine, but some have been pretty significant cases.
Just tell me, to help me know how you think, what would you consider a handful of the most important cases that have been decided by the Supreme Court since you became a law student 20 years ago?
A.
Senator, to give you a running list, I would have to go back and give it some thought.
But I certainly think that during the time that I was in law school, two of the cases that were considered the most significant cases, or among the most significant cases, would have been certainly Griggs, which was decided while I was in law school. . . .
And certainly I think Roe v.
Wade. . . .
Q. Are there some other cases that come to mind in the last 20 years?
A.
There would be others, Senator.
I can't off the top of my head, as you mention them, perhaps I could accord some weight to them.
Just not off the top of my head.
Q.
But there are none that sort of stand out that might have been cases that have influenced your thinking when you accepted the appointment to the Court of Appeals or when you accepted this appointment?
Did certain things stick in your mind and you say, "I am being nominated to the Court that decided," whatever the case might be?
A.
Before my lifetime, I am being nominated to the Court that decided Brown. . . .
When the President made the announcement that I would be nominated to the Supreme Court.
That is certainly one of the cases, even before I knew all of the legal ramifications, it is one that changed my life and changed the South, and, of course, even though I did not go to desegregated schools until I was virtually an adult.
Q. . . .
You would accept, I would assume, that people don't expect the second a judge puts on a robe that it is like an eraser going across a blackboard and their whole life is wiped out, all their thoughts, all their feelings, their prejudices, and I don't use that in a pejorative form, but just all their feelings they have toward everything is suddenly wiped out.
A.
With respect to judges and what happens when you become a judge, I, quite frankly, don't know that any of us who, prior to becoming judges, understood exactly how it would change us.
I could not have told you when I was here for the Court of Appeals exactly how it would change me.
I can tell you, and I think most judges would tell you, that it is not necessarily like an eraser, but it is a profound change.
Q.
Lewis Lehrman's analysis concludes that because the right to liberty attaches at conception that abortion of any sort is unconstitutional.
Do you agree with that conclusion?
A.
As I indicated, Senator, to you in our last discussion, I have read this article; and as I have noted throughout my testimony and in discussions in reference to this article, my only interest was as stated: to demonstrate to a conservative audience that one of their own used this notion of natural rights -- --
Q. Judge, I ----
A. ---- and the second point is that, as I have indicated, I do not endorse that conclusion. . . .
Q.
I am not sure just which conclusion we are talking about.
I am talking about Lehrman's conclusion that all abortion, under any circumstance -- which, of course, would go way beyond any overruling of a Supreme Court decision or anything else, but his conclusion that all abortion is unconstitutional, do you accept that conclusion? . . .
A.
And what I am trying to do, Senator, is to respond to your question and at the same time not offer a particular view on this difficult issue of abortion that would undermine my impartiality.
The point that I am making is that I have not, nor have I ever, endorsed this conclusion or supported this conclusion. . . .
QUESTIONS BY SENATOR SPECTER
Q.
I want to come to the Yale Law School admission, and not to personalize it with you, but take Professor Steven Carter, who is an African-American, a distinguished professor now at Yale, Yale being a very good law school.
Professor Carter has just written a book, "Affirmative Action Baby," and he says flat out that he enjoyed the benefits of racial preference. . . .
Why shouldn't the law school like Yale give a preference, to give that person an opportunity to blossom fully, even though on the test scores at the moment that African-American doesn't measure up quite to the white person he has displaced?
A. . . .
I think that during that era, those of us who were then the beneficiaries of what were called preferential treatment programs, I think that was the exact terminology that, it was an effort to determine whether kids had been disadvantaged, had socioeconomic disadvantages, had done very, very well in other endeavors against those odds.  . . .
That is a difficult, subjective determination, but I thought that it was one that was appropriately made.
One of the aspects of that is that the kids could come from any background of disadvantage.
The kid could be a white kid from Appalachia, could be a Cajun from Louisiana, or could be a black kid or Hispanic kid from the inner-cities or from the barrios, but I defended that sort of a program then and I would defend it today.
Q.
Judge, I hear you very close to my position, but what I believe I am hearing is that you are in favor of affirmative action preference, at least in that context.
A. I think I have said that.
Q.
I would turn to one critical line from Professor Carter's book, which I think really puts in a nutshell much of this affirmative action debate, when he says, "The reason for the surge is to find the blacks among the best, not the best among the blacks," and that if you have the affirmative action, as you concur, on preference in law school, then the potential is developed through a Professor Carter or a Judge Thomas. . . .
A. . . .
I have been an aggressive advocate of giving minorities the opportunity and the occasion to develop potential.
QUESTIONS BY SENATOR BIDEN
Q.
Before I yield to the Senator from Alabama, a point of clarification.
Did you say, Judge, that affirmative action preference programs are all right as long as they are not based on race?
A.
I said that from a policy standpoint I agreed with affirmative action policies that focused on disadvantaged minorities and disadvantaged individuals in our society.
QUESTIONS BY SENATOR HEFLIN
Q.
Let me look a little bit -- from your life and history, you are somewhat of an enigma.
You have gone through many changes in your life, and the last three decades of society in America has gone through many changes.
The thinking of individuals evolve, they change with time.
You have told us about your background in your opening statement and through testimony here.
It is interesting to note that you decided at one time in your life that you wanted to study to be a priest, and you went to a seminary and then to a seminary in Missouri. . . .
A.
Well, Senator, with respect to going to the seminary, of course, that is always a very, very deeply personal choice, it is a deeply personal religious choice.
When you make that decision at 15, there is always opportunity for change and growth and development.
Q.
Of course, part of this I think shows you do have a sensitivity to the factors that have occurred relative to the movement or progress of race relations, and I think that ought to be brought out, in fairness to all parties concerned.
Major and Minor
Now, you went to Holy Cross. What did you major in at Holy Cross?
A.
Well, I transferred to Holy Cross for my sophomore year and I majored in English literature. . . .
Q. What did you minor in?
A. I think protest. (laughter)
A.
When I went to Holy Cross, there was a tremendous amount going on, and one of the areas that was of great concern to me was what I perceived at that age as injustices in our society, and what I attempted to do was to be involved and to protest and be active in protesting what I thought were injustices in a way that is permitted in our society. . . .
Q.
In this Los Angeles Times article, it says, "Today, he seems embarrassed about those days."
A. No.
Q. Do you want to respond to that?
A.
No, I am no more embarrassed about feeling strongly and passionately about injustice than I am about doing anything else in my life.
I think that I would rather have those days of wanting to participate in our political process, even though I have grown and matured, than saying that I spent all of my college days drinking beer and having a good time.
Q. Why did you decide to go to law school and become a lawyer?
A. . . .
You know, we all wanted to change the world at that time.
I guess at that age you think you actually can go out and change the world.
I wanted to right some wrongs that I saw in Savannah, some specific wrongs with respect to my grandfather and what he was able to do with his life, as well as to the overall wrongs that I saw as a child there. . . .
Q.
I started talking about your biographical, that you were in an enigma. . . .
What is the real Clarence Thomas like or what will the real Clarence Thomas do on the Supreme Court, if he is confirmed? . . .
A.
Senator, I think that during the past 10 weeks, people have written and formed conclusions about me, and that has gotten to be a part of this process.
I think they are free to do that. . . .
But those conclusions that people form about you were not -- about me -- were not the real Clarence Thomas.
I am the real Clarence Thomas, and I have attempted to bring that person here and to show you who he was, not just snippets from speeches or snippets from articles. . . .
But, by and large, the point is I am just simply different from what people painted me to be. . . .
QUESTIONS BY SENATOR SIMON
When you told about being a student at Holy Cross, I would feel comfortable voting for that student for the Supreme Court.
And then in describing yourself, you said, "Then we thought we really could change the world" --making it past tense.
Some of us still think we can change the world.
Maybe not in huge giant steps, but in little steps.
And you are going to a place where you are going to change the world for a lot of people. . . .
Frankly, a person with Clarence Thomas' ability is going to make out all right.
Whether you get confirmed or not confirmed, you are going to do very well.
That 10th-grade dropout may not do well. . . .
A.
Senator, when I spoke earlier about changing the world, I think I would distinguish between the way that as a youth you feel that you can go out and take on everything tomorrow morning and get it all accomplished tomorrow morning.
At some point I think you realize that you have to take a step back and begin to approach it more -- not so much in a rush or impatiently, but persistently.
And if there was one lesson that I learned during that period, it was the difference between impatience and persistence, the difference between being upset and being committed to something. . . .
QUESTIONS BY SENATOR KOHL
Q.
Judge Thomas, you have been extremely critical of the Senate's rejection of Judge Bork.
In fact, in a 1987 speech to the 1988 Business Law Section, you said that the Senate's failure to confirm Judge Bork was "a tragedy." I am interested in your views on how the Senate should discharge its advice and consent responsibility, so would you tell us what it was about the Senate's rejection of Judge Bork that was so improper?
A.
I guess, Senator, the point for me there and, again, my approach if I were making the decision, I think each member of this body would have to decide for himself, but my view was that Judge Bork was qualified as to his temperament, as to his competence, and certainly qualified as to his overall abilities.


Undoing Injustice in Lithuania
Lithuania rightly pleads not guilty to the shocked charges of anti-Semitism that have been prompted by its exoneration of citizens convicted by Soviet courts for activities under Nazi occupation.
The newly independent Baltic state did, however, act with undue haste in some cases -- haste that the Government now acknowledges and promises to correct.
By opening its processes to testimony from outsiders and inviting members of Israel's Parliament to take part in the proceedings, Lithuania helps assure that, this time, justice will be done.


China Expels Briton Amid Signs of Crackdown on Journalists
China expelled a British journalist today amid some indications that the Government is tightening control over foreign journalists.
The Briton, Andrew Higgins of The Independent, said he had been summoned to the Public Security Bureau today and ordered to leave China within 48 hours.
The authorities did not give a reason, but in June Mr.
Higgins reported on a confidential Chinese document that discussed the suppression of a nationalist movement in the Chinese region of Inner Mongolia.


U.S. AND SOVIETS TO END ARMS SALES TO AFGHAN RIVALS
In yet another move to settle longstanding regional disputes, the United States and the Soviet Union agreed today to stop all arms sales to combatants in Afghanistan to help pave the way for free elections and a final settlement of the Afghan civil war.
After a meeting this morning to tie up the details, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Boris D. Pankin, and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d read a joint statement declaring their intention to cease all weapons deliveries -- and to encourage all other countries to cease theirs -- by Jan. 1, 1992.
In the interim, they agreed not to step up current arms shipments to their respective Afghan allies.


Judge in Tyson Case Limits Statements
If you hear or read anything more about the charges against MIKE TYSON before he comes to trial, it better not come from the prosecutors, lawyers or others involved in the case.
A judge in Indianapolis yesterday ordered all parties not to make any statements that could prejudice the case against the former heavyweght champion.
He was indicted on Monday and charged with having raped an 18-year-old woman in his Indianapolis hotel room last July.


Bond Market Takes Fed Cut in Stride
The credit markets did not give a resounding reception yesterday to the Federal Reserve Board's decision to cut both the short-term interest rates it controls most directly.
Traders responded to the rate cuts and weak economic reports by pushing Treasury bond prices down slightly and yields up.
Short-term interest rates were little changed.


Passenger Safety and Power Featured in 1992 Vehicles
The 1992 model cars and trucks, which officially go on sale Sept. 26, are more powerful and offer more consumer conveniences than ever before; they are also more technically advanced, particularly in passenger safety.
As usual, the new vehicles are also more expensive than the 1991 models, but rebates are being offered on most of them to help them sell, and many dealers are willing to discount the retail price.


East European Jobless
Unemployment in Eastern Europe, including the Soviet Union, could reach 22 million in 1992, Heribert Maier, Deputy Director General of the International Labor Organization, said today.
He made the prediction in a speech at a conference on labor markets in Eastern Europe.
Labor officials said unemployment would continue to rise in Eastern Europe for some time.
Mr.
Maier said it was impossible to assess the current level of Soviet unemployment.


Wolverines Want the Irish to Try to Travel by Air
Before the first big game in a stretch that could determine the University of Michigan football team's fate before the leaves change color, it would be difficult to blame Coach Gary Moeller if he marked the occasion with the standard well-kept secrets and evasive statements.
But as the Wolverines prepared for their meeting with Notre Dame, to be played Saturday afternoon before the usual 100,000-plus maize-and-blue mob at Michigan Stadium, Moeller's approach was as direct as that of a blitzing linebacker.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8--8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.25
5.44
7.36
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.16
5.19
7.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.20
5.19
7.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.43
7.53
8.72
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.93
8.01
9.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.00
10.03
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.93
6.94
7.59
*Average daily rate, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dow Off 22.14 on Signs of Weak Economy
Despite a cut in the discount rate by the Federal Reserve, stocks closed lower yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average down 22.14, to 2,985.69.
For the week, the Dow lost 25.94 points.
The rate cut by the Fed came after statistics were released showing that the rise in the Consumer Price Index in August was less than had been expected and that retail sales had dropped last month.


Corrections
A chart yesterday about sponsored travel by members of Congress misidentified the source of the information.
The study was provided by Public Citizen, not Common Cause.


After the Voting; New Faces on the City Council
Of New York's 51 new City Council districts, 21 will send newcomers to City Hall in January.
Pending the official results, the final outcomes in some of Thursday's primaries remained too close to call, and officials said yesterday it may take unitl Sept. 25, after absentee ballots are counted, for the final results to come in.
In at least one other race, the Democratic winner will face strong Republican opposotion in the Nov. 5 general election.
These are the new Democrats who appear certain of winning their seats on the new Council.
DISTRICT 1 (MANHATTAN) KATHRYN E. FREED
44 years old, tenants' lawyer ... counsel to State Assembly Consumer Affairs and Protection Committee ... former counsel to City Commission on Human Rights ... endorsed by Downtown Independent Democrats, Village Reform Democratic Club and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 3 (MANHATTAN) THOMAS K. DUANE
36, Manhattan coordinator for City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman ... former stockbroker ... former deputy press secretary for State Attorney General Robert Abrams ... endorsed by Village Independent Democrats, Gay and Lesbian Independent Democrats and the insurgent Majority Coalition for a New New York.
DISTRICT 10 (MANHATTAN)  GUILLERMO LINARES
41, instructor at City College School of Education ... adult literacy instructor for the Hispanic Women's Center ... founding member of Community Association of Progressive Dominicans ... president of School Board 6 ... endorsed by the Majority Coalition for a New New York.
DISTRICT 12 (THE BRONX)  LAWRENCE A. WARDEN
47, health care administrator ...
Democratic leader in 82d Assembly District ... president of Community School Board 11 ... member of Community Planning Board 12 ... member of Bronx Municipal Hospital Center Community Advisory Board ... endorsed by Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Bronx Democratic organization and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 18 (THE BRONX)  LUCY CRUZ
46, director of community affairs at Bronx Municipal Hospital Center ... district manager for Community Board 9 ... member of National Latina Women's Caucus ... member of the National Council of Negro Women ... endorsed by the Bronx Deomcratic organization, the Liberal Party and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 19 (QUEENS)  HOWARD WEISS
66, insurance broker ... state Deomcratic committeeman ... state commander of the Jewish War Veterans ... chairman of the Veterans Committee for the Homeless ... endorsed by the F.D.R.
Democratic Association.
DISTRICT 21 (QUEENS) HELEN M. MARSHALL
61, member of the State Assembly ... former teacher, library director ... member of the Council of Black Elected Democrats of New York State ... member of the East Elmhurst/Corona Civic Association ... member of Community Board 3 ... endorsed by Mayor Dinkins, the Queens Democratic organization and the City Council Politcal Action Committee.
DISTRICT 28 (QUEENS)  THOMAS WHITE JR.
52, director of a substance abuse program ... founder of the Jamaica Community Adolescent Program ... former Democratic leader in the 32d Assembly District ... endorsed by the Queens Democratic organization and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 36 (BROOKLYN) ANNETTE M. ROBINSON
50, former liaison in the office of former City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin ... former member of Community School Board 16 ... former vice president of P.T.A. of Boys and Girls High School ... endorsed by Mayor Dinkins, the Brooklyn Democratic organization, the Liberal Party and the Majority Coalition for a New New York.
DISTRICT 37 (BROOKLYN) MARTIN MALAVE-DILAN
40, aide to Representative Edolphus Towns ...
Democratic distirct leader and state committeeman for the 54th Assembly District ... former chairman of Community School Board 32 ... endorsed by Mayor Dinkins, the Brooklyn Democratic organization and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 38 (BROOKLYN) JOAN GRIFFIN McCABE
35, policy analyst for the Public Education Association ... publisher of Brooklyn Schools newspaper ... associate director for community relations of the Henry Street Settlement ... endorsed by the Central Brooklyn Independent Democrats.


Approval for ITT On Compensation
The ITT Corporation said its proposed changes in executive compensation were acceptable to the United Shareholders Association, which was critical of compensation received by Rand V. Araskog.
ITT's chief executive.
"Obviously, our proposed executive compensation meets the standards of United Shareholders Association," the company said.
It declined to give details, although a source said it included a revised stock option plan placing restrictions on when executives could exercise options.
The nonprofit shareholder rights group picked the company as the target for a shareholder rights campaign.


Judge Bars Milken Motion
A Federal judge today rejected a motion by Michael R. Milken to disqualify a law firm from representing Federal savings regulators that sued the jailed financier over the demise of dozens of savings and loans.
Federal District Judge Stephen V. Wilson ruled that the law firm, Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, did not have an attorney-client relationship with Mr.
Milken or any other defendants in the case.


North America's Best In Canada Cup Final
They probably won't drop their gloves, ball their fingers into fists and throw punches.
They might not pull the shirts over each other's heads or whip off the helmets to grab a handful of hair.
And they won't stand up in the penalty boxes to shout curses through bloody lips.
In other words, it's not the kind of hockey that Americans can expect to see on the highlight segment of the late-night sportscasts.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the prospects of Hollywood films for the rest of the year rendered movie admission figures incorrectly.
Attendance for the summer was 329.1 million, down from 390 million last summer.


California's Democrats Take Cuomo at Word
A blistering attack on Republican policies, a fund-raising lunch for the California Democratic Party and a vigorous denial that he is interested in the White House marked Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's brief visit here today.
But unlike many previous trips, which have tended to revive Presidential speculation despite Mr.
Cuomo's protestations, many of California's leading Democrats say they have begun to take the Governor at his word: That he is not campaigning for President.


Belgian Group Weighs Investing in Sabena
Belgium's Groupe Bruxelles Lambert S.A. said today that it was considering investing in the troubled Belgian air carrier Sabena S.A. through a consortium that would include Air France.
Michel Delloye, general manager of the holding company, said Groupe Bruxelles would be interested in setting up an operating and financial consortium with other partners, including Air France, to invest directly in Sabena.
But "it is too early to say who else might be involved," he said in a telephone interview.


Bush's Wetlands Plan Makes a Good Start
To the Editor:
"The Swamp President" (editorial, Aug. 14) is misleading.
Of course, the Bush Administration's proposals to redefine wetlands will "result in wetland loss, at least by present Federal standards." The capricious standards are themselves the problem.
As much as half of the Eastern United States and perhaps 40 percent of drought-stricken California could be defined as wetlands under the current definition.
The Administration's proposals are a timid first step toward injecting sanity into the policy.


SHAMIR UNMOVED BY BUSH'S THREAT
Shrugging off President Bush's threatened use of a veto, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said today that Israel and its supporters in Washington would keep pressing the United States Congress for swift approval of $10 billion in loan guarantees intended to help resettle Soviet Jewish immigrants here.
Although Mr.
Shamir spoke in conciliatory terms and emphasized that he still supported the Middle East peace conference sought by the United States, the thrust of his remarks was that Israel was prepared for a bitter fight if it came to one.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Fed drove down the interest rates it controls to their lowest points since the 1970's, and large banks responded by reducing their prime rate.
The Fed cut the discount rate to 5 percent from 5 1/2 percent and acted to lower the Federal funds rate to 5 1/4 percent from 5 1/2 percent.  [ Page 1. ]


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Massey Leads Du Maurier by a Stroke


After the Voting; The Votes Are In, but There's Still Room for Doubt in a Quarter of the Races
The results of 9 of the 38 City Council primaries held on Thursday were so close that their final outcomes probably will remain in doubt until Sept. 25, after absentee ballots are tabulated and votes are meticulously recounted.
Even then, several elections may be challenged in court, raising the possibility that judges may order new races in districts where there is evidence of impropriety or fraud.


Review/Jazz; On One Bill, Two Warring Jazz Schools
One camp of modern jazz musicians insists that jazz needs to start over again from the mid-1960's, reclaiming the sounds of acoustic instruments and the magnificently complex idiom of hard-bop.
Another insists that electronic instruments and more recent funk rhythms should be incorporated in a contemporary jazz vocabulary.
Usually the two camps are barely on speaking terms.
But the double bill at the Joyce Theater headlined by the saxophonist Branford Marsalis's trio (tenor or soprano saxophone, bass and drums) brought them together by booking the alto saxophonist Steve Coleman and his group, Five Elements (with electric guitar, piano, electric bass and drums), as the opening act.
The program is at the Joyce, 175 Eighth Avenue, through Sunday.


Fresh Flowers Mark Memorial to Men Killed in Soviet Coup


Review/Dance; Folk Rhythms of Slovakia From a Native Ensemble
In the background rose the Brooklyn Bridge.
From time to time, boats passed calmly on the East River.
In the foreground dancers whirled and stamped through Slovak folk dances to the sounds of violins, dulcimer, accordion and shepherd's pipe.
This attractive mingling of sights and sounds occurred on Wednesday night when the Oravan Slovak Folk Ensemble performed outdoors on a platform at Pier 17 at the South Street Seaport.
The Czechoslovak troupe, which comes from Nizna, a town in northern Slovakia, has been touring the United States since August.
It appeared at South Street as part of the Downtown Dance festival, a series of outdoor summer performances produced by the Battery Dance Company under the direction of Jonathan Hollander.


Thomas to Win High Court Seat, Senators Predict
Judge Clarence Thomas ended a week of sometimes contentious questioning before the Senate Judiciary Committee today amid a growing sense among committee members that his confirmation to the Supreme Court seems inevitable.
The subtle but unmistakable movement in favor of his prospects was evident both in the tone of questions posed to him during the hearings and in comments by individual senators outside the Senate Caucus Room.


After the Voting; A Fine Concession Speech (but His Math Was Wrong)
By all accounts, Robert J. Miller, a City Council candidate, gave a fine concession speech on Thursday night.
In fact he gave it twice, once to supporters at the Independent Democrats of Flatbush clubhouse in Brooklyn and then again to followers at the Progressive Democratic Club in Bensonhurst.
"I said the numbers don't look good, there's a lot of confusion but it looks like we lost," Mr.
Miller said yesterday.
"I told people I hoped they weren't disappointed, that I'd be back. A lot of people were crying. My parents were there. They were quite upset."


Serbian Rebels Harden Control of Croatia Coast
Serbian insurgents occupied Yugoslav Army barracks along the Croatian coast today, consolidating their control of the republic.
In Belgrade, an important official of the national Government said that what little remained of central Yugoslav authority was crumbling.
In Croatia's capital, the Zagreb radio accused the Yugoslav Army of transporting large numbers of Serbian guerrillas by land and sea from Montenegro, a republic in the southwest, to army barracks along the Dalmatian coast.
The purpose was presumably to secure the region after having effectively cut it off from Zagreb this week.


Key Senate Backer of Stealth Bomber Sees It in Jeopardy
The Stealth bomber, already imperiled by shrinking military budgets and a diminishing Soviet threat, was dealt another setback today when a key Democrat who had supported the program in the Senate warned the Air Force that the B-2 was in jeopardy.
The action by Senator Jim Exon of Nebraska was the most significant erosion of support for the plane since the Air Force told Congressional leaders this week that the B-2 had failed a test of its ability to evade enemy radar.


Blacks and Jews Talk, Averting Clash in Teaneck
Blacks and Jews have been talking, and demonstrators have been marching, with some regularity here since a black youth was killed by a white policeman.
Now, trouble elsewhere has threatened months of work meant to restore the town's reputation for racial tolerance.
But the bridges built since the shooting 18 months ago seem to have paid off.


'Third Force' Linked to Black Factional Strife in South Africa
With the most important peace conference in the recent history of South Africa scheduled for Saturday, one issue is dominating preliminary talks among delegates: whether a pro-apartheid "third force" is orchestrating the factional violence among blacks.
Renewed fighting broke out overnight, when four people were killed in shooting attacks in Vosloorus and Thekane, black townships south and east of Johannesburg.
The dead included two municipal policemen.


Observer; The Boo-Hoo Express
All right, men, we now know you can cry, so could we just turn the manly tear ducts down to a trickle, fellows?
I've been trying for months now to muster enough courage to make this plea.
What finally pushes me to do it are two teary tales in Tuesday's papers.


M.T.A. Cuts Back on New Buses and Trains
There will be 200 fewer new buses, nine fewer renovations of subway stations and no more new double-decker cars on the Long Island Rail Road under a scaled-down five-year transit rebuilding plan announced yesterday by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
The agency's chairman, Peter E. Stangl, said Monday that he had decided to cut back its proposal for renovating the New York region's subway, bus and commuter rail lines.
Yesterday, Mr.
Stangl detailed the specific cuts he was proposing.


Stanford Picks Inventor As Head of Licensing
Stanford University on Thursday named Katherine Ku, a chemical engineer and inventor who holds two patents, to be director of the school's office of technology licensing.
Royalties from licensing agreements have been an increasingly important source of revenues for Stanford, totaling $25.6 million in the 1990-91 school year, including $7.5 million paid to joint licensers.
Ms.
Ku, who is 42, has been vice president for business development at Protein Design Labs Inc., a Mountain View, Calif., biotechnology company specializing in monoclonal antibodies.
At Stanford, she succeeds Niels Reimers, who retired July 1 after 23 years with the technology office.
Ms.
Ku, who starts her new job on Sept. 23, was Stanford's associate director of technology licensing from 1984 to 1990.


The Woodward's Added Race: Win, Place and a Two-Horse Sideshow
Take a star 3-year-old race horse like Strike the Gold, four months after he won the Kentucky Derby, and run him against the best older horses in the land, and see if he can cut it.
Whatever happens, said his trainer, Nick Zito, "You can't duck the big boys."
But Strike the Gold will run only one race tomorrow at Belmont Park when he challenges six older handicap horses in the Woodward Stakes.
At least two of the other horses on the track, two of the big boys, will be running two races at the same time, the Woodward and one other.


Corrections
A diagram in Science Times on Tuesday showing the brain's processing of language referred incorrectly to research involving verbal errors made by patients when various areas of the brain were tested with electrodes during surgery.
The chart showed the number of patients for whom each area was tested, and the percentage who made verbal errors.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
AFD Capital Group,Inc., New York, will buy Frameguild Moulding Ltd., a maker of custom frames.
Terms were not disclosed.
AFD Capital Group will change its name to International Framing and Arts Ltd. *
Albertson's,Inc., Boise, Idaho, a food-and-drug retailer, will buy four stores in Texas from Furr's Inc. for undisclosed terms.


Sports of The Times; Words, Inaction And Silence
Lawrence Taylor says he never spoke out about racism before because no one ever asked him.
Hank Aaron relentlessly blisters baseball officials for failing to hire more members of minority groups, but when he was in a position to make or influence such hirings he had as poor a record, if not worse, than others.
Bill White, as president of the National League, is the highest-ranking black official in professional sports, but he does a good imitation of Harvey, Jimmy Stewart's and Mary Chase's six-foot rabbit.
Minorities are a continuing topic of controversy in sports, most notoriously baseball, with professional football second in the line of fire.
Front offices are staffed primarily by whites.
The coaching lines are manned mostly by whites.
Too many white hands hold the pens that write out the starting lineups.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on July 30 about early puberty rendered the name and field of expertise of a University of Wisconsin professor incorrectly and mischaracterized his research.
The researcher, Dr.
Charles Snowdon, is a psychologist, not a psychiatrist.
In a letter to The Times last month, Dr.
Snowden said his research on young monkeys separated from their parents was not stressful for the animals.
This correction was delayed because his letter was addressed to the writer, who was vacationing.


Cynthia D'Aprix, a Writer, Is Wed
The marriage of Cynthia Ann D'Aprix, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger M. D'Aprix of Rochester, to William Michael Sweeney, the son of Dolores Sweeney of Montvale, N.J., and the late Dr.
William M. Sweeney, took place last evening at St.
John the Evangelist Roman Catholic Church in Rochester.
The Rev.
Thomas Valenti performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Peter Clifford.
Mrs.
Sweeney, 31 years old, is a freelance writer.
She graduated from St.
Bonaventure University.
Her father is a principal in William M. Mercer Inc., a human resources consulting concern in Rochester, and the author of four books on corporate communications.


No Riddle in the Middle: Riley Says Ewing Will Be Staying Put
If there were any lingering doubts regarding Patrick Ewing and his future with the Knicks, they were dismissed today, at least by the team's new coach, Pat Riley, who said unequivocally that Ewing would not be traded.
Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, expressed a similar sentiment but not so emphatically, saying that he expected the star center to be with the team when training camp opens in three weeks but that he had still not dismissed the possibility that Ewing could be traded.


Dinkins Labor Settlements Falter As Unions Blame City Confusion
Efforts by the Dinkins administration to achieve significant concessions from New York City labor unions are faltering even as it faces new demands by city teachers for wage increases.
Union officials say that a much-heralded effort by the administration to roll back $200 million in contract costs for well over 150,000 workers has stalled and appears headed for failure.
The administration says it is continuing to press for an agreement, but with the talks faltering it has unilaterally begun offering groups of city employees incentives to retire early, even without union agreement.


Rangers Prospect Packs A Fistful of Ambitions
His fists are what can carry Pat Cavanagh from the schoolyards in Rockville Centre, L.I., to the ice at Madison Square Garden.
His fighting spirit, his fearlessness in the face of the most fearsome hockey goons, can win him a real Ranger jersey to replace the replicas at home.
That is the way Cavanagh figures it, anyway, in his blue-seat fantasy.
So Cavanagh, a tough local prospect described by Rangers General Manager Neil Smith as the biggest surprise in training camp, has been blazing new trails in aggression during the team's early scrimmages.


Consumer Prices Rise By Only 0.2%
Consumer prices rose a modest two-tenths of 1 percent for the third month in a row in August, the Labor Department said today in a report seen as confirmation that inflation is still not a significant threat to the economy.
The August increase in the Consumer Price Index was slightly below the three-tenths of 1 percent rise expected by economists.
The so-called core rate of inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, rose four-tenths of 1 percent in August, slightly higher than expected, after identical four-tenths of 1 percent gains in June and July.


Down to 67 Devils
The New Jersey Devils have trimmed their roster to 67 players.
On the roster is KEN DANEYKO, who is holding out, but not SEAN BURKE, who is not expected to report.
Among the new arrivals is ZDENO CIGER, who reported after Czechoslovakia's elimination in the Canada Cup.
ALEKSEI KASATONOV and TOMMY ALBELIN, who played for the Soviet Union and Sweden, respectively, were expected to join within a day or two.


U.S. Backs I.M.F. Role For 3 Baltic Republics
A senior Treasury offical said today that the united States had no objections to full membership in the International Monetary Fund and other international institutions for Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia if they met the institutions' membership criteria.
The International Monetary Fund's criteria included progress towars a fully convertable cuurency, the release of extensive information on menetary policy and gold reserves and the payment of a substantial deposit.
The official, who insisted on not being identified, said the United States still favored a s0-called special relationship for the Soviet Union with the fund, rather than full membership.


Next Job for the Council: To Govern
The voter turnout was disappointingly low and the campaign was often dismayingly divisive.
Yet in the first primary election for the newly enlarged City Council, New Yorkers rejected extremism and opened the way to political power for minority groups.
Black and Hispanic representation on the Council is headed from 25 to 40 percent, a long-overdue change in a city that is about 50 percent black and Hispanic.
Now comes the hard part -- governing.
It will not be easy, in part because of the same factors that will, come January, give the city a more representative legislature.


Some Choice Pickings
With more than 100 colleges clamoring for JASON KIDD, it's not easy for the high school basketball star to make a selection, but he's getting there.
After eliminating Kentucky, Ohio State and Arizona State, Kidd said he had narrowed his choice to California and Kansas.
Kidd can afford to be choosy.
The 6-foot-4-inch guard, who led St.
Joseph High School in Alameda to the California Division I championship, has been widely acclaimed as the best high school player in the country. (AP)


Northwest and Trump End Talks on Shuttle
Northwest Airlines' negotiations to take over the Trump Shuttle's operations have ended because Northwest could not reach a labor agreement with the machinists' union, the two airlines said yesterday.
In addition, executives close to Donald J. Trump asserted that Northwest had not dealt in good faith and that the Trump Organization was considering whether to file a lawsuit against Northwest and the International Association of Machinists.


After the Voting; New Faces on the City Council
Of New York's 51 new City Council districts, 21 will send newcomers to City Hall in January.
Pending the official results, the final outcomes in some of Thursday's primaries remained too close to call, and officials said yesterday it may take unitl Sept. 25, after absentee ballots are counted, for the final results to come in.
In at least one other race, the Democratic winner will face strong Republican opposotion in the Nov. 5 general election.
These are the new Democrats who appear certain of winning their seats on the new Council.
DISTRICT 1 (MANHATTAN) KATHRYN E. FREED 44 years old, tenants' lawyer ... counsel to State Assembly Consumer Affairs and Protection Committee ... former counsel to City Commission on Human Rights ... endorsed by Downtown Independent Democrats, Village Reform Democratic Club and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 3 (MANHATTAN) THOMAS K. DUANE 36, Manhattan coordinator for City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman ... former stockbroker ... former deputy press secretary for State Attorney General Robert Abrams ... endorsed by Village Independent Democrats, Gay and Lesbian Independent Democrats and the insurgent Majority Coalition for a New New York.
DISTRICT 10 (MANHATTAN) GUILLERMO LINARES 41, instructor at City College School of Education ... adult literacy instructor for the Hispanic Women's Center ... founding member of Community Association of Progressive Dominicans ... president of School Board 6 ... endorsed by the Majority Coalition for a New New York.
DISTRICT 12 (THE BRONX) LAWRENCE A. WARDEN 47, health care administrator ...
Democratic leader in 82d Assembly District ... president of Community School Board 11 ... member of Community Planning Board 12 ... member of Bronx Municipal Hospital Center Community Advisory Board ... endorsed by Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Bronx Democratic organization and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 18 (THE BRONX) LUCY CRUZ 46, director of community affairs at Bronx Municipal Hospital Center ... district manager for Community Board 9 ... member of National Latina Women's Caucus ... member of the National Council of Negro Women ... endorsed by the Bronx Deomcratic organization, the Liberal Party and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 19 (QUEENS) HOWARD WEISS 66, insurance broker ... state Deomcratic committeeman ... state commander of the Jewish War Veterans ... chairman of the Veterans Committee for the Homeless ... endorsed by the F.D.R.
Democratic Association.
DISTRICT 21 (QUEENS) HELEN M. MARSHALL 61, member of the State Assembly ... former teacher, library director ... member of the Council of Black Elected Democrats of New York State ... member of the East Elmhurst/Corona Civic Association ... member of Community Board 3 ... endorsed by Mayor Dinkins, the Queens Democratic organization and the City Council Politcal Action Committee.
DISTRICT 28 (QUEENS) THOMAS WHITE JR. 52, director of a substance abuse program ... founder of the Jamaica Community Adolescent Program ... former Democratic leader in the 32d Assembly District ... endorsed by the Queens Democratic organization and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 36 (BROOKLYN) ANNETTE M. ROBINSON 50, former liaison in the office of former City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin ... former member of Community School Board 16 ... former vice president of P.T.A. of Boys and Girls High School ... endorsed by Mayor Dinkins, the Brooklyn Democratic organization, the Liberal Party and the Majority Coalition for a New New York.
DISTRICT 37 (BROOKLYN) MARTIN MALAVE-DILAN 40, aide to Representative Edolphus Towns ...
Democratic distirct leader and state committeeman for the 54th Assembly District ... former chairman of Community School Board 32 ... endorsed by Mayor Dinkins, the Brooklyn Democratic organization and the City Council Political Action Committee.
DISTRICT 38 (BROOKLYN) JOAN GRIFFIN McCABE 35, policy analyst for the Public Education Association ... publisher of Brooklyn Schools newspaper ... associate director for community relations of the Henry Street Settlement ... endorsed by the Central Brooklyn Independent Democrats.


Jurors Selected for Noriega Trial
After a week of wide-ranging questioning of more than 200 prospective jurors by prosecution and defense lawyers, Judge William M. Hoeveler late this afternoon empaneled the jury that will try Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega beginning next week.
The deposed Panamanian dictator has been charged with 10 counts of drug trafficking, money laundering and racketeering.
Judge Hoeveler has expressed the hope that the trial will be over by Christmas.


Baltimore Chief Wins Primary
Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke handily defeated seven challengers in the Democratic mayoral primary on Thursday.
With all 438 precincts reporting today, Mr.
Schmoke had 61, 681 votes to 31,748 for former Mayor Clarence H. Burns, who was closely beaten by Mr.
Schmoke in the primary four years ago.
William Swisher, a former city prosecutor, was a distant third on Thursday with 10,482 votes.


Patents; Computer Keyboard Can Shrink and Expand
Personal computers have been shrinking steadily for years, thanks to increasingly compact circuitry and flat screens.
But reductions in the size of computer keyboards have been somewhat limited, simply because a person's hands and fingers cannot shrink along with the keys.
In an attempt to push beyond those boundaries, two brothers in Salt Lake City have patented a keyboard that expands and contracts like an accordion.
The keyboard uses overlapping keys mounted on an expandable framework.
The top of each key is at a slight angle, so that each one can slide beneath a portion of the one next to it when the device is being stored.
The keys themselves are mounted on a collapsible latticework that stretches and collapses like the gates sometimes used to keep small children away from stairs.
William H. Roylance and Byron D. Roylance received patent 5,044,798.


Public &amp; Private; The Blank Slate
Orrin Hatch seemed peevish.
The Republican Senator from Utah had determined that members of the Judiciary Committee had asked Clarence Thomas twice as many questions about abortion as they had asked David Souter a year ago.
"You'd think from listening to what's going on here that that's the only issue the Supreme Court has to decide," he added.
Right on both counts: Judge Thomas has been questioned more closely than Justice Souter on Roe v.
Wade, and there are other important issues before the Court in the terms to come.
It was the Senator's affect that was wrong, the way in which he seemed to suggest that the issue of abortion was a pesky fly buzzing around the room, an annoyance that should be either ignored or eliminated.


Society Corp. in Ohio to Acquire Ameritrust
The Society Corporation, owner of the third-largest bank in Cleveland, yesterday announced an agreement to acquire the Ameritrust Corporation, which owns that city's largest bank.
The move will create an institution with more than $25 billion in assets, making it one of the nation's 25 largest banking companies.
While the merger will greatly increase Society's size and market share, the price it agreed to pay -- 0.65 share of its stock for each Ameritrust share -- was considered high enough by investors and traders to cause a $2.625 decline in its stock yesterday, to $45.375.
Ameritrust, which had said it was considering merger proposals, closed at $27.375, down 37.5 cents.
Both stocks are traded over the counter.


Union of Soviet Writers Is Also Breaking Apart
The failed hard-line coup and its aftermath have thrown the Soviet literary world into turmoil, with those who earn their living by the pen spending most of their time crossing swords instead.
As during so much of Russian history since Peter the Great, the intelligentsia is split between Russophile conservatives who favor strong law-and-order measures to keep their country from being overwhelmed by Western influence, and pro-Western reformers who want to jerk their country into the present no matter what the price to traditional values.


Police and Firefighters Ponder Duty and Death
They flirt with death and normally prevail over it, but every once in a while, death triumphs.
On Thursday, another day of robberies and domestic squabbles and burning buildings, a New York City police officer and a city firefighter suffered fatal wounds while carrying out their risky work.
The officer died Thursday evening; the firefighter yesterday morning.
And all day afterward, the men and women who share their callings fell into the uncomfortable rituals that have evolved for when the worst happens to one of them.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 14


WILDER ANNOUNCES BID FOR PRESIDENT
Saying he could no longer "stand on the sidelines while the country I love stumbles further backwards," Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder entered the 1992 Presidential race today.
Mr.
Wilder, who less than two years ago became the nation's first black elected governor, declared that President Bush should be defeated because he was leading the country into retreat through divisive racial and economic policies.


What Next? An Oil Spill in Central Park Lake


Traffic Alert
Christopher Street Fair: Christopher Street will be closed today from Hudson to West Street from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
N.A.A.C.P.
Street Fair: West End Avenue will be closed today from 86th to 96th Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Review/Dance; Who's Partnering Whom? Don't Blink!
Creach/Koester, a small company led by Terry Creach and Stephen Koester, has an engaging forthrightness.
In their own choreography for this all-male troupe, the two wear their energetic hearts emblazoned on their sleeves.
What you see is what you see -- an athletic exploration of movement possibilities -- and what you get is up to you.
Any interpretation is left to the viewer.
There is something direct about bodies hurtling through the air and caught daringly on the run; it is a plainly stated physicality that accounts for much of the popularity of Creach/Koester, whose concert on Thursday night at the Dia Center for the Arts was sold out.


Collagen Rejects Finding by F.D.A.
The Collagen Corporation, which makes injectable collagen, today rejected a Food and Drug Administration finding that product users have a statistically higher rate of two rare diseases.
An F.D.A. spokeswoman in Washington also cautioned that more study was needed to determine if the statistical finding was meaningful, and to see if collagen was the cause of the debilitating connective tissue diseases.
"We're working with very preliminary data so it will take at least a few days to determine whether this merits further study," said Susan Cruzan, an F.D.A. spokeswoman.
"Statistics can be tricky."


George Ashley Dies; Arts Administrator And Performer, 66
George Ashley, an arts administrator who worked with many of the leading figures of the New York avant-garde performance world, died on Monday at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Rosemary Quinn of Performing Artservices, an arts management organization he joined 13 years ago.


Adrian Israel, Investment Banker And Ex-Head of Bache, Dies at 75
Adrian C. Israel, an investment banker and a former president of Bache &amp; Company, died yesterday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco.
He was 75 years old and lived in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Bank Bill Must Serve Poor as Well as Rich
To the Editor:
You report an astounding comment by Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas, in "Bank Bill Moves to Full Senate" (Business Day, Aug. 3).
The consumer provisions of the Senate bill, he states, were the product of consumer organizations that were "little fascist groups who know nothing about how the market works."


A Timer Can Put An End To Long Showers
A company in San Diego has created a timer for the shower that can help people save water and reduce energy costs.
The sand timer rotates on a plastic disk and has a suction cup on the back that sticks to walls or tiles.
The sand runs down after three minutes.
People who are unable or unwilling to shower that fast can rotate the timer again.
A six-minute shower is sufficient for most people and is still likely to save energy and water because most people tend to shower for 10 minutes.


About New York
On May 26, 1988, Gary Smith, a physical education teacher at Public School 166 in the Bronx, was attacked in the playground by a young man ferociously swinging a baseball bat.
He lost an eye and nearly died.
Next Wednesday, he will endure a seventh operation to reconstruct his shattered face.
Nine months ago, Mr.
Smith in this space discussed his many feelings, particularly his pain at never being able to teach again.
He delivered an odd message to the assailant he had never met, Tommy Brown, who was 17 years old at the time of the attack:


No Headline
Retail sales tumbled seven-tenths of 1 percent in August, the biggest decline since January, when the Persian Gulf war kept many shoppers at home, the Commerce Department estimated today.
The results, considerably worse than most analysts had expected, were poorest for the automotive and housing-related sectors but also extended into general merchandise and clothing.
The biggest gain, 1 percent, was at gasoline stations, but this was partly a result of a presumably short-lived increases in oil prices.


No Englishman He
To the Editor:
A review of the movie "Dead Again," incorrectly describes Kenneth Branagh as an Englishman.
Mr.
Branagh is from Northern Ireland and is therefore very much an Irishman.
I, for one, appreciate the difference.
SEAN P. SULLIVAN Seattle, Aug. 26, 1991


U.N. Chief, Ending Talks in Iran, Voices Optimism on the Hostages
The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, left here today expressing confidence that the strong momentum toward resolving the hostage crisis in Lebanon would continue and would produce further "positive results" in the "next few days or weeks."
The Secretary General, whose behind-the-scenes hostage diplomacy paid a large dividend this week with the release of Arab prisoners by Israel, was given a warm airport send-off by Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati.


Natural Gas As Auto Fuel Gets a Push In New York
Everyone has agreed for years that it would be good for New York City's air if cars and trucks were converted to run on natural gas, and cheaper for drivers.
But who wants a car that uses a fuel that's hard to get?
And who wants to sell fuel for cars hardly anybody drives?
Now there are signs that this self-reinforcing obstacle is ending.


A Victory For Mets; Nothing For Viola
It was a light moment in a season burdened by deep disappointments.
Frank Viola, his face featuring a beard, said recently he wouldn't shave until he won again.
"What do you think it'll look like in March?" the left-hander for the Mets asked, laughing at himself.


Hearst Intended to Furnish Spanish War
To the Editor:
Letters Aug. 1 and 20 have argued the authenticity of an 1897 William Randolph Hearst wire from New York to his artist in Cuba, Frederic Remington.
Hearst, outraged over Spanish troops sent to quell Cuban rebels, publicized Spanish "atrocities" and urged our entry into the war against Spain.
Remington, finding no atrocities, wired: "There will be no war. I wish to return." Hearst wired back: "Please remain. You furnish the pictures, and I'll furnish the war."


5 Are Arrested in Killing of 9 Buddhists at Temple
Five men described by the authorities as residents of a crime-ridden Tucson neighborhood were arrested and charged today with the murder of nine Buddhists at a temple near Phoenix last month.
The Maricopa County Sheriff, Tom Agnos, said the break in the case confirmed investigators' belief that the motive for the fatal shootings was rage over an unfruitful robbery attempt, instead of initial public fears that it might have been racial hatred.


'One Bad Pitch,' One More Yankee Loss
Phil Plantier knew it was gone.
Jeff Johnson knew it, too.
The bunch of fans who scurried after the ball in the right-field upper deck also knew it was gone.
When Plantier's pinch-hit blast landed in the seats, the chances that the Yankees would end their losing streak were essentially gone as well.
Sure, it was only the sixth inning, but the Yankees have not been coming back much lately, and they have been scoring runs in drips.
So when Plantier planted his compact swing on a slider for a three-run home run that gave the Red Sox a two-run lead, things looked grim for the Yankees.
They remained status quo after nine innings as Boston quelled a few rare comeback attempts and took a 5-4 victory over New York last night at Yankee Stadium.


With an Angry Chant, 200 March Through Streets of Crown Heights
About 200 angry black demonstrators marched in Crown Heights last night, calling for "justice" in the death of a Brooklyn boy killed last month by a car driven by a Hasidic man.
There were several incidents of violence, including bottles being thrown at the police who were on hand.
Several dumpsters were set on fire.


INSIDE
Behind Bush's Tough Stand On Loan Guarantees to Israel
President Bush's opposition to quick approval of $10 billion in loan guarantees for Israel grew out of frustration with what he sees as Israeli Government stubbornness on the Middle East peace process, Administration officials said.
News analysis, page 5.
U.S.
Blinks in Bases Talks
The United States was said to be willing to consider changes to save part of a treaty for American use of a Philippine naval base.
Page 3.
Bush Gets a Green Light
The President's doctors said he had recovered from Graves' disease and there was no medical reason barring a run for re-election.
Page 8.
Fill It With Natural
Natural gas has always been cleaner and cheaper than gasoline.
Now it's becoming available in New York as a fuel for cars and trucks.
Page 21.


Oil Spills Into Central Park Lake
In New York City, when residents think of oil spills, they tend to think of the Arthur Kill.
Now they can think of Central Park.
Workers yesterday were trying to soak up 200 to 300 gallons of diesel oil that spilled into the western part of the Lake in Central Park Wednesday afternoon after a leak from an above-ground oil storage tank at the Parks and Recreation Department's maintenance center near 79th Street.


J. P. Morgan Sells Stake in Insurer
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company said it had sold its stake in Bermuda-based Centre Reinsurance Company to the Zurich Insurance Company and will post a $50 million pretax gain for the third quarter from the deal.
The company did not disclose terms of the deal, which a spokesman said was completed in the last two weeks.
Market sources said New York-based Morgan, the nation's No. 4 bank, had owned about 10 percent of the reinsurance company.
Zurich Insurance, based in Switzerland now owns a majority of Centre Reinsurance.
Morgan said in a statement that it acquired the stake in 1988 when it was an adviser on the formation of the reinsurance concern.


Review/Pop; Old Master of Juju Stays True to Its Roots
When I. K. Dairo started playing juju music in Nigeria in the late 1950's, the music belonged to the urban, Yoruba-speaking working class.
By the end of the 1960's, Mr.
Dairo had been made a Member of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth, and he and his band, the Blue Spots, had made juju music popular across Nigeria.
By recording in other languages as well as Yoruba, by introducing the accordion to music that had previously been made with guitars, percussion and voices, and simply by making music with irresistible melodies and an infectious spirit, Mr.
Dairo modernized juju while staying true to its traditional roots.
Younger juju band leaders like King Sunny Ade and Ebenzer Obey toured the United States frequently in the 1980's.
But Mr.
Dairo's appearance on Tuesday at S.O.B.'s offered a rare chance to hear juju from an older generation.
He led a nine-piece band, half the size of the next generation's troupes.


Otis Elevator Cutting Jobs
The Otis Elevator Company, a unit of the United Technologies Corporation, said today that it would lay off 326 employees at its Bloomington, Ind., plant.
"The North American elevator market has declined dramatically in the last few years," said Robert Pentland, vice president for new equipment operations.
He said the layoffs were necessary because of a reduction in orders.


Review/Dance; Shapes and Patterns, With Spasmodic Energy
If choreography were only a matter of arranging shapes and patterns, the choreographers who offered works on the program that the Yard presented on Thursday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater could be praised as inventive.
Often, the patterns they devised did indeed please the eye.
Nevertheless, it was a dull evening, for many dances were surprisingly lacking in emotional conviction.
All were created this summer at the Yard, an arts colony on Martha's Vineyard that has been encouraging choreographers since 1973.


Rates Falling On Mortgages
Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 9.02 percent this week, the lowest in 13 1/2 years, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
The rate, down from 9.14 percent last week, was the lowest since Jan. 20, 1978, when it dropped to 8.98 percent.


Caring for Street Trees Can Bring New Yorkers Together
To the Editor:
The trees of New York City are falling victim to people, not budget cuts (front page, Aug. 27).
The neglect and attack that trees are subject to range from not watering them during a drought to cutting into the bark, tearing off low limbs, not removing the guy wires when they cease to support and begin to choke the tree, hanging signs with wires that destroy the limbs and painting the trunks.


Intel Stock Falls on Weak Outlook
The Intel Corporation's shares plummeted more than $6 today after the semiconductor company said that its third-quarter earnings and revenues would not reach its or Wall Street's expectations.
Intel, which makes most of the microprocessor chips that serve as the brains of I.B.M.-compatible personal computers, attributed the shortfall to weakness in its commodity-chip and computer-making businesses.
Andrew S. Grove, the president and chief executive, said seasonal weakness, a sluggish economy and rapid transition in the computer industry had weakened demand.


Caring for Street Trees Can Bring New Yorkers Together
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 27 front-page report that New York City's trees are a budget victim:


Bridge
Would a young man with limited financial resources fly from California to New York for a single evening of bridge?
It may happen year.
Brad Moss, 20 years old, represented the United States in the World Junior Championships in Ann Arbor, Mich., last month and promptly relocated from Manhattan to Berkeley, Calif.
But he was already leading in the New York Player-of-the-Year race by finishing second in three major events and third in another.


Mexican Elections Are the Least of Latin Woes
To the Editor:
Latin Americans understandably get fed up with United States hectoring and moralizing about democracy.
"The Missing Reform in Mexico" (editorial, Aug. 26), which cites Mexico's invariably "massively fraudulent" elections and puts Mexico along with Cuba, Suriname and Guyana as the only exceptions to a supposed norm of "honest democratic competition" from "the Arctic to Tierra del Fuego" is a classic case in point.


Oversight Plan Loses In Japan
After weeks of Government pledges to clean up Japan's scandal-plagued securities markets, a high-level advisory panel rejected the idea today of an independent agency to regulate the industry.
It proposed instead that the Ministry of Finance retain its role as overseer.
The panel, which presented its recommendations this evening to Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu, suggested that the Finance Ministry create a new Securities and Financial Examination Committee, which would function as a kind of Securities and Exchange Commission in Japan.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a Soviet request for at least $6 billion in foreign food aid misstated terms of the request.
A European Community spokesman in Brussels announced yesterday that the Soviet request included an offer to pay for part of the food, beginning in 1994; it would not all be a donation.


Payout Nearer In Collusion Cases
The two arbitrators who determined that baseball's club owners had acted in collusion against free agents approved yesterday, with one exception, the framework the Players Association has proposed for dealing with players' claims for the $280 million collusion pot.
The decision of Thomas Roberts and George Nicolau paved the way for the union to take the next step in the claims process: evaluating the approximately $1.25 billion in claims from more than 800 players.


Accord Seen as Unlikely to End Afghan War
The agreement to end American and Soviet military support for combatants in Afghanistan's civil war could hasten the fall of the nation's Soviet-backed Government, but it is unlikely to end the war itself, Government and private experts on the conflict said today.
For Washington and Moscow, those experts said, the long-anticipated agreement to wind up their proxy guerrilla conflict is but a footnote to the cold war.
Although the Afghan war was said to be the Central Intelligence Agency's single largest operation, Congress had signaled the White House that this fiscal year was the last in which the war would be financed, officials said today.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about a plan to create a regional school system in Englewood, N.J., to promote desegregation misidentified Sarah Albert's class.
She is a junior.


Featherbed in the Breeze
Dr.
Richard Malcolm, a Cortland, N.Y., physiologist and physicist, has invented an inflatable down sleeping-bag system that includes a waterproof tent.
The bag can be inflated to diffuse the interior goose down, which provides the warmth.
The bag comes in large and small versions: the Cocoon 4 and the Cocoon 4/SL, for shorter and lighter.
The down mattress inflates to a thickness of 3 1/2 inches; there are also a down-filled blanket and an orthopedic pillow.
The blanket, inflated, warms a person in temperatures as low as minus 45 degrees Fahrenheit, Dr.
Malcolm said.
He said that not inflated, it was comfortable at room temperature, about 70 degrees.


Amax Gold Sets Alaskan Deal
Amax Gold Inc. has reached an agreement to acquire an Alaskan gold field that would double the size of its reserves, officials say.
The deal between Amax and a joint venture of Fairbanks Gold Ltd. of Canada and Gilmore Gold Inc. is worth up to $200 million.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York gold closed at $344.40 today.
Amax officials said the company would rely on low-cost production to preserve profit margins in the face of the weak market.
The Fort Knox field is undeveloped, but initial studies indicate it will yield up to 350,000 ounces of gold a year, which is equivalent to Amax's production last year, said Timothy Haddon, Amax's president.


CHRONICLE
The seismic changes in the political structure of the Soviet Union and its republics were much on the minds of the actors in the Russian Academy of Theatrical Arts who came to New York this week as part of an exchange program with the Phoenix Ensemble, which performed in Moscow in July.
"You must understand that not all changes are for the best," said NATASHA ISSAEVA, translator for the group and wife of SERGEI ISSAEV, the school's director.
"Before, art and theater was the way to get out of terrible oppression," she said.
"But now people just want to create something new with their lives, so they are less interested. There are a vast variety of choices open, so art is just one sphere. And we fear that the support we previously got from the state will decrease."


Patents; Microwave Popcorn's Latest Bag
Hoping to preserve its strength in the increasingly competitive market for microwave popcorn, Golden Valley Microwave Foods Inc. has developed a bag that it says has much better "pop volume" and far fewer "unfavorable popping experiences."
Bag technology has been central to the boom in microwave popcorn, which has surged from sales of less than $100 million in 1985 to roughly $1 billion today.
Golden Valley, based in Edina, Minn., led the boom by inventing bags with a special patch inside the lining that concentrates microwave energy and allows low-powered household ovens to generate enough heat to pop the kernels.
Before these bags, popcorn could be microwaved only in high-powered commercial ovens.


The Giants' Game Face Has a Great Big Smile
Two days before a big game, and the Giants are loose.
In their locker room today, Phil Simms paid off a $30 bet with Matt Cavanaugh by leaving 3,000 pennies, stacked in the shape of a dollar sign, in front of Cavanaugh's locker.
Matt Bahr taped an 18-inch-by-24-inch crossword puzzle on a wall and started filling in the 857 words.


Questions on Soviets' Needs Erase Early Soybean Gains
Soybean traders were diverted by new crop data only briefly yesterday before the Soviet Union reasserted itself as the dominant factor in the bean pit.
Soybean futures advanced more than 7 cents a bushel in early dealings, but most of the gain was erased on word that the Agricuture Department was a long way from determining the extent of the Soviets' emergency food needs.


Craig's Heart Procedure
San Francisco Giants Manager Roger Craig, troubled by chest pains, was admitted yesterday to Stanford Hospital in Palo Alto, Calif., where he underwent an angioplasty to relieve blockage in his coronary arteries.
Craig, 61 years old, checked into the hospital after experiencing discomfort while exercising on his treadmill yesterday morning.
The angioplasty took less than 30 minutes and was performed by Dr.
MARC GRADMAN.


EXECUTIVES
*
Alliance Capital Management L.P., New York, an investment services subsidiary of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, named Lawrence Kreicher senior vice president-director of global fixed income research and Steven Reynolds senior vice president in its Minneapolis office. *
A.T.&amp; T., New York, announced that C. Perry Colwell, senior vice president-financial management, would retire at the end of October.


NCR Approves A.T.&amp;T. Takeover
Shareholders of the NCR Corporation approved the takeover of the computer maker by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, according to preliminary vote results released today.
The results were made public after a special shareholders meeting at NCR headquarters.
Charles Russ, NCR's vice president, secretary and general counsel, said 53.4 million shares were voted in favor of the merger, 179,400 against and 197,181 abstained.
At least 43.3 million votes, or two-thirds, were needed to approve the merger.
Lola Signom, a NCR spokeswoman, said the vote represented about 82 percent of NCR's outstanding shares, with the other 18 percent apparently not voting.


Altepexi Journal; Mexico Fights Cholera but Hates to Say Its Name
Just inside the door of a tiny health clinic here, a peasant woman lies shriveled on a metal cot, her eyes wide open.
Except for the short breaths that tug on her lips, the woman does not move.
"Your pressure will come right down, dear," a nurse said, adjusting the drip of a rehydration solution into the woman's veins.


Parents Accused of Chaining Daughter, 15, in Apartment
The police have charged the parents of a 15-year-old girl with illegally imprisoning their daughter for the past year, keeping her chained in the family's Bronx apartment.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, said Elizer Marrero, 44 years old, and his wife, Maria, 42, were arrested last night after a police officer responding to an anonymous tip went to their home, at 1387 Grand Concourse, and found the teen-ager in the living room with a heavy metal chain around her ankle.


U.N. Says the Iraqis Could Have Devised A-Bombs in the 90's
The United Nations has concluded that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq could have possessed enough nuclear explosives to build at least two or three atomic weapons a year by the mid-1990's, if his secret production plants had not been destroyed by allied bombing during the Persian Gulf war.
The unpublished report, produced by United Nations inspectors responsible for finding and destroying Iraqi plants capable of producing nuclear weapons and material, also said that other countries provided Baghdad with substantial quantities of equipment and material for part of its nuclear program, and "very probably" sent experts to give continuing technical advice.


Sense of Humor Helps Thomas in His Trial by Committee
The American public may still be befuddled about Judge Clarence Thomas's views on abortion and affirmative action.
But what has clearly emerged after four days of Senate hearings is a better glimpse of the Supreme Court nominee's personal side.
After weeks of intense rehearsals at the White House, Judge Thomas was surely delivering a somewhat calculated performance.
But beneath that is a vivid, though unfinished, portrait of a person who exudes a sense of humor that is often ingratiatingly self-deprecating.


Patents; An Advance Reported In High-Speed Filtering
Perseptive Biosystems Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., has patented a new material to coat the tiny particles used to filter liquids in high-speed separation systems.
Processes for separation are central in research, as well as in purifying drugs produced by genetically engineered cells.
Company officials said the coating made it possible to use a new class of hard particles that filter liquids as the liquids pass through tubes at high speeds and pressures.


After the Voting; Highlights of the Primary
MINORITY REPRESENTATION
Black and Hispanic representation on the City Council will increase from 25 percent to 40 percent and the Council will get its first Dominican member.
For the first time, the Council will also have at least one openly gay member, Thomas K. Duane from Greenwich Village.
It could have a second if Antonio Pagan's slim lead holds up in lower Manhattan.
INCUMBENTS
For all this change, though, the Council's political cast is not likely to change much.
Seventeen of the 19 incumbents seeking renomination were victorious, while the two others - Miiriam Friedlander, in lower Manhattan and Noach Dear in Borough Park Brooklyn - trailed by tiny margins and were sure to challenge the outcomes.
In addition, 12 incumbents did not face primaries.
THE ORGANIZATION AND THE INSURGENTS
While the Council leadership suceeded in protecting incumbents, its influence in open districts is still unclear.
Six of its 13 newcomers won clear victories - compared to 3 supported by the insurgent Majority Coalition - but 5 others are locked in races that remain too close to call.
TURNOUT
Turnout was the lowest in memory, less than 20 percent citwyide.
Interest was greatest in several hard-fought races in Manhattan and one each in Brooklyn and Queens, while nine others failed to attract 15 percent of the eligible Democrats.
CLOSE RACES
Low turnout and some large fields of candidates left an unusual number of races too close to call: In unofficial tallies, 170 votes or fewer separted the leaders in 9 of the 38 Democratic primaries.
In addition, in 5 races, the winner had fewer than 2,000 votes.
And in only half the races did a candidate get at least 50 percent of the vote.


6 Polish Youths Attack A Warsaw Synagogue
Shouting anti-Semitic slurs, a group of six drunken Polish youths vandalized the entrance of the Warsaw synagogue this morning and beat an elderly man prominent in Jewish affairs here.
The youths began throwing bottles at the synagogue but were accosted by two members of Warsaw's Jewish Community staff, which is housed in the same building, said Pawel Wildstein, one of the two members.


Jurors in Swaggart Case Try to Divide Damages
The bitter war between two television evangelists ground forward in court today, with jurors helping a state court judge decide how to divide the burden of $10 million in damages they awarded to Marvin Gorman among his rival, Jimmy Swaggart, other defendants and their insurance companies.
On Thursday night, the jury found that Mr.
Swaggart, who leads one of the world's most prominent television ministries, had defamed Mr.
Gorman and intentionally inflicted emotional distress by trying to destroy his reputation as an aspiring television minister.


Staten Island Ferry Terminal Set to Reopen
The Staten Island Ferry will resume operating at full service on Monday from the lower level of its Manhattan terminal, eight days after a fire closed the terminal, New York City officials said yesterday.
The terminal, whose upper level was wrecked by the blaze, has been undergoing asbestos decontamination since the Sept. 7 fire.


Mexican Elections Are the Least of Latin Woes; Ignoring the Vote
To the Editor:
You have given ample coverage to Mexico's elections (news articles, Aug. 19-21), with a full examination of possible voting fraud.
But you have not mentioned another type of election fraud, which I experienced firsthand in Taxco, Mexico, on New Year's Day 1990.
That was the day appointed for newly elected officials to begin their terms, but in four municipalities where the opposition had won the election, the Institutional Revolution Party, or PRI, incumbent refused to leave office.


Two Dismissed at Merrill
Merrill Lynch dismissed two junk bond traders for mishandling a customer account.
A Merrill Lynch spokesman said yesterday that Edward Scherer and Richard Kursman, vice presidents in the high-yield sales and trading department, were terminated Sept. 3.


Bush's Wetlands Plan Makes a Good Start; Threat to Florida
To the Editor:
When George Bush proclaims himself the "President" of some aspect of our national needs and interests -- it is a danger signal.
No sooner was the "education President" in office than he chopped the props from under public schools and libraries.


Yonkers Result Could Affect Desegregation Case
The defeat of this troubled city's defiant Mayor, Henry J. Spallone, in Thursday's primary election was being assessed today in terms of its impact on a longstanding housing desegregation case.
But even though Mr.
Spallone came in third in the three-way Republican contest, he may be on the November ballot anyway, running on an independent line.


Review/Film; Ending With Class, if an End It Is
"Every town has an Elm Street!" Freddy Krueger (Robert Englund) hootingly declares in "Freddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare," a film that also begins with a quotation from Nietzsche.
Has Freddy been reading his own press?
Has he begun to grasp the larger implications of the "Nightmare on Elm Street" series, with its hellish dreams tailored to fit each character's individual fears?
Has he grown jaded?
If so, it's a lucky thing that the ending of this so-called last installment really does leave Freddy in small pieces, more or less as promised.
The "Elm Street" series, now in its sixth chapter, is apparently coming to a close before it runs out of gas, thus displaying the kind of class not usually found in the horror genre.
No wonder: the Elm Street films have always been a cut above the competition, so to speak, with their playfully malevolent dream sequences and their mocking, ever-resourceful villain.
But before mourning Freddy's demise, it might be wise to see whether "Freddy's Dead" generates as much overall interest as it did at the National Theater, where it opened to a sizable audience yesterday.
Much-publicized media deaths have a way of being notoriously reversible.


Quotation of the Day
"I sense a growing anxiety about the strength of this economic recovery. In many ways, the recovery is indistinguishable from the recession." -- Norman Robertson of Mellon Bank.  [ 1:6. ]


Caring for Street Trees Can Bring New Yorkers Together
To the Editor:
I paid for a street tree and have fed it, protected it, sprayed it and watered it.
I am also a dog owner, a member of and contributor to organizations that promote animal welfare.


Enterra Stake
A group including Shamrock Holdings of California Inc. and Shamrock Entertainment Investors II Inc., which includes Roy Disney, may sell all or a portion of its 11.8 percent stake in the Enterra Corporation.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the group said it was considering the sale of all or a "significant portion" of the 1,883,220 shares it holds.
Enterra, an energy services company, agreed to register the shares with the S.E.C. provided that the group pay the expenses associated with the registration.
On Thursday, Enterra's board authorized the filing of the registration statement on behalf of the group, the 13-D filing said.
The investors said the shares might be sold in privately negotiated transactions, as well.
Enterra's shares fell $1, to $24.625, today on the New York Stock exchange.


Recital Will Aid Church
The tenor Meredith Derr is to give a recital on Sunday at 4 P.M. at the West End Presbyterian Church, Amsterdam Avenue at 105th Street.
Included on the program are works by Mozart, Tosti, Duparc and Verdi as well as spirituals.
Lowell Lacey is to accompany on the piano.
The concert is a benefit to help finance the restoration of the church.
Tickets are $15 and $25.
Information: (212) 663-2900.


Bankruptcy Up in Japan
Japanese bankruptcies surged in August for the 11th straight month as companies continued to suffer from the bursting of the so-called bubble economy of soaring land and stock market prices.
"Bankruptcies will continue to increase significantly as long as financial conditions remain as harsh as they are now," said Peter Morgan, chief economist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities (Japan) Ltd.


Troubled AIDS Families See A Fragile Cocoon Imperiled
The children were gobbling a snack of crackers and cheese when the nurse walked in with a tray of syringes.
She matter-of-factly handed them out, and the children put them to their lips to suck in the sweet syrup form of the drug AZT.
The room of 5- and 6-year-olds is part of the only day care center in New York City dedicated solely to children with AIDS, with most of the children coming from poor families.
Because of the city's budget woes, it is scheduled to close on Jan. 1.


DOCTORS SAY BUSH IS IN GOOD HEALTH
President Bush's doctors pronounced him in excellent health after a checkup that focused on his heart at the National Naval Medical Center here today, clearing the way for him to run for re-election next year.
No restrictions have been placed on the 67-year-old President, other than that he take a baby aspirin and a thyroid pill each day, said Dr.
Burton J. Lee 3d, Mr.
Bush's personal physician.


Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl Batters The Braves
The Braves' fans, excited in a way they haven't been since 1982, raucously booed Darryl Strawberry, and they taunted him by derisively chanting "Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl." The only thing the fans couldn't do was throw the ball past Strawberry.
Neither could Tom Glavine, the Braves' No. 1 pitcher.
Strawberry, responding to the biggest challenge of his first year with Los Angeles, used his bat -- or feet -- to help produce each of the first four runs the Dodgers scored tonight as they defeated Atlanta, 5-2, and leapfrogged back into first place in the National League West.
After a three-day stay in first, the Braves slipped half a game behind the Dodgers, their winning streak ended at seven games.


St. John's Juror Tells of Doubts In Assault Case
The lone juror who held out for convictions in the St.
John's University sexual assault trial before finally giving in said yesterday that the "main concern" of some jurors was that "they didn't want to ruin these boys' lives."
The juror, Theodore Lynch, said in an interview that he agreed to acquit all three student defendants after six days of deliberations -- even though he was convinced two were guilty -- because he believed that if he hung the jury on the two, "who's to say the next jury wouldn't acquit them" in a retrial.


Plane Workers Did Not Attach Portion of Tail
The night before a Continental Express Commuter plane crashed here on Wednesday, killing all 14 people aboard, workers at the airline's Houston hangar failed to screw on a part of the tail that is now missing from the wreckage, Federal investigators said today.
The investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board said they confirmed their finding by examining the wreckage and by looking at maintenance records that showed mechanics unscrewed part of the plane's tail wing, replaced some of the wing, but failed to refit 43 screws that hold the part in place.


Satin and Leather At Chanel Benefit
For the Chanel benefit party Thursday night, there was so much leather and satin in the crowd, it looked as if the Hell's Angels had front-ended a debutante ball.
Such a scene.
Under a see-through vinyl tent on a closed-off city block, at Washington and West 12th Streets in the meatpacking district, rappers, motorcylists, models, fortunetellers and 500 guests gathered for "Off the Street," a fair, dinner and fashion show featuring the Chanel fall ready-to-wear and couture collections.


Help Iraq Help Its People
The U.N.
Security Council and Iraq are at a watershed in their relations.
Upon their decisions depends the fate of Iraq's men, women and children, who should not continue to pay the price of a war they did not cause and of a peace that has turned increasingly bitter.
With food and medical supplies stretched to the limit, with power generation and water treatment deteriorating fast, a humanitarian crisis is looming.
Means have to be devised to finance Iraq's essential civilian needs, which the Council has exempted from sanctions, from Iraq's own vast oil resources in a way that satisfies the international community.


U.S. Is Said to Weigh Shift In Lease on Philippine Base
The United States would consider modifications of a lease agreement for the Subic Bay Naval Station in the central Philippines to prevent an immediate shutdown of the huge American installation, Western diplomats said today.
The diplomats said the Bush Administration, in what appears to be a major shift in its bargaining position, is willing to consider a three-year phased withdrawal from Subic instead of the 10-year base treaty that is now under debate -- and facing rejection -- in the Philippine Senate.


Hearst Extends Chronicle Pact
The Hearst Corporation announced Thursday that it had exercised its option to extend for 10 years the joint operating arrangement between The San Francisco Examiner, which is owned by Hearst, and The San Francisco Chronicle.
The Chronicle is the flagship of the Chronicle Publishing Company, which is owned by the Thieriot family.
The Examiner is the first newspaper acquired by William Randolph Hearst, founder of the Hearst Corporation, which is owned by his descendants.


Salomon Bond Analyst Takes Post at Global
Nicholas P. Sargen, a director of international bond research at Salomon Brothers, will be leaving to become a managing director and chief investment officer at Global Fixed Income Advisers, a $4.2 billion fund that invests in bonds and currencies around the world.
The job change will take Mr.
Sargen, who is a respected analyst, from the world of research and writing about markets and currencies to a huge portfolio where he will actually be deciding where to put the money.
He has never managed money before, but now will experience what it is like to follow the advice he has been giving many other managers through Salomon Brothers for years.


Phillies Re-Sign Kruk
JOHN KRUK became the first of the potential free agents to agree to a new contract, signing a $7.2 million, three-year deal with the Philadelphia Phillies yesterday.
He was eligible to file for free agency following the World Series.


Beliefs
Suppose some very angry anti-abortion militants decided to make a documentary movie about closing down an abortion clinic.
Suppose they opened this hypothetical movie by asking members of their group, "What is Planned Parenthood?" and then filmed responses like, "It's an organization that kills babies" or, "It's an organization that ruins young lives by promoting sexual promiscuity" or, "It's a group of eugenically minded rich folks who have always disguised their real aim of reducing the number of blacks and poor people."
Suppose these accusations of murder, lies and genocide were repeated throughout the movie, and suppose that no replies from Planned Parenthood were included.


Bush and Israel
President Bush's tough stand on housing loan guarantees for Israel grew out of his annoyance with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, anger at Israel's behavior since the Persian Gulf war, concern about his Middle East peace efforts and irritation with Congress and Israel's supporters for second-guessing him on foreign policy, Administration officials said today.
With Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d due in Israel next week, Mr.
Bush also wanted to send an unmistakable message that he was so strongly opposed to new settlements in the occupied territories that he was willing to risk the anger of Israel's American supporters.


In Search of the Source Of the Right to Privacy
Throughout Judge Clarence Thomas's confirmation hearings, abortion has been discussed as part of a fundamental right to privacy guaranteed by the 14th Amendment, as the Supreme Court declared it to be in Roe v.
Wade 18 years ago.
But legally the question is far more complicated, for neither the 14th Amendment nor the Constitution as a whole ever explicitly mentions privacy.


Missing Serviceman's Body Buried in Israel


Your Money; Employees Face Shift in Benefits
Employees today must increasingly take responsibility for planning and financing their own benefits, particularly retirement, a new study by the Conference Board and the American Association of Retired Persons has found.
"The days of corporate paternalism are behind us," Preston Townley, chairman and chief executive of the Conference Board, said at a news conference in New York last week.
"The new thrust is toward employee self-management," he added, referring to the shift in responsibility.


2 Killed in Lebanon As Palestinian Force Takes U.N. Hostages
Palestinian guerrillas made an amphibious landing in Israel's self-described "security zone" in southern Lebanon today, took 12 United Nations peacekeepers hostage and clashed with Israeli-backed militiamen.
A Swedish soldier and a guerrilla were killed in a gun battle that ended the incident.
The shooting took place in the coastal village of Naqoura at the headquarters of Unifil, the nine-nation, 5,800-member United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
It was about 500 yards from the place where Israel handed over the bodies of nine Lebanese guerrillas to the Red Cross on Wednesday as part of an exchange that negotiators hope will culminate in the release of 10 Westerners and any surviving Israeli military personnel held in Lebanon and about 300 Arabs in Israeli prisons.


Discovery Crew Prepares to Deploy Satellite
Astronauts steered the shuttle Discovery to a slightly higher orbit today and prepared to deploy a 14,500-pound environmental research satellite for a comprehensive study of the upper atmosphere.
The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite is scheduled to be released from the shuttle's cargo bay shortly before midnight Saturday.
Its $710 million mission is expected to last two years and give scientists a clearer picture of what is causing a depletion of the atmosphere's ozone layer, which shields the Earth from deadly radiation.


North Korea Reported Near Nuclear Ability
North Korea will be capable of making nuclear weapons within the next one to three years, a senior North Korean diplomat who defected to South Korea told reporters today.
The defector, Ko Young Hwan, 38 years old, is the highest-ranking North Korean official to defect to the South since the Korean Peninsula was split into hostile halves in 1945.


News Summary
International 2-5
A major pact in the Afghan civil war was reached in Moscow as the United States and Soviet Union agreed to stop all arms sales to combatants to help pave the way for free elections and a settlement of the war.
Page 1


Test for Grambling Tonight
On the surface, tonight's 21st Whitney M. Young Jr.
Football Classic, between Grambling and Virginia Union at Giants Stadium, is simply the latest edition of a charity game that dates to 1968.
But there could be more than a victory at stake, particularly for Grambling.
The game comes at a time of a tug of war between forces connected with the game.
Some would like to see Grambling continue as host of the game; others would like to see other strong teams from predominantly black institutions.


Dollar Declines Overseas But Ends Higher in U.S.
The dollar fell overseas but ended higher in United States trading yesterday despite news of falling interest rates in the United States.
"The market has been so bearish and so anticipatory of the dollar's decline based on lower interest rates that when it happened it was sort of a fait accompli," said Robert Ryan, corporate foreign exchange manager at Bank of New York.


A Place to Put Summer Things for the Winter
Now that summer is all but over, you may be scratching your head about where to stash all that outdoor equipment -- the lawn mower, barbecue, deck furniture, gardening supplies, pool toys, bicycles and other paraphernalia.
Somehow, each year these possessions mysteriously accumulate beyond the storage capacity of the garage and other areas where everything seemed to fit so nicely the year before.
The answer may be an outdoor storage shed that you can put together yourself.


After the Voting; Council Tallies Assure Diversity Under the Old Guard
Democratic primary races for the New York City Council produced the racial and ethnic diversity that black and Hispanic politicans and voting rights advocates had demanded while preserving the power of Speaker Peter F. Vallone.
In effect, the political establishment, its hand forced by legal challenges, warily let the 1 in 20 voting-age New Yorkers who participated in Thursday's primary do what in another era the party bosses might have done eventually themselves.


Fund Denies Salomon Tie In Scandal
The Tiger Management Company, in its first public comments on the firm's business with Salomon Brothers, said yesterday that it had no knowledge that Salomon had used its name fraudulently in a Treasury auction until months later.
It added that it had engaged in no wrongdoing.
Tiger's role has been under scrutiny because Salomon said in a statement to Congress that it had submitted a $2 billion bid for Tiger at the May auction of two-year notes, although Tiger had authorized a bid of only $1.5 billion.


Loans Made to U.S. Officials Are Cited in B.C.C.I. Inquiry
The Federal Reserve said today that as part of its continuing investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International it was reviewing loans to former Government officials by the Washington bank that B.C.C.I. secretly controlled.
In testimony before the House Banking Commitee, Federal Reserve officials said that the loans in question were "very limited" in number.
They refused to name the former officials whose loans from First American Bankshares Inc. are being examined.
They stressed that there was nothing illicit about an official borrowing money from a bank.


Blair Thomas's Back Passes the First Test
After missing practice all week with a strained muscle in his lower back, Jets running back Blair Thomas came out toward the end of practice today, took a few handoffs, did some running against thin air and then indicated he might be ready to do the same against the Buffalo Bills on Sunday.
"It was a tough injury, but one that healed kind of quickly," said Thomas, the Jets' leading rusher last season with 620 yards.
This season he has gained 117 yards but was hurt in the first quarter last week as the Jets lost to Seattle.


CHRONICLE
On Sept. 29, 1941, at a ravine near Kiev in the Ukraine called Babi Yar, Nazi forces began a massacre that took the lives of 33,771 Jews in two days.
Over two years, 200,000 Jews, Ukrainians and others were killed.
Tomorrow morning, ANATOLY ZLENKO, the foreign minister of the Ukraine, where it has rarely been acknowleged that the slaughter took place, will help observe the 50th anniversary of Babi Yar.
Mr.
Zlenko, who has been in his post since August 1990, will speak at ceremonies at Park East Synagogue, 163 East 67th Street in Manhattan, along with three representatives to the United Nations, THOMAS R. PICKERING of the United States, YULI M. VORONTSOV of the Soviet Union and YORAM ARIDOR of Israel; Senator ALFONSE M. D'AMATO, Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS, and SHOSHANA S. CARDIN, chairman of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations.


U.S. Vehicle Sales Fell 15.3% in Early September
The first 1992 models to reach showrooms failed to improve demand in the flagging United States auto industry, as sales of domestically built cars and light trucks declined 15.3 percent in early September.
Analysts predict that auto makers will increase sales incentives on new vehicles if sales do not improve in coming weeks.
Sales of cars alone dropped 23 percent from the levels of a year earlier.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, cars sold at an annual rate of 5.4 million, compared with 7.1 million in the period last year.
Analysts had predicted the annual rate would be higher, and said the sales figures showed weak consumer demand.
Sales of light trucks fell 1.1 percent.


FEDERAL RESERVE TRIMS LOAN COSTS TO SPUR ECONOMY
Faced with a raft of new evidence that the economy is still weak, the Federal Reserve today drove down the interest rates it controls to their lowest points since the 1970's.
Across the country, large banks responded immediately by reducing their prime rate, the benchmark for many mortgages and other consumer and commercial loans.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a proposal by Senator Tom Harkin to increase spending on social programs misstated the size of the Pentagon budget.
For the fiscal year starting Oct. 1, it is projected at $291 billion.


Making a Difference; Throwing A Line to Armenia . . .
If it ever becomes possible to telephone anywhere in the Soviet Union as quickly and reliably as in the United States, Mariam Nigohosian will deserve some of the credit.
Next month, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company plans to unveil direct international long-distance service to Armenia, a first for a Soviet republic and a possible model for the rest of the technologically backward Soviet Union.
Armenia will soon get capacity for 200 simultaneous conversations, or more than double the 91 that the entire Soviet Union gets today.
All those calls are now routed through Moscow.


IN SHORT: FICTION
POSTCARDS FROM PINSK  By Larry Duberstein. Permanent Press, $21.95.


Never Mind
Robert C. McFarlane, President Reagan's national security adviser, helped give the Iran-contra prosecutor the conviction of Oliver L. North in 1989.
Last week, he may have taken it away.
In testimony in Federal court, Mr.
McFarlane suddenly changed his mind about a point that could render worthless his testimony at Mr.
North's trial, where he was a key prosecution witness.
The hearing last week had been ordered by the appeals court to determine to what degree, if any, witnesses' testimony had been affected by seeing Mr.
North's televised statements that were made under partial immunity from prosecution.
After testifying all morning that his statements had not been "colored" by Mr.
North's, Mr.
McFarlane came back from lunch and, to the surprise of prosecutors, reversed himself.
Since Mr.
North's immunized statements cannot be used against him, Mr.
McFarlane's new assertion could endanger the remaining two convictions from Mr.
North's trial.


Children's Books
TAILS OF THE BRONX
A Tale of the Bronx.
By Jill Pinkwater. 208 pp.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $13.95. (Ages 8 to 12)
DAKOTA OF THE WHITE FLATS
By Philip Ridley. 139 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $12.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


Ailing Cordero Is Unable To Ride Strike the Gold
Strike the Gold, caught in a four-race losing streak and a feud among his three owners, took another jolt yesterday when Angel Cordero Jr. came down with a viral attack and was scratched as the colt's jockey in today's $500,000 Woodward Stakes at Belmont Park.
Cordero's absence left the winner of the Kentucky Derby without a rider for a time because most of the star jockeys in the East were committed to either the Woodward or the Molson Million, a $1 million race that will be run this afternoon at the Woodbine track in Toronto.
And it touched off a day of barnyard anxiety, several hours of shopping for a substitute rider and printed bulletins issued by the jockey's agent, wife and trainer.


Affordability
To the Editor:
I do not object to the concept of "affordable housing." In fact, I design affordable houses.
But just what is meant by "affordable"?
You quote statistics in an article on Aug. 18 headed "Battling Barriers to Affordability." What does it prove that 57 percent of the people can't afford a house?
A large percentage of them should not buy a house.


LET US NOW PRAISE FAMOUS SWAMPS
The fact that wetlands are beautiful -- diverse in wildlife and flora -- was wonderfully illustrated in your photo essay.
It is well known that wetlands provide flood protection and serve to purify runoff.
This region's major water bodies -- Long Island Sound, the Hudson River, the watersheds that provide drinking water and the Atlantic Ocean -- will suffer great deterioration of quality if additional wetlands are lost to development.
GUDRUN LELASH
Purchase, N.Y.


Tyson Stays Calm at Center of the Storm
The scene is always the same these days.
Let Mike Tyson alight from an airplane or appear in public and the bright lights of the television cameras fire up, flashbulbs pop and he is suddenly at the center of a vortex.
Around him -- moving quick-step stride for stride with him -- are the hired hands of the news media with their microphones and notepads, followed by curious people who, on sighting the fighter, mouth his name with gaping jaws.


Diane Hanan Wed To A. N. LaBruna
Dr.
Diane Lynn Hanan, a daughter of Mrs.
David Sanders of Camp Hill, Pa., and Donald Hanan of Norwood, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Anthony N. LaBruna, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Vincent V. LaBruna of New York and Elberton, N.J.
Archbishop Renato Martino, the permanent observer of the Holy See at the United Nations, officiated at St.
Jean Baptiste church in New York.
Dr.
Hanan, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, is an orthodontist in New York.
She graduated from New York University, where she also received her degree in dental surgery and a certificate in orthodontics.
Her father is a vice president of Kinsho International, a Japanese trading company, in New York.
She is a stepdaughter of Dolores Hanan and Mr.
Sanders.


What the Competition Knows
To the Editor:
The question "How Can We Save New York City?" (Forum, Aug. 25) encouraged shortsighted and narrow replies.
The real answer must be more fundamental -- a framework and strategy within which good ideas can be accommodated.


NEXT WEAVE
IN THE EARLY 1970'S, A GIDDY epoch in men's fashion, when denim flares and platform oxfords were the outer edge of style, Giorgio Armani made a suit that stretched.
Imbued with spandex, the elastic fiber that gives a fabric extra bounce, the suit was one of the first in a long line of innovations that would eventually make Armani as familiar a brand as Kleenex.
In those heady days, one might have expected the designer's expandable jacket to spring off the cutting table onto the backs of eager consumers.
It didn't.
Instead, Armani recalls, smiling ruefully at the memory of his naivete, "When I showed them my suit, people laughed. In the end I was the only one who wore it."


Liberian Rebels Said to Seize A Sierra Leone Border Bridge
Guerrillas of the Liberian rebel leader Charles Taylor have taken control of an important border bridge in neighboring Sierra Leone, a Taylor spokesman said today.
The spokesman, Ernest Eastman, said the Taylor troops had pushed up to 15 miles inside Sierra Leone to block an attack by remnants of forces loyal to the slain Liberian President, Samuel K. Doe.


Hitting the Ground Running: Backs Get Early Workout
If the early numbers are any indication, the workhorse running back and the ground game are in vogue in the National Football League this season.
Last Sunday, seven running backs had 20 or more carries in a game (compared with six in last year's second week), and after the first two weeks of the season six backs are averaging 20 or more carries and more than 4.5 yards per carry.
Three of the six undefeated teams in the N.F.L., Buffalo, Houston and Washington, are in the top five in rushing in the league and have running backs who are among the top five in their conferences in number of carries and yards.
One of the most surprising workhorses has been Miami's Mark Higgs, a Plan B free agent, who has 57 carries for 257 yards (4.5 yards per carry), which makes him the second-leading rusher in the N.F.L.


Perspectives: Office Construction; A Builder Takes the Plunge on Fifth Ave.
THE word last winter about the development site on the northeast corner of Fifth Avenue and 46th Street was that unfavorable market conditions had delayed a construction start on the office building planned there.
That judgment was accurate if applied to most of the 40 other Manhattan development projects in various preconstruction postures, but not for Dr.
Axel Stawski's, known as 565 Fifth Avenue.
The 40-year-old Dr.
Stawski -- who was awarded a Ph.D. in international law by New York University in 1978 at a time when he had begun to run the United States real estate investments of his family in Germany -- has taken the plunge.


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
Swados reveals to us how the defense mechanism of denial can inhibit the recognition and management of schizophrenia.
When pathology is misunderstood as an act of "willfulness," the appropriate intervention can also be denied.
CYNTHIA OKOLSKI
Bellmore, L.I.


On Preserving Outdoor Metal Items
OUTDOOR metal items will last longer if they are cleaned and protected from rust and corrosion before winter.
Because some cleaning products are hazardous, follow manufacturers' instructions and safety precautions carefully.
If necessary, wear rubber gloves and wash your hands thoroughly after finishing.
Unless you are using detergent and water, work in a ventilated area to avoid inhaling fumes.


Sports of The Times; The Ali Connection To Tyson
IN the commotion over Mike Tyson's approaching heavyweight title fight while Tyson is under indictment on a rape charge, one school of thought is based on the Ali Argument.
According to the logic course in this school of thought, if boxing organizations stripped Muhammad Ali of the heayvweight title in 1967 for refusing to take the oath of induction into the armed services during the Vietnam War, why should Tyson be permitted to earn $15 million before his Jan. 27 trial begins?


U.S. Is Returning a Third Fraternity House
The Government has announced that it will return the last of three University of Virginia fraternity houses that were seized in the wake of Federal agents' drug raids there last March.
The announcement, made Friday by United States Attorney E. Montgomery Tucker, came just three weeks after the Government's settlement with the two other fraternities, returning their houses to them.


Study Ties Dyslexia to Brain Flaw Affecting Vision and Other Senses
A new finding about dyslexia suggests that the disorder may not be a malfunction in the way people understand language but rather a brain abnormality that involves the sense of vision, and perhaps also hearing and touch.
A team of prominent brain researchers reported yesterday that studies of living dyslexic people, as well as autopsies of dyslexic brains, suggested that the basis of the condition might be a failure of the visual system's circuits to keep proper timing.


Rona Blakeslee and Marc Cherno Wed
Rona Lynn Blakeslee, the daughter of Mrs.
Leon Shor of Great Neck and the late Mr.
Shor, was married last evening to Marc Philip Cherno, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Isidore Cherno of Hollywood, Fla.
Rabbi Benjamin W. Roth, the bride's uncle, performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons restaurant in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Cherno, 47 years old, is a certified public accountant.
She is the financial principal of Brookehill Equities and Global Execution Network Associates, New York broker dealers.
A graduate of Connecticut College, she received an M.B.A. degree from Hofstra University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.
Her father was president of Leemar Knitting Mills, a Long Island City women's knitwear manufacturer founded by her grandfather Frank Weiss.


UNDERSTATEMENT
This season offers classic ease: basic boxer shorts, a simple tank suit, soft and roomy robes.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Business inventories, percent change
-0.3
-0.3
Tuesday
Industrial production, percent change
0.5
0.4
Capacity utilization, in percent
79.9
79.7
Wednesday
Housing starts, annualized in millions
1.07
1.08
Thursday
Merchandise trade, billions
-$4.0
-$4.2
Monday: British retail sales *
U.S. industrial production *
Labor costs *
Manufacturing output Tuesday: Japan gross national product *
U.S. capacity utilization  Wednesday: Federal Reserve's beige book released *
Two- and five-year Treasury note auction details.  (Sosurce: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Style Makers; Gregory W. Landahl, Interior Designer
Gregory W. Landahl's work is rarely exposed to the elements.
He concentrates on interior architecture for clients as diverse as real-estate developers, law firms, hotels and nightclubs.
Rather than bearing his personal imprint, Mr.
Landahl's projects are known for communicating something about the client.
"It's like a custom suit," said Mr.
Landahl, 40 years old.
"We try to give the client something tailored around his needs and wants."


Sports of The Times; St. Pete, the Colts, And Even the Bums
LENINGRAD is no more.
For some people, it never stopped being the city of Peter the Great after the regime put another name on it.
The change got me thinking about sporting names and places that will not go away, traditions that run deep, like subterranean rivers, spanning the generations.


Ill Winds for America's Cup
Another America's Cup controversy has erupted between challengers and defenders.
But rather than ending up in the courts, as happened two years ago when New Zealand claimed the cup on a technicality, this battle appears headed for a standoff.
Irate challengers are balking at demands by race organizers to have their competition yachts in San Diego by Dec. 20.
A spokesman for the challengers has suggested a racing boycott in retaliation for the early deadline.
Challengers also may choose mediation by a special council of America's Cup trustees.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bronxville, N.Y. 765,000
30 Sturgis Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Tudor; family room, breakfast nook, library; taxes $12,295.
Larchmont, N.Y. 410,000
11 Cambridge Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; 2-story entry hall, fireplace, deck, family room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes not yet assessed.
Rye Brook, N.Y. 320,000
63 Greenway Circle  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old town house; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, playroom, patio; taxes $5,972.
Brookfield, Conn. 176,000
32 Brookfield Meadows  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 24-year-old ranch; master bedroom with sliders to deck, newly painted exterior, 0.50 acre; taxes $1,947.
Fairfield, Conn. 217,000
130 Brookview Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 75-year-old colonial; fireplace, sun porch, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,241.
Norwalk, Conn. 178,000
10 Quintard Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old Victorian; completely renovated, new furnace, 0.10 acre; taxes $2,133.
OTHER AREAS Levittown, L.I. 140,000
32 Hilltop Road
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
Massapequa, L.I. 300,000
131 Bellaire Road
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 37-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage; taxes $8,500.
Oakland, N.J. 155,000
22 Oneida Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old split level; new carpeting, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,288.


Topics of The Times; Smears and Fears
As often happens in close campaigns, the final hours before last week's City Council election in New York City were marred by desperation politics.
James Shelly, the brother of a losing candidate in Manhattan's Eighth District, was arrested on attempted burglary charges after workers for a rival candidate said they caught him tampering with the lock to their headquarters.
Antonio Pagan, the probable victor in Manhattan's Second District, flouted good taste and fair politics by targeting Jewish voters with a last-minute mailing that portrayed the incumbent, Miriam Friedlander, as "no friend" of the Jews.


Teen-Age Girl Found Chained in Bronx Residence
A 15-year-old Bronx girl was discovered chained to an iron pipe in her family's home, and her parents told investigators that they had locked her up to protect her from drugs and other dangers in the community, the police said yesterday.
The girl, who the police said told them she had been chained up for a year, was found Friday night after a state agency passed an anonymous tip to the police.
The parents, Elizer Marrero, 44, and his wife, Maria, 42, were charged with unlawful imprisonment, reckless endangerment and endangering the welfare of a child.


Business Diary/September 8-13
COMPANIES Sympathy, But Not Credence, as Clark Clifford Explains


Unpredictable Variety in Kent Galleries
FOR eight years Jacques Kaplan, once an art dealer in Manhattan, has been in the small town of Kent, building an empire.
He directs Paris-New York-Kent, the gallery in a caboose, and PNYK, the gallery in a cottage, both of them in Kent Station Square.
He also maintains close diplomatic relations with Bachelier-Cardonsky, the gallery above a bookstore, a few doors away on Main Street, that is directed by his wife, Violaine Bachelier and her partner, Darby Cardonsky.
A visit to one is, therefore, a visit to all three.
The menu at Paris-New York-Kent is unpredictable.
A month ago it featured stars -- William Copley and Man Ray.
Now it is offering lesser knowns -- Carroll MacDonald, a landscapist with many shows to her credit, and Ellen Housman, a sculptor making her debut.


Lisa S. Elmes To Wed in Fall
November wedding plans for Lisa Suzanne Elmes and Peter Howard Weinstock, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley M. Weinstock of Scarsdale, N.Y., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
H.
Brown Elmes of Princeton.
The couple are both 24 years old and graduates of Columbia University.
The future bride is studying for her master's degree in education at New York University.
Her father is an orthodontist in Princeton.
Her mother, Ann Elmes, is the executive director of Princeton Capital Management.


Etching a Portrait of Judge Thomas
The portrait of Clarence Thomas as an American success story is sharply etched by now, but a considerably less distinct portrait of Clarence Thomas, the judge and likely Supreme Court Justice, emerged from the nominee's four days before the Senate Judiciary Committee this week.
In fact, with Judge Thomas scheduled to face only a few final hours of questioning when his confirmation hearing resumes on Monday, his image is in some ways more blurred now than it was before his week in the national spotlight began.


Curry: A Flavor Among Western Tastes
TO make an authentic Indian curry, spices are roasted, ground and mixed together in careful proportions.
An Indian cook would no more use a supermarket curry powder than a French chef would use garlic powder on snails or bottled Roquefort dressing on a salad.
But curry powder is becoming more and more popular as a flavoring in Western dishes.
Not a lot is used, just enough to add an unexpected and interesting dimension.
At the West Street Grill, an American bistro in Litchfield, Conn., one of the most popular dishes is pasta with curry-flavored scallops.
James O'Shea, the owner, says that curry as a flavoring has long been popular in his native Ireland.
"People there have a passion for anything curried -- just as they do across the sea in the British Isles. Perhaps it's a legacy of the empire, but curry is nursery food for them."


Anne Marie Jauss, Author, 89
Anne Marie Jauss, an author of books for children and an illustrator, died on Friday at a nursing home in Milford, N.J.
She was 89 years old.
She died of natural causes, said a friend, Florence Stephens.


On Making a Living
There had been talk of settlement, but by the time four days of preliminary hearings were concluded in Fort Worth on Friday, MARTINA NAVRATILOVA and her former lover JUDY NELSON seemed as far apart as ever in efforts to settle the suit brought by Nelson seeking half of Navratilova's estimated $9 million in earnings during their seven years together.
After a day of testimony in which both women broke into tears several times, Navratilova said she would not agree to a financial settlement unless Nelson agreed not to write a book about their love affair, and Nelson said she would not agree to such a restriction.


Mutual Funds; Getting In on the Latin Boom
Forget Eastern Europe.
The sizzling area for foreign investment in 1991 is Latin America.
The prices of some funds have more than doubled since the beginning of the year.
Through Sept. 6, the Brazil Fund was up 150 percent, for example, and the Chile Fund rose 105 percent, according to Thomas J. Herzfeld, who specializes in closed-end fund investment and analysis.
That compares with a gain of 32.8 percent in the Herzfeld single-country fund average, an index of 20 funds.
Closed-end funds issue a fixed number of shares that trade on stock exchanges.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about companies providing on-site medical care for employees misstated the title of Sean Kolb-Hunt of the Dictaphone Corporation.
She is the benefits administrator.


Karen Betzig and Herbert W. Marache 3d Wed
Karen Marie Betzig, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Betzig of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Herbert William Marache 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marache Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
Msgr.
Joseph J. Boyd, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of SS.
John and Paul in Larchmont, assisted by the Rev.
Dr.
John W. Bishop, an Episcopal priest.
Mrs.
Marache, 31 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Plattsburgh.
She is a sales assistant at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, the stock brokerage in New York.
Her father is a vice president of the Manhattan Automatic Sprinkler Corporation in New York and her mother, Katharine B. Betzig, is its office manager.


Hussein Tightens Grip by Dismissing Premier
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has tightened his grip on the governing Baath Party by dismissing Prime Minister Saadun Hamadi, who had pledged to work for political pluralism, Iraqi exiles in Europe said today.
The dismissal, announced early today, was a blow to pledges of democracy and economic liberalization after Iraq's defeat in the Persian Gulf war, the exiles said.
"Hamadi was the only firm advocate of pluralism," one exile said.
"He was courageous enough to call a spade a spade."


Baylor's Kick at 0:51 Upsets Colorado
Santana Dotson blocked a chip-shot field goal with three minutes left, setting up teammate Jeff Ireland's 35-yard field goal with 51 seconds remaining that gave Baylor a 16-14 victory over Colorado today.
The loss ended Colorado's winning streak, the nation's longest, at 11 games.


Bridge
In the early days of bridge, black players were excluded from many clubs and tournaments, particularly in the South.
In 1932 they formed their own group, the American Bridge Association, and this organization still flourishes, even though the discrimination in tournament bridge that produced it withered away in the 50's.
Under the leadership of Bob Price of Chicago, who finishes a two-year term as president in December, the membership has grown by 1,000, to 7,500, almost double what it was a decade ago.
The association stages two national championships each year, and the most recent, in New Orleans last month, set attendance records.
Information can be obtained from the executive secretary, Gloria Christler, at (404) 768-5517.


Jennifer Marshall Engaged to Wed
The engagement of Jennifer Kay Marshall to Mark Everett Sutherland has been announced by the prospective bride's mother, Rhoda Marshall of New York.
Mr.
Sutherland is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Owen Sutherland of Rochester Hills, Mich.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Marshall, 26 years old, is the daughter also of Lyal K. Marshall.
A graduate of Ohio University, as is her fiance, she is a manager of the Marriott Mark Resort in Vail, Colo.
Her mother is the executive director of the Art Directors Club in New York.


Mutual Funds; When Exit Fees Erase Profits
Many investors are unaware that some mutual funds -- roughly 12 percent of all funds -- charge sales fees when fund shares are sold within a specified time, usually five years.
That is why the National Association of Securities Dealers will require funds to disclose contingent deferred sales charges, also called "exit fees," on their confirmation slips beginning Oct. 1.
What is the impact of a contingent deferred sales charge?
"For short-term investors, enormous," said Charles Trzcinka, associate professor of finance at the State University of New York at Buffalo.
In the example shown, the annual 10 percent return drops by half, to 5 percent, for investors who sell in the first year and pay a contingent deferred sales charge of 5 percent.


U.S. Army Buried Iraqi Soldiers Alive in Gulf War
United States Army forces buried alive scores of Iraqi soldiers in their trenches in the early hours of the allied ground attack that ended the Persian Gulf war, Army commanders said this week.
The deaths took place during the operation in which American M1-A1 tanks of the First Infantry Division cut lanes through a 10-mile-wide stretch of barbed wire, minefields, bunkers and trenches north of the Iraqi-Saudi Arabian border on Feb. 24 as the allied ground offensive unfolded.


Sunday Menu; Seizing the Final Treasures of Summer
As the summer winds down, there seems to be more than the usual urgency to take advantage of as many of summer's treasures as possible: the fragrant fresh herbs, the crisp cucumbers, the tomatoes that will not be so good again until next season.


The Executive Computer; An Economical Time for Improving Your Memory
New software operating systems like Microsoft Windows 3.0 and Apple System 7.0 demand large amounts of system memory, especially if the machine will be running complex business applications.
Luckily, memory prices are at their lowest point in, well, memory.
I recently added eight megabytes of random access memory to my elderly Macintosh, and the price worked out to be $39 a megabyte.
In the days of the Great Memory Drought of 1988, a megabyte cost 10 times as much.
Memory prices soared that year because semiconductor companies were closing their 256-kilobit chip production facilities and retooling to produce the more efficient 1-megabit chips.
Because almost every company shifted at the same time, supplies of 256Kb chips dried up before 1Mb chips reached the market in quantity.


Spontaneous Quilts and Vibrating Instruments
MOST of the quilts on display at the Afro-American Historical Society Museum here have the spontaneity of jazz.
Unlike the precise geometry of traditional quilts, these were stitched with small but intentional variations of fabric and form.
Such improvisations suggest changing harmonies and a riff, while the colors sing of joy or the blues.
In one quilt, rows of diagonal lines are transformed into triangles as they reach the bottom border.
In several other quilts, repeated squares of checkered gingham change to flower-patterned fabrics in some segments and plaids in others.
Sometimes two triangles are stitched together to complete a series of rectangles.


Parents, Just Say No
To the Editor:
In "The War on Children's Culture"  [ Aug. 4 ]  Jon Katz seems to apply cultural relativism to yet another victimized group -- children.
If it's O.K. for his children to watch junk TV (and the commercials), can they eat junk food, use illegal drugs and go to bed without brushing their teeth because of peer pressure?
Is he going to do it with them?


Looking Into Homer
WINSLOW HOMER
By Nicolai Cikovsky Jr.
Illustrated. 156 pp.
New York: Harry N. Abrams in association with the National Museum of American Art, Smithsonian Institution. $39.95.
WINSLOW HOMER IN THE 1890S
Prout's Neck Observed.
By Philip C. Beam, Lois Homer Graham, Patricia Junker, David Tatham and John Wilmerding.
Illustrated. 154 pp.
New York: Hudson Hills Press in association with the Memorial Art Gallery of the University of Rochester. $35.


New &amp; Noteworthy
EUNUCHS FOR THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN: Women, Sexuality and the Catholic Church, by Uta Ranke-Heinemann. (Penguin, $10.95.) A professor of religion attacks the celibate hierarchy of the Roman Catholic church for what she sees as a centuries-long campaign to oppress women.
"Few theologians have targeted church sexual teaching from so many angles or as trenchantly," Jason Berry said here last year.
The book "should have an impact on American theologians and those bishops brave enough actually to read it."
THE INDIAN LAWYER, by James Welch. (Penguin, $8.95.) With a seat on the state parole board, Sylvester Yellow Calf, an Indian lawyer with a degree from Stanford Law School, seems well on his way to a career in Montana politics.
Then a disgruntled prisoner and his seductive wife scheme to discredit him.
"Mr. Welch writes as well about women as about men, and he is invariably balanced in his take on the torque of complicated relationships between whites and Indians," Edward Hoagland said here last year.
The novel's "dialogue is apt, the construction is sophisticated, and a week after I finished reading it these people still flare in my mind."


Corrections
Because of a production error, a report last Sunday about the marriage of Lynn Dadourian and Dikran Barsamian omitted a picture caption.
The bride should have been identified as Lynn Barsamian.


MR. SOFTWARE
The fact that Gates is acquiring art reproductions from museums is disturbing.
What financially pressed museum director can run with a billionaire.
Given the wretched financing of our museums, these rights may be the very thing that will enable museums to survive -- and to present great art as essentially different from the endless matrix of images we generate.
BJARNE F. ROSTAING
New York, N.Y.


For Devils, Hockey Is a Contract Sport
Except for arbitrator's decisions, the main topic of conversation at the Devils' training camp has been money and contracts.
"A lot of guys around here feel they're underpaid," said Bruce Driver, the team's representative with the players' union, which is negotiating a new collective-bargaining agreement with the owners.


Correction
An essay on Aug. 25 about Ezra Pound and the poet Rolfe Humphries misstated the location of St.
Elizabeths Hospital, where Pound was confined in the 1940's and 50's.
It is in Washington, not in Bethesda, Md.


Thanksgiving At a Bath Hotel
A hotel in Bath, England, is offering a Thanksgiving celebration package that includes dinner with turkey, stuffing, cranberry sauce, pumpkin pie "and all of the usual trimmings." The menu, the Bath Spa Hotel says, "will delight even the most patriotic appetite." Priced at $:450 a person (about $765), the four-night package starting Nov. 27 will include airport transfers, a reception with champagne and guided tours of Bath's American Museum at Claverton Manor and of nearby Bristol.
Participants will also receive tickets for a play produced by the National Theater at the Theater Royal, Bath.
For information: Forte Hotels, (800) 225-5843.


The Senior G-Man  David M. Oshinsky is a professor of history at Rutgers University and the author of "A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy." By David M. Oshinsky
J. EDGAR HOOVER
The Man and the Secrets.
By Curt Gentry.
Illustrated. 846 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton. $29.95.
FROM THE SECRET FILES OF J. EDGAR HOOVER
Edited by Athan Theoharis. 370 pp. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. $24.95.


Hilary Waldman Is Married
Hilary Debra Waldman and Joseph Anselm O'Brien Jr., reporters at The Hartford Courant, were married yesterday at the Watch Hill (R.I.) Chapel.
Judge Michael Higgins of Rhode Island District Court officiated.
Ms.
Waldman, 32 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Purchase; Mr.
O'Brien, 35, from the University of Connecticut.
The bride, who will keep her name, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herman Waldman of Gulfport, Fla.
Mr.
O'Brien's parents live in Winsted, Conn.


Asters Can Be Ordinary or Spectacular
SUMMER has gone, and soon fall will be here officially.
Roadsides and fields are touched with the purple-blue haze of the native asters.
These ubiquitous wild plants are not usually the sort that anyone would care to have in a garden, because they can become kind of weedy.
Also, the plants have the bad habit of losing their bottom leaves or, worse, turning brown-black as the season advances.
These wild asters have daisylike flowers and belong to that huge Composite genus.
It is so large, in fact, that the genus has been divided into tribes, and the aster tribe has around 500 members.


Aimee Storin Weds Keith Harrison Jr.
Aimee Blanche Storin, an associate with the Chicago law firm of Monahan, Cohen &amp; Derstine, was married yesterday to Keith E. Harrison Jr., a copy editor at The Daily Southtown Economist in Chicago.
The Rev.
William Scanlan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Timothy's Church in Norwood, Mass.
Mrs.
Harrison, 25 years old, is a daughter of Judith White of Walpole, Mass., and Matthew V. Storin of New York.
She graduated from the University of Notre Dame, as did her husband, and De Paul University Law School.
Her father is the managing editor of The Daily News in New York.


This Time, Braves Come Out on Top
A two-out walk to Jerry Willard, an obscure catcher grasping onto the remnants of an unspectacular career, led to a change at the top of the National League West tonight.
Willard, a September callup, who previously had one hit in nine at-bats, drew the walk as a pinch-hitter on a 3-2 pitch from Roger McDowell in the 11th inning, and the Atlanta Braves proceeded to edge the Los Angeles Dodgees, 3-2.
Keith Mitchell, who ran for the 31-year-old Willard, scored the decisive run on a bases-loaded single by Ron Gant, who earlier in the game had made two outfield blunders and twice grounded into force plays with two runners on base each time.


Miss Bunn Wed To J. J. McCool
Allison Pennell Bunn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Freeman Bunn of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday at Christ Church to Joseph James McCool, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. McCool of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Leonard W. Freeman performed the Episcopal ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Paul C. Christopherson.
Mrs.
McCool, 26 years old and known as Penny, is an institutional equity saleswoman at Salomon Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father retired as an executive vice president at the New York advertising agency of Dancer Fitzgerald &amp; Sample.


Alicia Sternberg Wed to J. C. Nitz
Alicia Boyle Sternberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Sternberg of Norwich, N.Y., was married yesterday in Rye, N.Y., to Jeffrey Charles Nitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Nitz of Sudbury, Mass.
The Rev.
David L. Uhl performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church, assisted by the Rev.
Donald Poole.
Mrs.
Nitz, 26 years old, graduated from Lake Forest College.
Until recently she was a sales representative for the Educational Foundation Institute for Cultural Exchange in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is the general counsel and secretary of the Raymond Corporation, a maker of industrial equipment in Greene, N.Y.


Streetscapes: The Carnegie Mansion; New Roof to Crown The Cooper-Hewitt
IT looks now like your great-grandmother with a punk haircut: three portly stories of sober red brick and limestone topped by black netting with spiky wooden supports that could be giant hairpins.
But it's just protection around the copper roof of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum on Fifth Avenue between 90th and 91st Streets, which, after 90 years, has finally worn out.
The building, largely completed by late 1901, started life as the mansion of Andrew Carnegie, who in the 1890's was living at 5 West 51st Street at a time of controversy about the character of New York City mansions.
Real estate writers and architectural critics considered typical rich men's housing -- narrow, densely built houses with dark rooms and poor ventilation -- ludicrous considering their architectural pretensions.


THE 'STAR TREK' CURSE: A LIFETIME STARFLEET COMMISSION
Some call it a curse, the double-edged consequence of playing a character so popular that an actor's work becomes largely defined by that role.
For most of the actors in the original "Star Trek" series, Starfleet has never been far off the professional horizons.
Here is what the crew has been up to since the show went off the air in 1969.
William Shatner, 60, the impulsive Capt.
James T. Kirk, has been involved in two other successful television projects, the early 80's ABC police series "T. J. Hooker" and the current CBS reality-based program "Rescue 911," for which he is the host.


Society Cruises Still Sailing
Despite financial problems, Society Expeditions Cruises intends to continue operating luxury adventure cruises aboard the 139-passenger World Discoverer and, on a reduced scale, aboard the 96-passenger Society Explorer, according to a spokesman for the Seattle-based company.
James Quitslun, director of special programs, said that the parent company, Discoverer Reederei of Germany, was negotiating with various German banks for a loan to enable Society Expeditions to repay about $200,000 in deposits that had been received for voyages on a third ship, the Society Adventurer.
The vessel was to have entered service in July.
Heiko Klein, owner of Society Expeditions, announced on June 28, 10 days before the ship was to have been finished at the Rauma Yards in Finland, that he was refusing delivery because of "major mechanical and contractal issues and technical specifications." The yard said it did not deliver the ship because Mr.
Klein could not pay for it.
The ship ship is for sale for between $70 million and $88 million.


No Headline
Christine Elizabeth McGrory, a daughter of Maureen McGrory of Boston and the late Edward P. McGrory, was married in Boston yesterday to Eric Peter Nash, the son of June C. Nash of Chicago.
The Rev.
James H. Lane performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Brendan's Church.
Ms.
McGrory, 30 years old, is an administrative assistant for Stretcho Fabrics, a textile manufacturing company in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her Father was a boiler tender for Boston Edison.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about African-inspired hair braids omitted the name of the salon that created the spiral cornrow, sculptured locks and the flat twist with coils.
It is Turning Heads, in Manhattan.


Time Has Finally Come For Hundley, Mets Believe
The polish, the Mets believe, will come, but the tools and physical structure are in place.
Todd Hundley, prospect, has thus officially begun his quest to become a major league performer.
"The moment's at hand," Doc Edwards, the bench coach for the Mets, said of Hundley's career.
"The package is there to become a complete catcher."


Seeking Out The Diaghilevs
To the Editor:
I can't say I took pleasure reading Hilary de Vries's article on regional theater artistic directorships  [ "It's a Tough Job, but Somebody's Got to Want It," Aug. 18 ] , but I commend her for bringing up the subject at all.


Taking the Fun Out of Playing Berlioz
The singular musical creations of Hector Berlioz, bearing such designations as "dramatic symphony," "dramatic legend" and "sacred trilogy," have never been so widely and sympathetically received.
On the other hand, performances of those works seem to have progressively lost touch with the music's imaginative sources.
They've become less fun, and in the process less serious as well.


Technology; Sensors That Tell Just How Good the Packaging Is
A package on its way from a warehouse to a store may encounter bumps that can cause profound damage to its contents.
To measure such jarring events, the International Paper Company is using a new sensor that fits inside a package and records the level of shock, vibration, temperature and humidity the parcel encounters in transit.
The company uses the data to help determine the effectiveness of the packaging materials it designs and to develop packages that provide protection at the least cost.


New Yorkers, etc.
It sounds like a cinch.
There's no talent, skill or even brains required to accept a compliment.
It's offered, accepted and that's that.
Not quite.
There are a number of different kinds of acceptance.
One is simply hearing the compliment and letting the words evaporate into the air with no acknowledgment.
It's as though nothing was said.
A slight degree better than this non-reaction is a thin, uneasy smile that spells embarrassment and is sometimes accompanied by a slight inclination of the head.
The head nod may or may not be a pathetic attempt at some kind of regal acknowledgment but it's actually anyone's guess.
However it's meant, the result is completely meaningless.


New York Hotels, New and Renewed
MANHATTAN has some of the most exciting hotels in the world, with sumptuous interiors and sensational views.
There are traditional hotels, with meticulously restored architecture and enviable guest lists, present and past.
And sleekly contemporary new hotels, with shiny fitness centers and adventurous restaurants.
And there are plenty of places you wouldn't want to go near.
With just under 70,000 hotel rooms, according to the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau, Manhattan offers choice, and the choices are growing as dozens of old hotels have been refurbished in the last few years.
Indeed, with so many rooms, deals aren't the rarity they once were, at least during quiet seasons.
Many hotels offer corporate rates, discounts for long stays and weekend rates that can include free meals and parking.
Unfortunately, the good deals tend to dry up in the autumn, when visitors stream into town with the cool weather.
Those seeking comfort but not luxury this fall can expect to pay between $125 and $230 a night for a middle-range hotel with a good location. (A report on budget hotels in New YLork will appear on Oct. 6.)


Beebe Took Hard Path To Reach a Big Day
Sometimes, Don Beebe stories really happen.
You know, the one about the homesick guy who quits school to go into the aluminum-siding business, then returns to a college no one ever heard of, somehow makes the pros, and then one day catches four touchdown passes from Jim Kelly.
"Yeah, the stories happen," said Beebe. "But rarely."


This Week: Trim, Pot, Mow
Check evergreens for bagworms, the larvae of small black moths.
If you pick them off this fall, the eggs won't hatch next spring.
Trim hedges and shrubs that block driveways, views to the street or walkways.
Keep watering newly planted perennials, shrubs and roses; keep seed beds moist.


If Stuck in a Fashion Rut, Get a Stick
Want some fashion advice this fall? Speak softly, and carry a chic stick.
George G. Graham Galleries, 40 West 55th Street, acquires walking sticks exclusively from carvers abroad and sells them to stores that include Countess Mara, Sulka, Paul Stuart and Senor David.


Date-Rape Case Prompts Review of Judicial System
Southern Methodist University has initiated a thorough assessment of its judicial system after an appellate board of administrators, faculty members and students reversed a lower board's guilty verdict in the campus's first date rape case.
In calling for the review, President A. Kenneth Pye, who in a final appeal recently upheld the not-guilty decision, said the case raised questions about the university handling serious cases, such as acquaintance rape, and comparatively minor rule infractions in the same manner.


Asters Can Be Ordinary or Spectacular
SUMMER has gone, and soon fall will be here officially.
Roadsides and fields are touched with the purple-blue haze of the native asters.
These ubiquitous wild plants are not usually the sort that anyone would care to have in a garden, because they can become kind of weedy.
Also, the plants have the bad habit of losing their bottom leaves or, worse, turning brown-black as the season advances.
These wild asters have daisylike flowers and belong to that huge Composite genus.
It is so large, in fact, that the genus has been divided into tribes, and the aster tribe has around 500 members.


Juli Anne Davis, Bank Examiner, Is Wed to Derrick Harkins, Minister
Juli Anne Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julius Davis of East Cleveland, Ohio, was married yesterday to the Rev.
Derrick Harkins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Harkins of Cleveland.
The Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York, and the Rev.
Marvin A. McMickle, pastor of the Antioch Baptist Church in Cleveland, performed the ceremony there.
Mrs.
Harkins, 24 years old, is an examiner with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father and her mother, Inez Davis, who are retired, were music teachers in Cleveland public schools.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16
A wide-ranging pact in South Africa, signed by the two main black political groups as well as the Government, is the first agreement of the country's various political movements.
But the main purpose of the agreement, to end black-on-black violence, appeared harder to achieve.
Page 1


From the Stage of 'Miss Saigon' to Acting Like a Kid
WHEN Philipp Lee Carabuena finishes work at night, he often has to face throngs of fans at the stage door clamoring for his autograph.
Most evenings, he obliges and signs their playbills with a special gold pen used only for that purpose.
Some nights, he is too tired and, like most children his age, only wants to go home to bed.
As an actor in the Broadway hit "Miss Saigon," the 4 1/2-year-old maintains a schedule that would daunt many adults.
His workday begins with an evening commute from his home here, arriving at his dressing room at the Broadway Theater in Manhattan no later than 7:30 P.M.


Police Insist on Complete Vests
The New York City Police Department will tighten its requirement that all officers wear complete bulletproof vests after the fatal shooting last week of a policeman who was not wearing the rear section of his vest, police officials said yesterday.
Officer Hector Fontanez suffered four wounds when he was shot by a gunman in the Bronx on Thursday, and medical examiners said the fatal bullet was one that struck him in the back and pierced his liver.
Had Officer Fontanez worn both sections of his vest, the medical examiner said, he probably would have survived.


Single, Older Women Shouldn't Despair
To the Editor:
In "The Glass People" (Op-Ed, Sept. 3), Theda Berkley-Street sounds bitter about her status as a single, older woman.
She should spend more time cultivating female friends, instead of complaining about being "invisible" to the passing parade of citizenry.
A person is only as "invisible" as he or she feels.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My kitchen cabinets are made of pine that has been stained to give them a cherry look.
I would like to give them a look more like my bleached-oak table and chairs.
Is there any way I can attain this look without having to completely strip the cabinets?
A.
You can approximate the look by using a semi-opaque white or off-white stain over the existing finish, or you can use a thinned-down white flat paint the same way.
The stain, or paint, is brushed on and then partly wiped off with a rag or cheesecloth.
That will still leave a darker cast, the cherry color, showing through the white, and so it still may not be as light as you would like.
But how much of this original color shows through will depend on how thick or opaque the white stain is, and on how much of it you wipe off.
Be sure you clean off all wax and polish before you start, and then experiment first on the back of a door or the inside of a drawer to see if you can get the effect you want.


Results of Transit Test Voided
The results of a test taken by transit police officers seeking promotions to sergeant have been voided because of cheating, city officials said yesterday.
The test was taken by 1,862 transit police officers on Feb. 2.
Reports of cheating that were published in The New York Post and Newsday the next month prompted an investigation by the city's Department of Investigations.


Communism's Unfinished Job, and Capitalism's; Mirror-Image Fallacy
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis in "E Pluribus Unum?" (column, Sept. 6) reflects the mirror-image thinking about the Soviet Union that has continually contributed to flawed United States policy toward the Soviet Union.
The United States cannot and will not serve as a model for a new Soviet Union.
Our states were settled by individuals who left their native land.
The populations of the former Soviet republics are living on their historic lands with separate and distinct languages, cultures, histories and religions.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My kitchen cabinets are made of pine that has been stained to give them a cherry look.
I would like to give them a look more like my bleached-oak table and chairs.
Is there any way I can attain this look without having to completely strip the cabinets?
A.
You can approximate the look by using a semi-opaque white or off-white stain over the existing finish, or you can use a thinned-down white flat paint the same way.
The stain, or paint, is brushed on and then partly wiped off with a rag or cheesecloth.
That will still leave a darker cast, the cherry color, showing through the white, and so it still may not be as light as you would like.
But how much of this original color shows through will depend on how thick or opaque the white stain is, and on how much of it you wipe off.
Be sure you clean off all wax and polish before you start, and then experiment first on the back of a door or the inside of a drawer to see if you can get the effect you want.


Miss Lewis Wed To T. L. Springer
Amanda Garland Lewis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lou Lewis of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Love Springer, a son of Margaret Springer of Durango, Colo., and William Springer of Concord, Mass.
Justice Albert M. Rosenblatt of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn officiated at Allyn's Restaurant in Millbrook, N.Y.
The bride, 23 years old, is keeping her name.
A cum laude graduate of Wellesley College, she is an editor and designer at Designworks in Somerville, Mass.
Her father is the senior partner in the Poughkeepsie law firm of Lewis &amp; Greer.
Her mother, Candace Lewis, is an art historian and writer for Oriental Art magazine.


Remi Leger Weds Victoria Grulich
Victoria Mary Grulich, a daughter of Mrs.
Harold Benn Judell of New Orleans and Norman Henry Grulich of Coral Gables, Fla., was married yesterday to Remi Christian Leger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yves Nicolas Leger of Paris.
Canon Henry C. Childs, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the American Cathedral in Paris.
Mrs.
Leger, 29 years old, graduated from Columbia University and the Cordon Bleu cooking school in Paris.
Her father is the president of G-K Advertising in Miami.
Her mother, known professionally as Celeste Seymour, is a fashion consultant.


The U.S. and Israel Collide At a Crucial Time in the Mideast
IT is something of a gamble, but Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir seems to have calculated that he can go home with all the marbles:
He would get $10 billion in special loan guarantees from the United States to help resettle Soviet immigrants.
He would continue to receive some $3 billion a year in regular aid from Washington.
He would go to Middle East peace talks planned for next month with no intention of giving up occupied territory and with the power to dictate which Palestinians would be allowed to sit at the conference table.
Most important, he would do all this without having to slow the expansion of Jewish settlement in the West Bank and Gaza Strip that he regards as his country's manifest destiny.


Julia Fiske Wed to David J. Hogan Jr.
Julia Woodruff Fiske, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Bogardus Fiske of Greens Farms, Conn., was married yesterday to David James Hogan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hogan of Westport, Conn., and New York.
The Rev.
Alastair Votaw officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn.
Mrs.
Hogan, 22 years old, graduated from Clark University and is a student at the New York School of Interior Design.
Her father, formerly the education editor of The New York Times, is a Montgomery Fellow at Dartmouth College.
He is the author of the "Fiske Guide to Colleges."


The New Europe: Will It Look East, or Inward?
Three months away from defining its own "political union," the European Community is badly divided over whether it should remain an exclusive club of prosperous countries or should prepare to open its doors to the new democracies emerging in the former Soviet bloc.
The debate is not new, but it has surfaced again with force since the failed Soviet coup brought independence to the Baltic republics and gave new urgency to the question of what places should be found in the new Europe for nations once ruled by Communists.


Croatia's Dying Dream
WITH military defeats multiplying and their territory rapidly shrinking, the Croatians' dream of an independent Balkan republic appears to be fading fast.
Serb guerrilla units backed by tanks, artillery and aircraft of the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Army effectively dismembered Croatia last week.
They inflicted losses in the south around the town of Okucani and on the western Dalmatian coast, once the republic's favorite tourist destination, while marauding Serb bands and snipers virtually cut off access from the capital of Zagreb to the western and eastern stretches of the republic.


Miss Harrison Has a Wedding
Susanne Gray Harrison, a daughter of Capt.
Albert Gray Harrison of Danbury, Conn., and Dawn Harrison of San Francisco, was married yesterday in Cooperstown, N.Y., to Eric Walden Poulson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Poulson Jr., of Cooperstown and Manhattan.
The Rev.
John Roos performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride is a sales assistant at Dun &amp; Bradstreet in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is a pilot for Pan American World Airways.
Her mother is a banker with the Financial Center Bank in San Francisco.


Social Events
Botanical Garden Party
Sept. 16 -- David Rockefeller promised his wife a rose garden, and a benefit for the result -- the Peggy Rockefeller Rose Garden at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx -- begins with cocktails there at 6:30 P.M.
Dinner and dancing follow.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 220-8774.
Recalling Frank Lloyd Wright
Sept. 16 -- A retrospective of Frank Lloyd Wright's 60 years as a designer will benefit the American Craft Museum, which collects and exhibits works by American artisans.
Drinks and dancing at the museum, 40 West 53d Street, from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $150 and $250, from (212) 956-3535.
UJA Dinner-Dance
Sept. 16 -- The Broadway producers Roger Berlind and Robert Whitehead will be honored by the theater group of the UJA-Federation at a benefit black-tie dinner-dance.
Cocktails at 7 and entertainment following dinner at the Marriott Marquis.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 836-1110.
Artists for Unicef
Sept. 19 -- More than 100 artists -- including Roy Lichtenstein, Claes Oldenberg, Frank Stella and Sam Francis -- have donated works to benefit the United Nations Children's Fund.
Now on view at Sotheby's, 1334 York Avenue (72d Street).
Reception at 6 P.M.; auction at 7:30.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 759-0760.
New York Hospital Cabaret
Sept. 19 -- The New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center will hold its annual cabaret aboard a yacht anchored in the East River next to the medical center, at 70th Street.
Reception at 7, followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 746-1401.
American Indian Dances
Sept. 19 -- The American Indian Dance Theater will stage a benefit performance for the American Indian College Fund, the American Indian Studies Center at the University of California at Los Angeles and the Association on American Indian Affairs.
The 8 P.M. performance at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue (18th Street), will be followed by dinner at America Restaurant, 9 East 18th Street.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 689-8720.
Bronx Home Turns 60
Sept. 19 -- St.
Patrick's Home for the Aged and Infirm in the Bronx, founded and run by the Carmelite Sisters, will celebrate its 60th anniversary with a banquet at the Plaza.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 519-2831.
Aid for Street Theater
Sept. 19 -- En Garde Arts, a theater troupe that performs at unusual sites in New York City, will present "Another Person Is a Foreign Country" at the Towers, on Central Park West at 106th Street.
A reception with the cast will follow the 8:30 P.M. benefit performance for the company.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 274-8123.
Party on City Island
Sept. 20 -- A "farewell to summer" dinner-dance will benefit the Cooley's Anemia Foundation, which supports research into Cooley's anemia, a fatal genetic blood disease.
At Anna's Harbor Restaurant on City Island in the Bronx, starting at 7.
Tickets, $75 from (212) 885-1373 or (212) 598-0911.
Helping U.S. Skiers
Sept. 20 -- A benefit for the United States ski team will be held at the Larchmont (N.Y.) Yacht Club with some of the nation's best skiers, past and present, in attendance.
The cocktail buffet starts at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets, $75, from (203) 655-7471.
Citykids at Carnegie Hall
Sept. 21 -- Robert De Niro, Quincy Jones and Demi Moore are expected at an evening of music, drama and testimonials for the Citykids Foundation at Carnegie Hall.
Youngsters from the multicultural group will perform along with the celebrities.
Dinner at Le Bar Bat, nearby at 311 West 57th Street, will feature food from 12 leading New York restaurants after the 8 P.M. performance.
Tickets for the concert alone, $100; for both events, $500; from (212) 925-3320.
For the Vanderbilt Museum
Sept. 21 -- The Vanderbilt Museum in Centerport, L.I., which is on a 43-acre estate overlooking Long Island Sound, was left to Suffolk County by William Vanderbilt in 1950.
The Marriott Wind Watch Hotel in Hauppauge, L.I., will be the setting for a black-tie benefit for the museum, with cocktails at 7:30, dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $170, from (516) 262-7876.
Our Lady of Mercy Awards
Sept. 21 -- The Our Lady of Mercy Fund, which helps support Our Lady of Mercy Medical Center in the Bronx, will hold its eighth annual charity ball at the Waldorf-Astoria, honoring two individuals and one institution: Florence D'Urso, a philanthropist and former chairwoman and chief executive of D'Urso Supermarkets/Key Food Stores; Dr.
Paul Tucci, a staff physician, and Consolidated Edison.
Black tie.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 920-9106.
St. John's Benefit
Sept. 21 -- The St.
John's University School of Law will give its fifth annual James Madison award to a New York lawyer, Thomas A. Bolan, for his services to Roman Catholic charities and organizations, at a black-tie dinner at the Plaza to benefit the law school.
Kenneth Y. Tomlinson, the editor in chief of Reader's Digest, will speak.
Cocktails at 7.
Tickets, $500, from (718) 990-6006.
Polo for Marymount
Sept. 22 -- Lunch followed by a polo match at Conyers Farm on North Street in Greenwich, Conn., will benefit the scholarship fund of Marymount College in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Lunch at 1; polo at 3.
Tickets, $100, from (914) 332-8217.
To Help Gay Services
Sept. 22 -- Joey Arias, whose voice resembles that of the late Billie Holiday, will give an 8:30 P.M. concert at Carnegie Hall to benefit the Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center.
Dinner follows at the Bellvue Restaurant, 496 Ninth Avenue (38th Street).
Tickets, $75, from (212) 620-7310.


Theft at a Hotel: What's Covered
WHEN a visitor from Mexico emerged from the shower in his Beverly Hills Hotel room, his Cartier Pasha watch -- depending on the model, these sell for $9,000 to $40,000 -- was gone from the dresser.
In another incident, a young women arriving at the Tropworld in Atlantic City this summer found her room was not ready, so she checked her leather suitcase with the bell captain, receiving a claim check.
When she returned later that night to register, her bag was missing and she was left with nothing but the clothes she was wearing and her handbag.
In neither case did the hotel compensate the victim for anywhere near the full value of the loss.


Croatia Cuts Off Army's Supplies and Seizes Officer
Croatia's Government challenged Yugoslavia's federal army today, seizing a senior military commander and ordering an end to all food, water and electric power supplies to army barracks in the republic.
The steps by the Zagreb Government, which is disheartened at the slow pace of peace talks and battered militarily on all fronts, significantly raised the level of confrontation in this beleaguered republic and threatened to tumble Yugoslavia into full-scale civil war.


Hindus Who Fled Kashmir Bitter Over Fate
Jawaharlal Koul, once a prosperous merchant in Kashmir state and now a refugee, looked bitterly at the row of tiny temporary stores here where he and other Hindu migrants are struggling to rebuild their lives.
"We are being treated like dirt," said Mr.
Koul, whose family owned apple orchards and carpet-manufacturing looms in the Kashmir valley.
"We have lost our homes, our farms, our businesses. We have been uprooted and alienated and nobody is bothered about whether we live or die."


The Pleasures of Dressing Down
IN MY CLOSET AND BUREAU drawers, my clothes are segregated.
Business shirts on one shelf; T-shirts, sweatshirts and aloha shirts on the other.
Somber suits and scratchy flannels on the right side; blue jeans, baggy corduroys and a white linen jacket on the left.
Clothes for work here; for fun there.
Those whispering conformity on this rack; those shouting individuality on that one.
Clothes unable to provoke the palest memory facing those with rich histories and associations.
Ask yourself: Does buttoning down the collar of an office shirt trigger fond recollections of buying it at Bloomingdale's?
Do you put on that gray pin stripe and think, "Aha! The very suit I wore to close the Flumwich deal"?
Probably not.
But if you're like me, many clothes on the casual side of your closet are attached to strong and pleasing memories.


Review/Dance; Barry Martin Company Delights in Technique
The dancers were enthusiastic, and the dancing was sharp and quick when Barry Martin's Deja Vu Dance Theater performed Friday night at City Center.
Mr.
Martin, the group's artistic director and choreographer, has obviously taken delight in showing off his company's expertise.
Yet his emphasis upon technical display has led him at times to belabor effects and to allow some of his dances to splinter into fragments that never quite cohere.


Encountering the Virgin Mary
To the Editor:
As a Roman Catholic priest, I found Kenneth L. Woodward's review of "Encountering Mary" by Sandra L. Zimdars-Swartz (Aug. 11) very interesting.
Fatima and Lourdes are worthy of belief.
Medjugorje is another story.
Most people don't realize the serious problems with the "apparitions" in that Yugoslav village.
The local bishop has issued a report warning people about the misleading books that praise the "seers," the "messages" and the many other "naive statements, clear falsehoods and absurdities." And the bishops of Yugoslavia have issued a statement that after 10 years they can find no proof that anything supernatural is happening in Medjugorje.
Yet people flock there by the thousands. (Rev.) THOMAS MCLAUGHLIN  Bloomfield, N.J.


Wall Street/Diana B. Henriques; Treasury's Troubled Auctions
The United States Treasury's auction process is fundamentally flawed, says Merton H. Miller, a finance professor at the University of Chicago and a winner of last year's Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science.
His chief objection is its "discriminatory price" auction system, in which Salomon Brothers became ensnared.
In that system, bidders willing to take a lower interest rate get their bids filled first, at that rate.
Runner-up bids are filled at their rate, on a prorated basis if necessary.
A single purchaser is limited to 35 percent of an issue.


POSTINGS: Third Avenue Condo; Bucking the Odds
The mushy market for new apartments in Manhattan does not offer a very firm foundation for condominium construction.
But among the risk-takers on the scene are the principals of M.J.M.
Associates, the Manhattan development company responsible for the recently completed, 32-story condominium residence on Third Avenue between 22d and 23d Streets.
Izak Senbahar, a principal of the company, said he and his partners were able to justify the development, in part, by purchasing the air rights above several nearby buildings including the Gustavus Adolphus Lutheran Church on East 22d Street.


FRONT PAGE TO OPERA STAGE
Nancy Malitz's illuminating article "Front Page To Opera Stage" (Aug. 25), on composer John Adams, broke new ground for me.
However, I take issue with her when she says, "Opera companies had become museums for dead composers and aging subscribers, unable to woo a younger generation. . . ." In football parlance, this would be termed unnecessary roughness.
I wonder whether Malitz has even seen the numbers of young mothers with baby strollers standing in line to buy tickets at the Met.
Has she sat next to any of the bearded and "jeaned" opera lovers?
If she made a demographic survey of the audience during intermissions at the Met, she would find that youth is abundantly served in those "cultural mausoleums."


In a Four-Quarter Game, 3 Good Ones Please Rams
The growing pains continued in the Bronx yesterday, but they are getting much easier to bear.
Three years after making the daring leap from Division III to Division I-AA, Fordham still can't win on this bigger, faster level, but it is inching toward respectability.
In its season-opener with Lehigh at Jack Coffey Field, Fordham fell to the Engineers, 32-7, proving that it isn't quite ready for prime time.
But the Rams were trailing by only 3 at halftime and were competitive for nearly three full quarters, displaying the skill and execution they lacked in their first two seasons of mixing it up with the big boys.


Football Team Has More Dreams Than Fans
MOST of Anthony Rocco's friends are content to unwind on weekends by playing golf or tennis, jogging or working around the house.
But Mr.
Rocco, who lives in Norwalk, takes a more vigorous approach, spending Saturday or Sunday afternoons during the fall trying to tackle 225-pound running backs in the Continental Interstate Football League.
"You can get banged up pretty good," said Mr.
Rocco, 29 years old, an inside linebacker for the New England Crusaders, a minor league football team based in Hartford.
"But when the game is over, I feel great."


Landmarks of the Loop
I WAS walking up Michigan Avenue in the shoppers' nirvana that Chicagoans call the Magnificent Mile.
Even though it was Sunday, the sidewalk was elbow-to-elbow people, so I didn't have to strain to hear the father say to his son, "There was a big fire, and the city burned down."
"Hot dog!" I thought to myself.
Here was at least anecdotal confirmation of some of my cherished thoughts about Chicago.


Elizabeth E. Plunkett Is to Marry in October
October wedding plans for Elizabeth Ellen Plunkett and Francis John Mastoloni 3d have been announced by the parents of the prospective bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Plunkett of Larchmont, N.Y.
Mr.
Mastoloni is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mastoloni Jr. of Harrison, N.Y.
Miss Plunkett, 27 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Pine Manor College.
She is a business development officer at the Marine Midland Bank in New York.
Her father is the executieve director of the Audio Engineering Society, a professional organization in New York.


Hearing Aid For the Classics
To the Editor:
In his essay "Pump Up the Volume, Beethoven"  [ Aug. 11 ] , David Schiff states that as long as classical music is heard on state-of-the-art sound systems, is played as loudly as the intense amplification of rock, jazz and folk concerts, and is visually stimulating, then classical music will be safe for another generation.
While we can appreciate the importance of a superior "acoustic ambiance" for the enjoyment of classical music, we have to question the assertion that raised dynamic levels combined with visual excitement will enable students to "hear" classical music.


Michigan State Upset By Central Michigan
Billy Smith rambled for 162 yards on 40 carries, including a 15-yard touchdown run, as Central Michigan deal Michigan State a jarring upset, 20-3, today.
Central Michigan, of the Mid-American Conference, never trailed and boosted its record to 2-0-1 by stunning last year's Big Ten Conference co-champion in their season opener.
Oddsmakers did not release point spreads on the game because they thought Michigan State would win in a rout.
One power rating had Michigan State rated 25 percentage points higher than Central Michigan.


Crime
P.
D.
James, Reginald Hill and Ruth Rendell may be writing as fast as they can.
But what are devotees of the English country mystery supposed to be reading betweentimes?
A superior new series by Peter Robinson should do nicely.
A DEDICATED MAN (Scribners, $18.95) picks up Chief Inspector Alan Banks (after his debut in "Gallows View") in the tranquil Yorkshire village of Helmthorpe, investigating the murder of a local archeologist who was bashed and buried under one of those stone walls that make the English countryside so picturesque.
"Bright, dedicated, obsessed even" with his field of study -- industrial archeology and the Roman occupation -- the victim was so universally loved and admired ("too damn perfect to have an enemy," says Banks) that the inspector is compelled to dig deep into his past for a murder motive.
The subtle nature of this historical and psychological detective work contents Banks, who understands that "in a place like Helmthorpe, emotions go deeper and last longer than in a big city."


Quotations of the Day
"They have made affirmative action a dirty word. For us it's a word that means fairness. You kept us down for 300 years and now you have to pay. I look at it as insurance and assurance." -- Ulysses Jones, a 40-year-old Memphis fire lieutenant.  [ 1:2. ]
"You always want to believe you were hired because you were the best. You work seven days a week, you wear Brooks Brothers suits, you play golf. But everything around you is telling you were brought in for one reason: because you were a quota." -- Jay Walker, a 33-year-old assistant corporation counsel in Chicago.  [ 28:4. ]


Gene Sirotin Is Married to Cathy E. Shore on L.I.
Cathy Ellen Shore, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Shore of Goshen, Conn., was married last evening to Gene Joseph Sirotin, a son of Sarah Sirotin of Jackson Heights, Queens, and the late Max Sirotin.
Rabbi Robert Benjamin officiated at Temple Emanuel in New Hyde Park, L.I.
Mrs.
Sirotin, 31 years old, is to join the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges next month.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University and a law degree from Fordham University.
Mr.
Sirotin, 41, received B.A. and M.B.A. degrees from Boston University.
He is a management consultant in New York.


Miss Saffer Weds M. D. Stephenson
Catherine Gail Saffer and Michael Deuel Stephenson were married last evening by Cantor Ted Aronson at the Orange Lawn Tennis Club in South Orange, N.J.
Mrs.
Stephenson, 28 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Saffer of Short Hills, N.J.
She is an associate in global markets at Bankers Trust in New York.
She is an alumna of the University of Pennsylvania, and she and her husband graduated from the Harvard University Graduate School of Business in 1990.
Her father is a lawyer in Short Hills.
Her mother, Helen Saffer, is a realtor for Degnan, Boyle Realtors in Millburn, N.J.
Mr.
Stephenson, 27, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Stephenson Jr. of Great Falls, Mont.
He graduated magna cum laude from Harvard and recently completed a fellowship in economics given by the Japanese Ministry of Education in Tokyo.
His mother, Nancy M. Stephenson, is the executive director of the Neighborhood Housing Services of Great Falls and a director of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank.
His father is a lawyer in Great Falls.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Rose Protection
Q.
There are so many conflicting reports on the proper way to prepare rosebushes for winter that I appeal to you for a definitive answer, once and for all. -- Leo Kaufman, Metuchen, N.J.


At Work, at Play, at War, Headgear for Our Times
Armor produced over the last century is often as terrifying and magical as it is technologically sophisticated.
In the exhibition "Modern Masks and Helmets," at the Museum of Modern Art through Nov. 19, many of the head protectors from the Space Age and earlier are imbued with symbolism as powerful as any found in tribal cultures.
The show of 40 examples of headgear made between 1850 and 1990, to be worn at work, play and on the battlefield, is the first museum survey of such modern armor, according to Cara McCarty, an associate curator in the museum's department of architecture and design.
Miss McCarty selected colorful and visually arresting artifacts, solutions to society's fear of nuclear warfare, terrorism, hazardous wastes as well as the dangers posed by competitive sports.


In Financial Scandals, Is Blind Greed Meeting Sightless Watchdogs?
ON the surface, the recent financial scandals have little in common.
But the more that comes to light about such seemingly disparate cases as cheating by Salomon Brothers in the Treasury market, corruption at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the nationwide savings and loan debacle and the shaky condition of many of the nation's largest banks and insurance companies, the more an underlying thread becomes apparent:
As national and international finance has become increasingly complicated, the Government's regulatory apparatus, mostly designed about 60 years ago, has proved unable to cope.
"Fragmented, underfunded and perhaps not particularly talented regulators find it difficult to outsmart centralized, wealthy and extremely talented crooks," said Robert B. Reich, an economist at Harvard.


Returning


Window Trial Informant Says Mob Had Him Shot
An admitted Mafia captain who escaped assassination and turned informer testified that he believes he was shot four months ago on orders of the top leaders of his crime family.
The witness, Peter Chiodo, testified today from a wheelchair because he is still recovering from 12 bullet wounds.
It was his second day of cross-examination in a racketeering trial about the window-installation industry in New York but the first time that the jury was told of the shooting.


Of Apples and Oranges
Does MICHAEL JOHNSON run better than SERGEI BUBKA vaults?
That's the apples-oranges question to be answered on Friday, when the Grand Prix final in Barcelona, Spain, determines the men's overall Grand Prix championship in the season-long competition, which uses a point system to provide a unified competition among athletes in disparate events.
Bubka, the Soviet pole-vaulter who set a world record during the season, leads the competition with 51 points, while Johnson, who turned in the season-leading time of 19.89 in the 200 meters in Brussels on Friday, is just 6 points behind.


The Executive Life; Of Ballistic Outerwear And Other Protections
Several months ago, an executive of a New York commercial bank began receiving telephone threats -- at home and at work -- from a disgruntled former employee.
He called in Stephen D'Andrilli, president of the Guardian Group International in New York, a security company, which tapped the executive's phone and hired a bodyguard.
Soon, the threats subsided.
"This is getting to be a more and more serious problem," said Mr.
D'Andrilli, who would not identify the executive.
"You have people who feel they have given a lot to a company and they become extremely angry when they are let go."


Style Makers; Suzanne Goodwin, Decorative Painter
Brushing wide strokes onto a dining room wall, Suzanne Goodwin created a mural of large peach, aqua and lilac flowers that brightens the room, giving the feeling of being outdoors under a tree on a breezy summer afternoon.
"I like to create an environment," said Ms. Goodwin, 33 years old.


Where Electronics and Art Converge
Alan Rath's workshop in an Oakland warehouse looks like a television repair shop.
Video tubes are strewn about and spools of colored wire of various sizes hang from racks on the wall.
But Mr.
Rath is actually a sculptor whose works have been displayed in museums and galleries.
He fashions his works from silicon chips and video tubes, often scavenged from the surplus stores of nearby Silicon Valley.
"Clock II," for instance, consists of three video screens that display brightly colored hands counting out the hours, minutes and seconds.


'Star Trek': It's a Wonderful Galaxy
There once was a time, before television went where no man had gone before, when "Star Trek" was not in reruns.
This was back when the universe was new and Spock was still the name of a pediatrician.
It was before anyone knew what dilithium crystals were, and Vulcan was just another name for Hephaestus.
It was before Tom Rush could write a song called "Beam Me Up, Scotty" and have the whole world know what he was talking about.
But that was long, long ago.
How long?
Paramount Pictures is glad you asked.
These days the company is trumpeting the 25th anniversary of "Star Trek," the original television series, set in the 23d century, which was first broadcast on Sept. 8, 1966, and lasted for three seasons on NBC.
Since then, of course, the series has been wildly successful in reruns, and has given rise to six "Star Trek" movies, the latest due out in December, starring the original cast of characters, Spock, Captain Kirk, Scotty and the rest.
A second television series, "Star Trek: The Next Generation," beginning its fifth season as a first-run syndicated series, takes place 100 years after the original voyages and has a completely different cast of characters, among them the sober Capt.
Jean-Luc Picard and his serious associates, Worf, a Klingon, and Data, an android. (Paramount owns all three incarnations of the show.)


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
July 91
July 90
Change
Starts
1,070
1,155
-7.3%
Completions
1,049
1,312
-20.0%
Sales
472
541
-12.8%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.37
9.37
10.42
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.01
7.01
8.40
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.20
9.22
10.23
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.87
6.94
8.12
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.23
9.26
10.30
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.96
6.90
8.28
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.47
9.47
10.61
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.46
7.58
8.57
*12*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.70
5.74
7.74
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.12
9.12
9.85
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


In Cable's World of Boutiques, a Generalist Thrives
When the television camera scanned the stands at the United States Open tennis championship match between Jimmy Connors and Paul Haarhuis recently, it caught, for a brief instant, the fans seated just behind the service line.
Among the privileged: Connors' guests, and Kay Koplovitz, the president and chief executive of USA Network, with her guests Arthur Levitt, the former chairman of the American Stock Exchange, and his wife, Marylin.
One cable executive said the placement was vintage Koplovitz: "She's always in the right place at the right time," he said.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 15, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
2
4
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon, from Nazi Berlin to London and New York, and his relationships with five women.
3
1
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
4
4
TIME BOMB, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.99.) A child psychologist tracks down the perpetrators of crimes spawned by hatemongers.
5
3
UNDER SIEGE, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $5.95.) Chaos in Washington when the kingpin of the Medellin drug cartel is brought there for trial.
6
7
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop on the trail of a Florida con man.
7
1
HARVEST, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $5.99.) Turmoil in a Jewish family during the turbulent 1960's.
8
2
BATTLEGROUND, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.95.) The Marine Corps in the struggle for Guadalcanal; the fourth volume of "The Corps."
9
34
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
10
9
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $5.95.) Lucky Santangelo schemes and maneuvers to get control of a major movie studio.
11
2
INTO THE DARKNESS, by Barbara Michaels. (Berkley, $5.50.) An inheritance brings a woman eerie experiences and romance.
12
1
THE ROWAN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Ace, $4.95.) The coming of age of a young woman in a universe governed by telepathy.
13
3
PRIME DIRECTIVE, by Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens. (Pocket, $4.95.) The former crew members of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise try to discover why their careers were ruined.
14 *
7
THE FIRST MAN IN ROME, by Colleen McCullough. (Avon, $6.95.) The rivalry of two men in the Roman Republic in 110 B.C.
15 *
17
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
17
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
12
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
3
9
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
95
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5
4
THE DOCTOR, by Edward E. Rosenbaum. (Ivy, $4.99.) A physician's experiences as practitioner and patient; originally published in 1988 as "A Taste of My Own Medicine."
6
410
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7
18
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
8
10
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
9
16
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
10
26
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
59
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
39
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
5
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
14
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
5 *
18
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Carol Malinowski to Wed Daniel Butturini
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Malinowski of Dennis, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carol Ann Malinowski, to Daniel Mark Butturini, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo A. Butturini of Black Rock, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Malinowski, 32 years old, is a director in the finance department NYNEX in White Plains, N.Y.
She graduated from Drew University and received a master's in telecommunications from Polytechnic University.
Mr.
Butturini, 33, is a manager in the Stamford, Conn., office of Deloitte &amp; Touche, a management consulting company.
He graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


CAMPUS LIFE: Yale; Students Protest Dinner's Demise At the Commons
Several hundred Yale University students, employees and union representatives gathered near the university president's office on Beinecke Plaza in a rally last week to protest the elimination of dinner in the huge white-columned Commons dining hall.
Eliminate dinner, they say, and you irrevocably damage the quality of student life.
The closing of the Commons dining hall, which was announced in the summer, is part of universitywide budget cuts of 5 to 10 percent ordered by President Benno C. Schmidt Jr. last November.
Other cuts include seven junior varsity and two varsity sports teams, as well as reductions in student jobs and library services.


Craig Is Resting
San Francisco Giants manager ROGER CRAIG was resting comfortably yesterday after undergoing an angioplasty Friday to relieve blockage in his coronary arteries, team officials said.
Craig was scheduled to be released from Stanford Hospital late yesterday afternoon for recuperation at home.
The Giants' physician, Dr.
WILL STRAW, said Craig would take a treadmill test tomorrow morning and if the results of that test are normal, the manager could be back for Monday night's game against Atlanta.


Data Bank/September 15, 1991
Consumer Credit
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
--1.4
--2.8
--2.2
Producer Price Index
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
0.2
--0.2
--0.3
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.2
0.2
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
--0.7
0.5
0.0
Auto Production
Sept. 13
Sept. 6
Aug. 30
In units, weekly total
122,803
92,532
100,229
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
78,222
63,479
71,076
Steel Production
Sept. 6
Aug. 30
Aug. 23
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,669
1,599
1,583
Municipal Bonds
Yield in percent 6.93 6.97 6.97


When an Author's Words Are Sold by the Pound
Like most writers, I have always championed thrift.
Writers live by thrift, after all, cutting losses and conserving profits to survive the inevitable bouts of indigence and bankruptcy that mark a life of letters.
And we practice thrift in our work, as well; good writing is always the product of language that has been pared down, sentences that are lean, taut, economical.
Not long ago, however, I experienced an extraordinary tergiversation.
Now I'm an ally of excess, a proponent of redundancy.
It all began the day I received a short letter from my publisher.
"Dear Mr. Norman," the letter began.
"Your book, 'These Good Men,' has been scheduled for remaindering."


K. C. Rider Wed To Missy Denton
Melissa Jean Denton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry R. Denton of New Russia, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kenneth Clarence Rider, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard I. Rider of Elizabethtown, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard A. Hoff, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at Westport Bible Church in Westport, N.Y.
Mrs.
Rider, 21 years old, is known as Missy.
She graduated from the State University College of Technology at Delhi, N.Y..
Her father is the manager of the Underwood Club, a private summer resort in New Russia.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Islip 147,000
103 Hobart Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, den, inground pool, 1-car garage; taxes $4,200.
East Northport 144,000
511 4th Avenue
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 7-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $1,500.
Hicksville 145,000
48 8th Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Levittown 140,000
32 Hilltop Road
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
Massapequa 300,000
131 Bellaire Road
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 37-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage; taxes $8,500.
Sayville 185,000
298 Astor Drive
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; new kitchen, den, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $4,700.
OTHER AREAS Norwalk, Conn. 178,000
10 Quintard Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old Victorian; completely renovated, new furnace, 0.10 acre; taxes $2,133.
Bronxville, N.Y. 765,000
30 Sturgis Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Tudor; family room, breakfast nook, library; taxes $12,295.
Howell, N.J. 157,000
13 Chestnut Hill Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, w/w carpeting, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,150.


Topics of The Times; The Wright Stuff
The furniture at the American Craft Museum's current Frank Lloyd Wright exhibition is to be viewed, not touched.
Except on the museum's ground floor, where four reproductions of the legendarily unwelcoming Wright chairs are arranged on a reproduction Wright rug.
A sign invites visitors to try them out.
That they do, bringing to the task as much fussiness as Goldilocks did to Papa, Mama and Baby Bear's beds.
By critical consensus the most uncomfortable ("too stiff, too stingy") is a cherry side chair designed in 1908 for Chicago's Robie House.
A 1956 mahogany armchair for the Friedman House in Bannockburn, Ill., "kind of cuts me off at the elbows." The 1948 walnut "Taliesin I" chair "leaves my arms flapping."


Money Talked in Race, But So Did Volunteers
As the dust settles after the frenzied last-minute efforts to get out the vote in Thursday's City Council primary, one thing seems clear to most of the exhausted campaign managers whose candidates won: All the money in the world did not substitute for committed volunteers knocking on doors and nudging people to the polls.
But having said that, money certainly helped, and in certain tight races, might have made the difference.
In most contests, public money from the city's campaign finance program far overshadowed the amounts -- and thus, the influence -- of both the Majority Coalition for a New New York and the Council Political Action Committee.


An Inescapable Need to Blame
THE SWEET HEREAFTER
By Russell Banks. 257 pp. New York. HarperCollins Publishers.


To Put More L.I. Wines On Restaurant Lists
Chef Michael Meehan of Mill River Inn in Oyster Bay is right on the mark in comparing the growth of the Napa Valley in California  [ "Quality L.I. Food and Wine Producing Distinctive Cuisine," Aug. 25 ]  to the growth of the Long Island vineyard and restaurant scene.
The comparison, though, should have been taken a step further.
While the tasting and pairings being held produce a quick flash of recognition acquainting the public with the versatility and excellence of our wine production plus the creativity of our local chefs, there has to be a follow-through that allows these same tasters to walk into an Island restaurant and pair an Island wine with the restaurant's particular cuisine.
At this point in time, my experience with Long Island restaurants finds wine lists falling short in the Long Island wine area.


Second Spring, and Its Price
The seasons have been mixed up enough already this year what with spring shoving winter out early and summer crowding into spring.
Now, on New England's outer islands, Hurricane Bob has put a crimp in autumn and brought in next year's spring.
The hurricane's high winds, heavy with ocean water, sprayed salt all over the island plants.
Leaves everywhere began to die.
The scrub oak that carpets Nantucket turned a glum December brown and beach plums were left with the bare branches of midwinter.
Fields of wildflowers were killed on Martha's Vineyard and Block Island, and the gathering flocks of Monarch butterflies hurriedly left for the south.


Ms. Mayer Weds Graeme Fisher
Deborah Kay Mayer and Graeme Donald Richard Fisher were married yesterday in Boston at Another Season, a restaurant.
The Rev.
Phillip M. King, a minister of the United Church of Christ and the chaplain at Massachusetts General Hospital, officiated.
Ms.
Mayer, 39 years old, is a daughter of Mrs.
Joan Glenn of Cedar Grove, N.J., and Gustave Mayer of Plantation, Fla.
She is an assistant professor in the graduate oncology nursing program at the MGH Institute of Health Professions, Massachusetts General's educational arm.
She has a master's degree in nursing from Yale University and a bachelor's degree from the University of the State of New York at Albany.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Ms.
Mayer has been appointed by President Bush to the National Cancer Advisory Board.


Sports of The Times; The Ali Connection To Tyson
IN the commotion over Mike Tyson's approaching heavyweight title fight while Tyson is under indictment on a rape charge, one school of thought is based on the Ali Argument.
According to the logic course in this school of thought, if boxing organizations stripped Muhammad Ali of the heayvweight title in 1967 for refusing to take the oath of induction into the armed services during the Vietnam War, why should Tyson be permitted to earn $15 million before his Jan. 27 trial begins?


Making a Difference; Power to the Shareholders
It does not happen often, but shareholders of large corporations do have the power to force changes in management.
At the Baltimore Bancorporation, shareholders, who were dismayed by years of weak earnings and the rejection last year of an attractive takeover bid, succeeded last week in gaining control of the board and ousting the old management.
The leader of the revolt, which took only six months to complete, was Edwin F. Hale, owner of a trucking and shipping business and the Baltimore Blast, an indoor soccer team.


Despite Growth, Mormons Find New Hurdles
A century ago the Mormon Church was widely viewed as a morally and politically dangerous sect.
Today it is widely seen as a conservative repository of old-fashioned values, an American success story.
One of the nation's fastest-growing major churches, it dispatches nearly 50,000 missionaries a year, many of them 19- and 20-year-olds, to spread its message in the United States and abroad.
There are now more Mormons than members of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) or the Episcopal Church, two pillars of the religious establishment.
And no other major American religious group is so generously supported by its followers: By church law Mormons give up to 10 percent of their income to the church.


Ms. Bergers Wed To John Everett
Jeannine Bergers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Adrian Jack Bergers of Northville, Mich., was married yesterday to John Otis Everett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis D. Everett Jr. of New York.
Msgr.
Walter A. Hurley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Sorrows church in Farmington, Mich., assisted by the Rev.
John C. Smith, an Episcopal priest.
Mrs.
Everett, 27 years old, was until recently an assistant market research manager for Helene Curtis in Chicago.
A Michigan State University graduate, she is studying for a master's degree in manaagement at Northwestern Univesity.
Her father retired as a sales executive.


Leaving No One Out of the American Experience
SCHOOL opened in New York City last week, and the grumbling wasn't all from students who saw the sweetness of late summer whirled away in a gust of book reports.
Over the objections of some clergy and families, the Board of Education decided that parents need not be consulted before a high school student is offered a condom.
And many schools struggled to find their footing as 216 new principals replaced others who took early retirement.
Meanwhile, something else was quietly moving ahead with the board's approval: new teacher workbooks meant to help introduce multiculturalism, to show students that modern American society was created by many ethnic groups and that virtually all of them suffered mockery and abuse at one time or another.


Army's Wishbone Still Hard To Break
Another football season, the 102d, began for Army today under a new coach, Bob Sutton, but with the same wishbone offense.
The wishbone spread the defense -- as it is supposed to do -- and the Army backs galloped through the gaps for 500 yards and 26 first downs.


Alternative Ways to Educate Youths About AIDS
THOUGH adolescents may be difficult to educate and government budgets limit HIV programs, some people have nevertheless found ways to educate teen-agers.
The instructors try to reach young people from pulpits, community health centers and classrooms, as well as through innovative outreach programs.
"We got off easy when AIDS struck gay men," said Dr.
Deborah Cotton, an assistant professor of medicine at the Harvard Medical School.
"They came to us to be tested. But adolescents are not going to seek us out until they really need us."


What the Competition Knows
To the Editor:
How Can We Save New York City?
What makes you think you can?
But if try you must, consider calling the suicide hot line.
GIDEON KANNER  Los Angeles, Aug. 25


WINNING LOOKS
Vintage styles lead the parade this fall, including 1930's- and 40's-influenced suits with strong, full silhouettes.


Prize-Winning Singers At Mellon Arts Center
THE Paul Mellon Arts Center, at Choate Rosemary Hall in Wallingford, is quite a hub of cultural activity.
The 800-seat main theater is home to the Wallingford Symphony.
A changing schedule of art exhibitions fills the gallery.
The school puts on several faculty and student programs in various recital halls, and the center itself has developed an ambitious professional showcase series, which "promises to be superb,"said the center's director, Terrence Ortwein.
"The variety is stunning. Classical and contemporary music and theater, American and international artists, solo artists and ensembles are all here for your pleasure."
Theatrical events outnumber the musical ones at the center this fall, but what should be a delightful evening of song is scheduled for 7:30 P.M. on Saturday, when two prize-winning American singers, Eddye Pierce Young and Benjamin Matthews, team up with the pianist Wayne Sanders for an evening of opera arias and duets, spirituals and scenes from Gershwin's "Porgy and Bess." Memberships (at $65) provide admission to all Arts Center events, but single tickets are also available.
For reservations or more information, call 269-1113 on weekdays.


A Mixture of Whimsy, Piety and History
AS a year-round religious artifact, the Jewish mezuza has no connection to any particular holiday.
Yet especially during the High Holy Days, which culminate Wednesday in Yom Kippur, the mezuza -- a small, usually tubular case nailed at a slant in a doorway -- symbolizes spiritual commitment.
The word mezuza means "door post" in Hebrew.
The object has no religious meaning unless a piece of parchment is folded inside, on which a scribe has handwritten in Hebrew a holy passage from the book of Deuteronomy.
Often nothing of the inscription is visible from the outside except the word Shaddai, which is a mystical name for God.


Why Eastern Europeans Need Trade Relief
To the Editor:
James Bovard makes an excellent case for removing trade barriers against Eastern European imports ("For the U.S., a Repeated Trade Slip," Forum, Aug. 18.) Our government is protecting us from nonexistent threats.


Second Thoughts
As one speaker after another took to the podium Wednesday night to tell the New York City Board of Education what they thought of its plan to give condoms to high school students, Dr.
Westina L. Matthews, a member of the board, left the meeting room to take a telephone call.
Earlier she had seconded a motion to adopt an amendment that would allow parents to bar their children from the program, which is intended to fight AIDS and other diseases.
But after she returned she reversed herself, calling on the board to "put this behind us once and for all." And so it did, rejecting the so-called "opt out" plan, to the consternation of those who opposed the condom program.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who appointed Dr.
Matthews, conceded that he had phoned her just before the vote to let her know "what my wishes were." Dr.
Matthews declined to elaborate.
"I'm an educator," she said.
"I leave politics to the politicians."


Solzhenitsyn Predicts He'll Return to Russia
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn said today that recent events in the Soviet Union made it certain that he would return home, but he restated his long-held policy that he would not consider going back until treason charges against him were dropped.
The exiled Soviet writer, speaking through his son, Stephan, at the Cavendish bicentennial parade, said: "I said a long time ago that I definitely will return, and that stays intact. I'm not going to live here forever."


Tennessee Intercepts U.C.L.A. By 30-16
Tracy Smith returned an interception 38 yards for a touchdown and Tennessee converted Darryl Hardy's block of a punt into another score today in downing U.C.L.A., 30-16.
Tennessee is ranked 11th by The A.P. and 12th by The New York Times.
U.C.L.A. is ranked 21st by A.P., and not ranked by The Times.


Affordability
To the Editor:
I read the the article "Battling Barriers to Affordable Homes" (Aug. 18) with great interest.
I believe that the best way of encouraging housing is through incentives.


Linda Anne Levis Marries
Linda Anne Levis, a daughter of Mrs.
George Levis of Attleboro, Mass., and the late Mr.
Levis, was married yesterday to Brendan Stephen Kammerer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry J. Kammerer of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
James F. Buckley officiated at the Holy Redeemer Roman Catholic Church in Chatham, Mass.
Mrs.
Kammerer, 33 years old, is a sales representative for women's wear manufacturers.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Mr.
Kammerer, 35, graduated from Hobart College and is an assistant vice president of the Bank of Boston.


BRIEF ENCOUNTERS
AT FIRST GLANCE, ALAN BROMLEY's briefcase appears to be all business.
But when the Manhattan public relations executive reached inside it recently, he proved himself well versed in matters of the heart.
"I have in here my old file of love poetry that I wrote to my wife," he says.
"Our 16-year-old daughter's boyfriend is writing her poems, and I wanted her to see these." Happily, he still admires some of the odes, as well as the woman he wrote them to.
"We're still crazy about each other," says Bromley.


Pianists' Forum


Encountering the Virgin Mary
To the Editor:
As a 1987 "pilgrim" to Medjugorje, I can tell you that the so-called visionaries are
not
faking it.
Scores of scientific and medical teams have determined that they are indeed seeing something that physically detaches them from reality as we know it.
If this were a hoax, it would have evaporated long ago.
BARBARA PETERSON Vancouver, Wash.


True Colors


POSTINGS: Christ Church Riverdale; Roof Restoration
The newly restored red and gray slate roof of Christ Church Riverdale, being dedicated today, is historically correct right down to its lead-coated copper gutters and capping.
The 125-year-old Victorian Gothic church, off the Henry Hudson Parkway at 252d Street in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, gained landmark status in 1967.
It was designed by Richard M. Upjohn, who also was the architect for the 1846 Trinity Church on Broadway at Wall Street.


Sofia Haberman Is Wed
Sofia Margaret Haberman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Haberman of Phoenix, was married in New York at the Ballroom yesterday to Scott Luksh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Luksh of San Antonio.
The Rev.
George Keith, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
The bride, 31 years old and a cum laude graduate of Yale University, is a shoe buyer for Lord &amp; Taylor.
Mr.
Luksh, 36 and a University of Texas graduate, is the advertising director of Photo District News, a trade magazine in New York.


Cynthia Jean Quinn Marries in Vermont
Cynthia Jean Quinn, the daughter of Patricia M. Quinn of Mountainside, N.J., and Michael F. Quinn of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday in Bennington, Vt., to Jeffrey Neil Edwards, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Edwards of Gillette, N.J.
The Rev.
Patrick Brown, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick de Sales.
Mrs.
Edwards, 31 years old, is a senior research associate with Johnson, Smith &amp; Knisely, an executive recruiting concern in New York.
Her father founded and heads Quinn-Woodbine, a book manufacturing company in Woodbine, N.J.
Her mother is a consultant with Forward Mobility, a corporate relocations services company in Bernardsville, N.J.


'Klinghoffer' Sinks Into Minimal Sea
In the second act of the opera "The Death of Klinghoffer," an enormous tube of fluorescent light slowly descends through the scaffoldlike industrial set.
It is accompanied by pulsing, shifting tonal chords, the chorus singing sustained "Ah" 's and a Palestinian terrorist invoking martyrdom.
The scene seems to pay homage to another minimalist opera, Philip Glass's "Einstein on the Beach." In that work (first seen in New York in 1976), a fluorescent beam was languidly lowered, splitting the stage's universe as the music's patter slowed the passage of time.
Whether the homage was real or a critic's imagining, "Klinghoffer," which ended its run at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Friday, is in a tradition that began triumphantly with that epic and its imagistic staging by Robert Wilson, and which has since sputtered into cliche and mannerism.
In between have come Mr.
Glass's other operas -- "Satyagraha" and "Akhnaten," Anthony Davis's "X" and John Adams's "Nixon in China" (which shared "Klinghoffer's" librettist, Alice Goodman, and director, Peter Sellars).


Riley's Still Sporting a Showtime Look
He is more than a year removed from Showtime, but Pat Riley, standing here in the air-conditioned cool of a desert hotel, is still a portrait of coaching chic.
His hair is slicked back and gleaming, his skin is warmly tanned, his shorts are pressed and the collar on his polo shirt is standing, as if starched for the occasion.


Robert Hanley, 67, Trial Lawyer; Won A.T.&amp; T. Antitrust Lawsuit
Robert F. Hanley, a leading civil trial lawyer who once won a $1.8 billion jury award in an antitrust suit against A.T.&amp; T., died yesterday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
Mr.
Hanley, who was 67 years old, had returned to Chicago in July to start a new law firm.
He was hospitalized about a week ago with an undiagnosed illness.
An autopsy is planned to determine the cause of death, a family spokesman said.


Q and A
Federal Tax Liens  Question: I am under contract to buy a studio apartment from a savings bank that foreclosed on the former owner in 1989.
A lien search showed that the Internal Revenue Service filed liens against the former owner.
The bank refuses to return my $4,000 deposit, saying the liens do not affect title.
Would the I.R.S. be able to claim this unit against payment of the former owner's back taxes? . . .
Ann McCaughey, Manhattan


Beijing's Top Priority: Maintain Communism
China's leaders have pledged in a series of confidential documents that the Soviet upheavals will neither diminish China's commitment to Communism nor weaken its resolve to open the door wider to the outside world.
At least three classified documents are circulating at various levels in the Chinese Communist Party, outlining the leaders' response to the Soviet events, according to Chinese with access to high-level information.
Two of the documents are based on advice from the paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, that China must act prudently and avoid taking a belligerent stance against the collapse of Communism elsewhere.


Louis Weintraub, 69, Public-Relations Chief
Louis Weintraub, a New York public relations and picture-service executive for more than 40 years, died on Friday at his home in Jericho, L.I.
He was 69 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Communism's Unfinished Job, and Capitalism's; North American Model
To the Editor:
The breakup of the Soviet Union into as many as 15 independent republics will neither ameliorate their deep economic problems nor fail to exacerbate even deeper internal conflicts.
The need for some kind of stable, federal structure is obvious.


Christine Dimmick Gorham Weds Robert G. Cox
Christine Dimmick Gorham, the headmaster of Gill St.
Bernard's School in Gladstone, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert G. Cox, the president and chief executive of the Summit (N.J.) Trust Company.
The Rev.
Frederick M. Baldwin officiated at St.
Bernard's Episcopal Church in Bernardsville, N.J.
Mrs.
Cox, 42 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Gorham of Pembroke, Bermuda.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.
Mr.
Cox, 50, is the son of Florence Catherine Cox of Watertown, N.Y., and the late George Pearce Cox.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My kitchen cabinets are made of pine that has been stained to give them a cherry look.
I would like to give them a look more like my bleached-oak table and chairs.
Is there any way I can attain this look without having to completely strip the cabinets?
A.
You can approximate the look by using a semi-opaque white or off-white stain over the existing finish, or you can use a thinned-down white flat paint the same way.
The stain, or paint, is brushed on and then partly wiped off with a rag or cheesecloth.
That will still leave a darker cast, the cherry color, showing through the white, and so it still may not be as light as you would like.
But how much of this original color shows through will depend on how thick or opaque the white stain is, and on how much of it you wipe off.
Be sure you clean off all wax and polish before you start, and then experiment first on the back of a door or the inside of a drawer to see if you can get the effect you want.


Miss Boyer Wed To Daniel Losito
Virginia Ann Boyer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Boyer of Harding Township, N.J., was married yesterday at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Morristown, N.J., to Daniel Joseph Losito, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Francis C. Losito of Manhasset, L.I.
The Rev.
David P. Hegg 2d officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Daniel Picciano, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Losito, 22 years old, graduated cum laude from Hamilton College.
Her father, a paleontologist, is the chairman of the biology department at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Rutherford, N.J.
Her mother, Marian Boyer, is a photographer.


A New Wedtech Trial Begins for Ex-Lawmaker and Wife
Former Representative Robert Garcia sold his influence so that he could board "the gravy train" that the Wedtech Corporation was fast becoming as it sought to win big Government contracts, a prosecutor charged last week as the the retrial of Mr.
Garcia and his wife, Jane Lee, opened in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
But lawyers for the Garcias and a third defendant, Ralph Vallone Jr., urged the jury of 11 women and one man to judge the credibility of the Government's witnesses, particularly former Wedtech executive Mario Moreno, before deciding guilt or innocence.


In Chicago, Bears and Defense Come Roaring Back
On most National Football League teams, it is the quarterback or running back, the fleet receiver or even the punishing defensive back who garners glory, who is the focal point of the coaches' and the fans' fancy.
Richard Dent wants you to know that it does not work that way with the Chicago Bears.


PRO-ISRAEL LOBBY READIES FOR FIGHT
As President Bush faces off against Congress in his effort to delay its consideration of $10 billion in loan guarantees for Israel, he confronts one of the most powerful lobbies in the capital.
Israel's supporters in American politics put at least $4 million into last year's election campaign, sent at least 1,000 volunteers to Capitol Hill last week and are trying very hard to sign up sizable, perhaps veto-proof majorities in Congress to back the loan guarantees, which are meant to help Israel provide housing for its large influx of Soviet Jewish emigres.


Argentina Stays Tuned to Peronism And Its Politics of Personality
BASIC tenets of Argentine politics and national culture change very little over the years, and very important among them is that style is everything.
Except for the interruption of the harsh years of the military juntas, the strength of style has been enough to propel the masses.
Gen.
Juan Domingo Peron had it, and his wife, Eva, even more so.
The Perons could whip the public into a frenzy and proclaim that Peronism was for the poor, while letting corruption run wild within the movement's ranks.
And for most Argentines, it became a near-religion to vote Peronist.


Maria Anita Fiore Married
Maria Anita Fiore, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Americo S. Fiore of Southampton, L.I., was married there yesterday to Frank Matthias Kutschera, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joachim Kutschera of Hamburg, Germany.
Archbishop Renato R. Martino, the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations, and Msgr.
Edmond J. Trench officiated at Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Fiore, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She was until recently a research analyst at Salomon Brothers in New York.
Mr.
Kutschera, 33, is a project manager at ECE, a Hamburg real-estate company.


Kuwait, Drilling New Wells, Reports Progress on Repairs
Kuwait started drilling new oil wells today and said firefighters had recapped more than half of the wells set alight or damaged by retreating Iraqi forces at the end of the Persian Gulf war.
"The new wells will replace those which became unproductive after being damaged by the Iraqis," an Oil Ministry official said.
Oil Minister Hamoud Abdulla al-Raqba said last month that Kuwait planned to drill about 100 wells by July 1992.


Political Memo; In Spotlight, Jackson Nears Decision
This is the season of decision for Democratic Presidential hopefuls, and few decisions will be more closely watched, or have more impact on the race for the party's nomination, than whether the Rev.
Jesse Jackson chooses to run for the third time.
It is now widely believed among Democrats, including some of Mr.
Jackson's allies, that he will not seek the nomination next year.
Some who follow Mr.
Jackson closely, but spoke on condition that they not be identified, say they believe he has made up his mind and is wrestling with the pain of making it official -- particularly to his supporters.


Q and A
Information on Albania
Q.
How can I get information about traveling to Albania? -- E. J. Townsend, Vails Gate,N.Y.


Connecticut's Tax Shadow Falling on Tennessee
To the Editor:
It remains to be seen if Connecticut's legislative battle over Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker's income tax proposal, which ultimately was passed, will become the breaking wave in any of the remaining nine states that are devoid of an income tax, as you suggest in "Hartford Offers Sobering Lessons as More States Face Tax Troubles" (front page, Aug. 26)


Bach to Bach to . . .
The harpsichordist Elaine Comparone performs a program of solo works by Johann Sebastian Bach's son Carl Philipp Emanuel to open her series, "A Bridge to Mozart," at Weill Recital Hall on Thursday evening at 8.


'Dogfight' Wears Camouflage
There are some uneasy moments early in "Dogfight," as the camera searches for ugly women.
The director Nancy Savoca rushes into dangerous territory with a story that is a minefield of potential insults: marines, on their last night before heading out to Vietnam, stage a contest to see who can pick up the least appealing date.
The camera assumes the marines' point of view as they wander through San Francisco in 1963, when "hippie" still meant a woman whose hips were too big.
To these men, ugly is a woman with a beehive hairdo, cat's-eye glasses and a very prominent nose.
Ugly is a squat, round-faced American Indian with no makeup and unfashionable long braids.
And in one memorable case, ugly is a woman with too much makeup and too few teeth.
There seems to be something here to offend everyone, from yahoo marines to fat ladies to people with improper dental care.


Mysterious Allure of 'Evita' Persists at Candlewood
IN 1985, when "Evita" was last seen at the Candlewood Playhouse, it was the musical of the moment in suburban theaters.
Because the rights to produce the show had just been released, two years after the Broadway closing, the "Evita" blitz was on, with six professional productions showing up in the county and in Connecticut in as many months.
The glut is over, but the musical's mysterious allure goes on.
Given the demand for tickets, the theater here has extended the show's run an additional week.
"Evita" -- with its glamorous, wicked anti-heroine hurling invective and blowing kisses to the masses that she duped -- is about media manipulation.
Grimly beginning with a funeral and requiem and ending with a death scene, "Evita" is no occasion for uplift.


Coming to the Rescue of Vintage Pianos
A 1907 Steinway A piano dominates the living room of the Gordon house here.
Russell H. Gordon is a piano craftsman and technician and a member of the second generation of his family to ply his trade from a small workshop in the family homestead built by his parents and grandparents 50 years ago.
"This particular Steinway pretty well illustrates the unique aspects of my business," Mr.
Gordon said the other day.
"It was a shell when I bought it. The pads were completely worn out; it needed everything. But over a period of three to four months I completely rebuilt it."


The Bar to Be Seen In (but Heard?)
The Bar at Charlotte, at the Hotel Macklowe, 44th Street east of Times Square, has sink-into soft leather chairs and a classy, low-key ambiance for a theater district bar; on occasion, there's even a pianist.
The Royalton Hotel's bar, 44 Round, on 45th Street just west of Fifth Avenue, is roomy and comfortable.
The bar at Chez Josephine, on 42d Street between Ninth and Tenth Avenues, has a contagious international joie de vivre.
At the View, the revolving bar atop the Marriott Marquis, on Broadway between 45th and 46th Streets, one gets a good glimpse of the city skyline and, at cocktail time, an impressive assortment of free snacks and hors d'oeuvres.


Hazing Report Strips Fraternity of Local Officers
Following a month-long investigation into allegations of hazing and drug and alcohol abuse, the national headquarters of Alpha Tau Omega fraternity ordered its chapter at the University of Alabama to elect new officers and turned over control of the chapter to a local alumni board until further notice.
According to a statement released by the national fraternity last week, an on-site investigation found evidence of hazing and related alcohol policy violations, but not drug abuse.
However, an A.T.O. official said the members of the U.A. chapter voted to voluntarily submit to drug testing to clear their organization's name.
In addition, all new members will be asked to take drug tests as a condition of being asked to join the fraternity.
Alcohol Bought for Pledge
Wynn Smiley, director of communications for the national fraternity, whose headquarter is in Champaign, Ill., said this is the first time that an A.T.O. chapter has enacted drug testing for its members; the action, he said, is "uncommon" among Greek organizations.


RAIN SHORT-CIRCUITS CBS
An afternoon shower spoiled CBS's chance to show its most meaningful game of the season, and instead the network showed Toronto's 6-0 victory over Oakland yesterday.


Corrections
A photograph of a fragment of the Dead Sea scrolls last Sunday, with a brief report in the Headliners column, was upside down.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about places to pick apples in the Hudson Valley misstated the telephone number of the Lawrence Farms Orchards in Newburgh, N.Y.
It is (914) 562-4268.


For a Change, Walking in Los Angeles
MOST visitors to Los Angeles do as Angelenos do: they avoid downtown.
For them, downtown is an ungainly clutter of buildings viewed from a car on the freeway.
But here, confined in this massive noose of highways, is the historic heart and soul of what is now the second largest city in America.
A walking tour of downtown is essential to any traveler willing to explore the Los Angeles beyond palms, beaches, swimming pools and Hollywood lore.


All Those In Favor . . .
To the Editor:
Thanks to Joseph Horowitz for adding his voice in support of English supertitles at the Metropolitan Opera  [ "Wagnerians, Westward Ho-jo-to-ho!" Aug. 18 ] .
Increasingly, I find myself limiting my Met visits to those Italian warhorses and a few other favorites with which I am familiar.
For the more "difficult" works, I either go out of town, to Seattle, San Francisco and Chicago, or to the New York City Opera, all of which have implemented supertitles with great success.


If Banks Don't Lend, Credit Is Not Easy
Blame it on Friday the 13th.
Stock traders got almost everything they claimed to want: a discount rate cut, good inflation numbers and soaring bond prices.
But instead of going on a buying spree, they sold, and the Dow Jones industrial average lost 22 points on Friday.
Two possible explanations come to mind.
One is the old Wall Street cliche: buy on the rumor, sell on the news.
The reduction in the discount rate to 5 percent was widely anticipated, and a number of traders seem to have bought stocks planning to sell them when others rushed to buy on the news.
That rush did not materialize, so they sold anyway.
And within a few minutes, the bond rally also began to fade.


Rickie Lee Jones Has Grown Up Into a Chanteuse
The road through adulthood can be every bit as rocky and difficult as adolescence.
Since her 1989 album, "Flying Cowboys," Rickie Lee Jones has been struggling with the process of maturation.
Though it seemed slight and wistful on the surface, "Flying Cowboys" was a wise, subtle work that looked at distant youth through a telescope of dreams and memories.
Like surrealistic fairy tales, the recurring images of rodeos and painted ponies and imaginary posses described adventures that took place solely in the mind.
For Ms.
Jones, the Wild West was the perfect metaphor for a crazy, misspent youth.
When she sang in the title track, "Oh, when I was young I was a wild, wild one," it was more than a reference to the "wild and only ones" of her song "Living It Up," on her 1981 masterpiece "Pirates"; that single line was the definitive and elegant statement of a grown-up who had achieved a hard-won reconciliation with her past.


Jets Wonder: How Do You Play Those Bills?
No one would be surprised if the Buffalo Bills did the same thing to the Jets that they did to Miami and Pittsburgh, their first two opponents this season.
Or maybe even worse.
The Bills, the defending American Football Conference champions, overcame Miami, 35-31, and mauled the Steelers, 52-34, on the way to becoming the first National Football League team in history to surpass 500 yards of total offense in their first two games.


Guns 'n' Roses Against the (Expletive) World
A family of screeches lives in Axl Rose's throat.
One sounds like a chainsaw hitting a railroad spike; another slides and catches like a car alarm on a deserted street; another yowls like a tomcat locked out of a fish store.
There's a ratchety quaver, a narrow-eyed low growl, a strangled shriek, a decadent cackle.
His voice, the voice of Guns 'n' Roses, is never pretty or endearing; it's a constant irritant.
The band would rather stick in the craw than tickle the ear.
From the beginning, Guns 'n' Roses have been a skillful band with a nasty, often stupid attitude.
Their unvarnished spite has paid off handsomely; although Guns 'n' Roses have only released one full-length album until now, they may well be the world's most popular rock band.
Violent incidents, confessions of drug use and vicious song lyrics have only convinced fans that Guns 'n' Roses are true rock-and-roll rebels.


Joanne Kroeger, Writer, Married
Joanne Trabue Kroeger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur F. Kroeger of Vero Beach, Fla., was married in New York yesterday to Guy Earl McCarter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert McCarter of Rancho Santa Fe., Calif.
The Rev.
Bruce Forbes, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
Bartholomew's Church.
Ms.
Kroeger, 31, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Yale University, she is a magazine-promotion copywriter at Playboy in New York.
She was a member of the Junior Assembly.
Her father is a retired business consultant.


Declaring War on Men
MERCY
By Andrea Dworkin. 344 pp. New York: Four Walls Eight Windows. $22.


The Cultivated Gardener; When Planting Bulbs, Don't Be Stingy
Talking to Nelson Sterner about bulbs is like talking to a good cook about food.
Your mouth starts watering; you want to run into the kitchen and bake a peach pie.
With Mr.
Sterner, the horticultural superintendent at Old Westbury Gardens in Old Westbury, L.I., you want to plant a hundred tulips, a thousand daffodils, a carpet of crocuses and scilla in the lawn, anemone blanda all through the woods and enough hardy, fragrant lilies to -- well, there are never enough lilies.


Danielle Baroni Weds James Roberts
Danielle Nicole Baroni, the daughter of Diane Baroni and Maurice Baroni, both of New York, was married yesterday to James Dylan Roberts, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas N. Roberts of New York.
The Rev.
Francis Creamer, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Church in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Roberts, 27 years old, is an assistant decorating editor at House Beautiful magazine.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology and received a master's degree in decorative arts from the Parson's School of Design.
Her father is a librarian with the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
Her mother is a novelist and a senior editor at Cosmopolitan magazine in New York.


Entrepreneur of Necessity Runs Afoul of Old Lithuania
At the sprawling flea market on the edge of this city, the old system, energetically represented by a police inspector, Oleg Orlov, today confronted the new entrepreneurial spirit, as personified by Narine Paciaviciene.
Inspector Orlov won today's round, but Mrs.
Paciaviciene retained seemingly boundless confidence that her views would soon prevail in this newly independent land.


Penguins and Pontiacs in Middle Age
I REMEMBER 1957.
It was the International Geophysical Year and I was in the Navy at the South Pole, trying to stay warm, running around after scientists and occasionally watching my buddies feed Budweiser to the penguins.
What I don't remember was Pontiac's introduction of the Bonneville, but that's what the company did that year, making 630 of them available as convertibles with 315-horsepower V8's, which was Pontiac's first engine with fuel injection.


Currency; Dollar Falls Against Mark
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
134.08
135.65
136.95
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6900
1.7145
1.5710
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1357
1.1393
1.1647
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7297
1.7185
1.8930
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$344.20
$348.90
$385.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


On Preserving Outdoor Metal Items
OUTDOOR metal items will last longer if they are cleaned and protected from rust and corrosion before winter.
Because some cleaning products are hazardous, follow manufacturers' instructions and safety precautions carefully.
If necessary, wear rubber gloves and wash your hands thoroughly after finishing.
Unless you are using detergent and water, work in a ventilated area to avoid inhaling fumes.


Curry: A Flavor Among Western Tastes
TO make an authentic Indian curry, spices are roasted, ground and mixed together in careful proportions.
An Indian cook would no more use a supermarket curry powder than a French chef would use garlic powder on snails or bottled Roquefort dressing on a salad.
But curry powder is becoming more and more popular as a flavoring in Western dishes.
Not a lot is used, just enough to add an unexpected and interesting dimension.
At the West Street Grill, an American bistro in Litchfield, Conn., one of the most popular dishes is pasta with curry-flavored scallops.
James O'Shea, the owner, says that curry as a flavoring has long been popular in his native Ireland.
"People there have a passion for anything curried -- just as they do across the sea in the British Isles. Perhaps it's a legacy of the empire, but curry is nursery food for them."


Communism's Unfinished Job, and Capitalism's; Gorbachev Packages
To the Editor:
In the euphoria following the failure of the Soviet coup and the disintegration of the Communist Party, we might forget that the lack of food supplies in many cities last winter accelerated the Russian disenchantment with Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
It may be worse next winter, as Communist bureaucrats are replaced by inexperienced free market administrators.
Help is promised hesitatingly by the capitalist countries, but will it solve the immediate problems of production and distribution?


Corrections
Two articles on page 15 of the Travel section today carry incorrect continuation-page numbers.
The article headed "Hidden Corners of Lower Manhattan" continues on page 24; the one headed "New York Hotels, New and Renewed" continues on page 22.


CAMPUS LIFE: Skidmore; Man Who Led Move of Campus Receives Thanks
When increased enrollment in the late 1950's forced Skidmore College to either renovate its turn-of-the-century buildings or move, J. Erik Jonsson, a college trustee and president and chairman of the board of Texas Instruments, stepped in.
Mr.
Jonsson, whose daughter, Margaret Ellen, had resumed studies at the college after she was involved in a car accident on the way home for Christmas break, recalled that he had wanted to give the college something.


Michelle Rose Fischmann Is Married
Michelle Rose Fischmann and James Edward Pass were married in St.
Louis last evening at the Westwood Country Club by Rabbi Joseph Rosenbloom.
Mrs.
Pass, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Kansas and is the buyer for the St.
Louis Art Museum's gift shop.
She is a daughter of the late Milton M. Fischmann and Gail Krummenacher Fischmann, who runs her own art and investment consulting company in St.
Louis.


Communism's Unfinished Job, and Capitalism's
To the Editor:
The world has been celebrating the demise of Communism and the triumph of capitalism as though the Second Coming had occurred.
The assumption seems to be that from now on economies based on private property and markets will make everyone rich and free.


Not Everyone Favors Hastings Project
The recent front-page article  [ "A Setback for Waterfront Project in Hastings," July 28 ]  regarding the faltering Harbor at Hastings development in Hastings-on-Hudson barely glanced at community opposition to the project.
Make no mistake about it: Opposition is deep, widespread and enduring.
Last March, Trustee Ben Indig was elected by two votes out of three.
He ran on a platform of moderate, conservative development on the waterfront.
He received twice the votes cast for the trustee candidates who started the campaign supporting the new waterfront zone that enabled the harbor project to proceed.
They tried to shift their positions as the campaign progressed because they saw the writing on the wall.


Jury Still Out on Bears and Giants
The Giants' offense goes on trial today in Chicago.
In the season opener against the San Francisco 49ers, it did its job.
Against the Los Angeles Rams last Sunday, the blocking often broke down, passes were overthrown and runs were stopped cold.


LET US NOW PRAISE FAMOUS SWAMPS
Although I was born and raised in Southern California, I'm a longtime swamp fan and enjoyed your article "Let Us Now Praise Famous Swamps" (photographs by David Muench, text by Anne Raver, Aug. 18).
The photograph of Chincoteague Bay brought back pleasant memories of a trip this past summer.
My only disappointment was that there was no photo or mention of a swamp on the Virginia-North Carolina border, which I've yet to visit but which I feel has the most picturesque and evocative name of any swamp I've heard of: the Great Dismal Swamp.
It sounds like the title of a Roger Corman movie or a particularly bad period in psychoanalysis.
STEVEN KOENIG
Silver Spring, Md.


Cable TV Hearings Suggested by Panel
"Advanced Cable TV Converters Upset Customers"  [ Aug. 11 ]  incorrectly states that Huntington Town officials scheduled two public hearings because of the numerous complaints that they received from Cablevision subscribers regarding the new cable converter boxes.
In fact the public hearings had been suggested by the Citizens Advisory Committee on Cablevision, which was appointed by the Huntington Town Council in early 1991.
The committee wanted feedback from town residents on Cablevision's performance both past and present.
The committee also learned that the New York State Cable Commission mandates that a public hearing be held in conjunction with the renewal of a cable-television franchise agreement.
Huntington's franchise agreement with Cablevision Systems of Woodbury expires Dec. 31, 1991.
ANTHONY VICARI Citizens Advisory Committee On Cablevision Huntington
The Huntington Town Board has set a nonbinding referendum for Nov. 5 on acquiring competing cable television service.


The Bitter Lessons of Experience
To the Editor:
As the former chief executive of Magnascreen, one of the United States flat-panel display companies party to the anti-dumping petition, and as the inventor and pioneer of the key flat-panel technology in dispute -- active matrix screens -- I wish to comment on "Danger in Manipulating the Trade Laws" (Forum, Aug. 11.)


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
UH-OH  By Robert Fulghum. Villard, $19.


Lift the Trade Embargo on Vietnam
If the 16-year-old ban on trade with Hanoi continues, the United States will lose Vietnam all over again.
But this time, the defeat will be economic and the winner will be our economic rival, Japan.
In the next decade, Vietnam has the potential to outpace other nations in economic growth.
With a population of 70 million, it offers a larger market for American goods than Romania, Czechoslovakia and Hungary combined.
Nearly 60 percent of the population is under the age of 21.


Winging It as a 'Novelist,' The Mad Duck Is Cashing In
FOR three years, wedged between Frank Gifford, who made him look fat, and Howard Cosell, who made him seem dumb, what could the Mad Duck do but plot his revenge?
One can only imagine the fever in his brain: I will write a movie -- no, a book -- that will expose this game, this broadcast, this network -- no, this country -- for what it really is, one long commercial briefly interrupted by live action.
The revenge, "Tuesday Night Football" (Birch Lane Press), may not be the worst novel ever written.
But to judge it as a novel is to miss the point.
Alex Karras, called the Mad Duck as an All-Pro lineman with the Detroit Lions, has written, with a screenwriter, Douglas Graham, a story with paid commercials.
The brands that pop up with televised regularity in the book appear in the screenplay on which it was based, and, if the corporations pay on time, will appear in the movie, scheduled to go into production next year with Karras as star.


Tool Talk


Post-modern Morality
To the Editor:
Francis Kane, in his review of "Can't We Make Moral Judgements?" by Mary Midgley (Aug. 4), makes the familiar conservative argument that the left academy practices both moral relativism and intolerance toward other ideas.
Thus, these unnamed politically correct "post-moderns" reject value judgments but also incoherently privilege their own views.
Yet Mr.
Kane's depiction of the left academy is unfair.
It's true that many undergraduates insist on the impossibility of value judgment while, like anyone else, making such judgment throughout the day.
However, modern philosophical debates are not reducible to the self-contradictions of sophomores.
The question is not whether we can make moral judgments, since obviously human relations would be impossible without them.
The real question concerns their status.
Are moral judgments facts, like observations about the physical world?
Can values be rationally determined?


Playing On
With banners flying outside and television lights blazing inside, Kurt Masur picked up his baton last week to signal a new chapter in his life, and that of the New York Philharmonic.
Mr.
Masur's debut as music director of the orchestra, which also marked the beginning of the its 150th season, was an intensely observed affair in the music world.
Following in the shoes of the likes of Zubin Mehta and Leonard Bernstein, Mr.
Masur was not expected to produce skyrockets and bombast.
He promised instead "a steadier music life" and a "warm, human sound." His opening concert, featuring Bruckner's Seventh Symphony, was greeted enthusiastically by the audience and with approval if not raves by the critics.
The musicians, whose relationship with him is at an important formative stage, seemed impressed.
The principal French hornist praised the new conductor for the sort of "all-important spontaneity that can lead to concert magic."


Miss Lind Wed To M. P. Danziger
Elizabeth Neal Lind, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jon R. Lind of Winnetka, Ill., was married yesterday to Michael Paskus Danziger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Danziger of New York.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, an Episcopal priest and Dean of the Cathedral Church of St.
John the Divine, performed the ceremony at Christ Church in Winnetka.
Mrs.
Danziger, 28 years old, graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
She teaches the third grade at Dedham (Mass.) Country Day School.


Turmoil Continues in Soviet Georgia


Brenda Bowen, Publisher, Weds
Brenda Bowen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George F. Bowen of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Goodman, a son of Marianna Rehling Goodman of New York and Richard C. Goodman of Virginia Beach, Va.
The Rev.
Vernon C. Nichols, a Universalist Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of a friend of the groom in New York.
Ms.
Bowen, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a vice president and the associate publisher of books for young readers at Henry Holt &amp; Company.
She graduated cum laude from Colby College.
Her father, who is retired, was manager of European retail business for Esso Europe in London.


Political Talk
Pre-emptive Cocktails
Albany's legislative leaders and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo engaged in hand-to-hand political combat this spring over the state budget, an exercise that pushed budget adoption two months past its legal deadline and left everyone involved embittered and exhausted.


Lee Campbell and Richard Fredrick Are Married
Lee Andreas Campbell and Richard Walker Fredrick were married yesterday by the Rev.
Galen Goodwin at Chatham United Methodist Church in Chatham, N.J.
Mrs.
Fredrick, 25 years old, graduated from Columbia University and plans to attend its Teachers College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth L. Campbell of New Vernon, N.J.
Her father is a partner in the brokerage firm of Stern Brothers in New York.


Unfair Criticism
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow rose to the defense of Michael Jordan in light of recent unfair, misguided criticism that Jordan has not sufficiently used his fame for the benefit of African-Americans ("Jordan Tries, So Don't Be Stoopid," The Times, Sept. 2).


Zmeskal Driven to Overall Success
The quality Bela Karolyi has always most admired in Kim Zmeskal is her combativeness.
"This one's a tiger," he once said after she had clawed her way to yet another gymnastics title.
But the ferociousness was never more apparent than it was Friday night in Indianapolis, where Zmeskal broke the Soviet Union's virtual stranglehold by winning the women's all-around title at the world championships.


Elliott, Amid Turmoil, Considers His Choices
Bill Elliott, who came as close to dominating stock-car racing as is possible, is -- in a career sense -- about to restart from the middle of the pack.
As Elliott prepares to compete in a 500-mile race today in Dover, Del. (TNN, noon), he is considering a number of choices for next year, including driving for another team.
His family-run team, which includes his brothers Ernie and Dan and is based in Dawsonville, Ga., is losing its main sponsor after this season and has undergone other turmoil in the last year.


New Round of Calm in Crown Heights
Caribbean music blared from record shops, Hasidic Jews strolled to Sabbath services and black residents thronged shops and restaurants as an uneasy calm returned to the racially troubled streets of Crown Heights yesterday after a night of angry protest by black demonstrators and sporadic violence.
A sidewalk shrine of fresh flowers and flickering candles -- marking the spot where a 7-year-old black boy, Gavin Cato, was struck and killed by a Hasidic motorist -- and a continuing police presence were the only signs of the tensions that have bedeviled the Brooklyn neighborhood since the boy's death and its aftermath, four nights of rioting and the killing of a Hasidic man, last month.


Melissa Dewey, Artist, Married
Melissa Thayer Dewey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Chalmers B. Dewey Jr. of Glens Falls, N.Y., was married yesterday to Edward Pagnotta Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pagnotta of Lake George, N.Y.
The Rev.
Stephen Grant performed the ceremony at Caldwell Presbyterian Church in Lake George.
The bride, 31 years old, is a graphic artist specializing in airbrush painting in Lake George.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Cortland.
Her father, who is retired, was a systems engineer with the International Business Machines Corporation in White Plains.


Satellite Group Plans a Pocket-Phone System
Inmarsat, a London-based international satellite consortium, has announced plans to set up a system to relay calls from pocket-sized wireless telephones anywhere on earth.
Industry experts say the Inmarsat plan, announced Friday, makes it likely that when an international conference is held next year, world governments will assign to satellite telephones the radio frequencies they need to operate.


Two Hotels: a Classic and a Comer
LIKE many Los Angeles residents, I've seen more of downtown on "L.A. Law" than in person.
But last month I spent a night in the landmark Biltmore Hotel and in the up-and-coming Checkers Hotel Kempinski across the street.
Without identifying myself as a reporter, I made reservations a couple of weeks in advance and checked in with my husband.
We scrutinized our accommodations and meandered around nearby Chinatown and Little Tokyo, and later ordered a small snack from room service.
The next morning, after checking out, I revealed my identity and was given a tour of the other rooms.
This is what I found.
The Biltmore Hotel
I'd always wanted to stay at the Biltmore.
The majestic old hotel, built in 1923 by Schultze &amp; Weaver, the same architects who designed the Waldorf-Astoria in New York, is a staggeringly ornate Beaux-Arts masterpiece in the heart of downtown.
The public areas with opulent hand-painted vaulted ceilings and vivid tapestry-like carpets promised a peak hotel experience


From a Hillside in Rural New York to an International Religion
Joseph Smith, founder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, came from a family steeped in folk religion and from an area of western New York swept by revival movements preaching that Christianity must be restored to a pristine condition as a necessary prelude to Christ's imminent Second Coming.
In 1830, Smith published the Book of Mormon, which he said he had translated from golden plates long buried in a hillside near Palmyra, N.Y., and temporarily placed in his possession by a heavenly messenger.
The book is a Bible-like account of God's dealings with ancient inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere who were said to stem from the Israelites and other Biblical peoples and to be the ancestors of the American Indians.


U.S. to Rely on European Weather Satellites
Ruling out other options, the United States has decided to rely on aging European weather satellites until a new generation of orbiting weather watchers is sent aloft, officials said Friday.
The decision means that the Government will not try to acquire a new stopgap spacecraft from the Japanese nor to hurry efforts to solve persistent problems with the new weather satellites.
Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher said he had directed the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to use surplus European spacecraft to supplement the lone, high-altitude American weather satellite as it nears the end of its useful life.
The move is intended to assure that the nation has continued weather surveillance while the new satellites, which are behind schedule and over budget, are perfected.


'Insider' -- an International Positive
The stock market scandals in the United States and Japan have given a bad name to insiders, but in most countries being an insider is still the only way to do business.
Companies that fail to establish themselves as "home players" in the foreign markets they want to penetrate never succeed there.
Now, the unprecedented movement toward open markets in Europe -- both East and West -- as well as in Asia and Latin America, is creating a rare opportunity for American companies to become insiders in countries where they once were disadvantaged.
As nations from Mexico to Hungary, Germany to Japan, try to remove trade barriers and create more equal conditions for competition, smart American companies -- big and small, in any number of industries -- can finally challenge long-entrenched domestic companies in their own markets.


Intelligence Material on Sandinistas Is Said to Have Involved Lawmakers
During most of the 1980's, as the Reagan Administration monitored the communications of the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua, it intercepted and recorded numerous private discussions involving Congressional opponents of the Nicaraguan rebels in an unanticipated part of the secret intelligence operation, former Administration and intelligence officials say.
In one case, a former Congressman said this week that he believed the material collected was used in an attempt to intimidate him.
Michael D. Barnes, who was a Democratic Representative of Maryland, said William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, confronted him privately in late 1985 and tried to threaten him so he would mute his opposition to military assistance to the contras.
Mr.
Barnes says Mr.
Casey failed.


Princeton's Public Intellectual
ONE EVENING EARLIER this year, a crowd gathered for the keynote address of the New-York Historical Society's "Why History?" program, a series of lectures and panels on the relevance of the city's past.
The topic was "The Role of Visionary Leadership." The speaker was Cornel West, a 38-year-old professor of religion and director of Afro-American studies at Princeton.
West is a philosopher by training, whose scholarly work in American pragmatism, Marxism, Afro-American thought and prophetic Christianity may seem like dubious credentials for confronting the harsh realities of city life.
But to Norman Pearlstine, executive editor of The Wall Street Journal and chairman of the society, who introduced him, Cornel West is "a social critic for our time."
Cutting a wiry, athletic figure in his dark blue, closely tailored three-piece suit, West leaped on stage, flashing a huge smile.
Speaking with a Baptist preacher's oratorical zeal -- dropping his voice to a whisper, then castigating in rhythmic consonance those who make "paralyzing pessimistic pronouncements" -- West combined the playful cadences and rhymes of urban street talk with a vocabulary from the rarified precincts of Princeton.
But he wasn't just putting on a show.
The evening felt less like a lecture than a town meeting, right down to the sense of moral purpose it seemed to inspire in the audience.


Aftermath of an Emergency
IN SUMMER NIGHTS, ANGELA LEEDS LIKES TO SIT on the stoop of her Jersey City brownstone.
Mercer Street brims with life -- an artist sketching, a plumber walking her dog, a business executive stepping out for an evening cigar, children Rollerblading curbside.
When the ice-cream man rang on the evening of June 30, 1990, Angela Leeds bought Italian ices to share with Curran, her 2-year-old son.
Then the two returned to the stoop to compare red tongues.
The night turned bad around 8:30.
Mrs.
Leeds's husband, Robert, an advertising copywriter, was upstairs in the apartment with their month-old son, Auden.
Mrs.
Leeds cannot forget the scream.
It wasn't normal crying.
By the time she'd rushed up the stairs, the baby's head had swollen badly.
Her husband was so agitated, she recalls, he could barely speak.


Coins
Columbus Takes Chicago
The Spanish Mint has issued a commemorative coin celebrating Columbus's first voyage to the New World.
The 5,000-peseta piece won an award for the best coin design for silver crowns at the American Numismatic Association's convention last month in Chicago.


Remedy for Racism of Past Has New Kind of Shackles
Without the strong arm of affirmative action, Renee Baldwin would not be a police officer in Cleveland, Carlyle Miller of Manhattan would have trained at a segregated medical school instead of an Ivy League college and Jay Walker, a Chicago lawyer, might not have suffered the pangs of uncertainty over why an East Coast law firm had hired him.
They are among the thousands of blacks who are the ambivalent children of affirmative action, the first generation to walk over the threshold of newly opened doors and integrate the nation's offices and classrooms.


CAMPUS LIFE: Maryland; Scientists Find Slaves Kept African Culture
Archeologists and historians have long thought that white society quashed the expression of African religion and culture among black slaves in 18th- and 19th-century America.
But scientists and students from the University of Maryland say their recent surprise discovery of artifacts at a dig site in Annapolis, about 30 miles east of the campus, suggests that those practices did not die; they simply went underground.
"Most of the archeological remains associated with black people in Annapolis have shown them to have been fully assimilated into American culture," said Mark P. Leone, director of a program called Archeology in Annapolis and an anthropology professor at the university.
"It is very, very rare to find such a large collection of material that represents an Africanism."


Starman
THE ZODIAC HAS fallen on hard times.
For the ancients it was a sacred book inscribed in the heavens, a key to predicting the future of king and state.
And when astrologers talked, people listened.
In the 12th century, with the planets headed into conjunction in the windy sign of Libra, astrologers sounded the alarm.
Throughout Europe, panicked citizens began digging caves in preparation for violent windstorms.
Five hundred years later, when an English astronomer named William Whiston predicted the end of the world, thousands of Londoners fled the city.
Today the starry vault has lost its luster.
The era of mass communications has reduced an elegant system of correspondences and symbols to a celestial Lotto game, a galactic mood ring.
The priests who interpreted the mysteries of the heavens have given way to suburban sages who speak -- on obscure television channels, in shaky syntax -- exclusively of sex and money.


It's de Seversky, Not Sikorsky
For some years, until his death in 1974, I was executive-personal secretary to Alexander P. de Seversky and I wish to register a complaint about the inaccurate reference to him in the article on the New York Institute of Technology property  [ "Canon's Proposed Move Upsets Brookville," Aug. 25 ] .
Alexander de Seversky was a Russian Naval air ace who came to America, became a U.S. citizen, served his adopted country well and never returned to his homeland.
He was an airplane designer; founded Seversky Aircraft, later Republic Aviation, and is probably best known for the plane he designed for Jacqueline Cochrane and the P-35, which evolved into the P-47 Thunderbolt, the workhorse "star" of World War II, as well as his own aircraft, which he raced successfully, winning, among many awards, the Harmon trophy twice.
Although he held numerous patents relating to airplanes, Major de Seversky had nothing to do with helicopters, which were the bailiwick of Igor Sikorsky.
HELEN BRENNER Forest Hills


Politicians Take Up The Domestic Issues; Polls Suggest Why
BY tacit bipartisan agreement, this is supposed to be the season for politicians to work on domestic issues, everything from abortion to civil rights to education to transportation.
Despite the increasingly sharp dispute over housing loan guarantees to Israel, which caught Congress by surprise, leaders of both parties have a compelling reason to concentrate, for now, on the problems of Americans and not those of other countries.
In fact, they share the very same reason: President Bush's successes, real and perceived, in foreign policy.
For the Democrats, whether in Congress or launching Presidential campaigns, those successes are a good reason to change the subject.
They retain an image of a caring party, one that can best be relied on to improve schools and health care, and look after ordinary people generally.
It's not as much to go on as they had until recent years, when polls still identified them as the party of prosperity, too, but it's what they have.


Review/Jazz; Nostalgia From Torme
Mel Torme's annual September visits to Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street) are becoming a New York cabaret tradition auguring rejuvenation after the summer doldrums.
Unlike most of his previous shows, which have been thematic tributes to individual entertainers, "The World of Mel Torme With Words and Music," which opened a four-week engagement on Tuesday, takes a more generalized nostalgic overview of jazz and swing history.
The new show also takes note of the publication of Mr.
Torme's newest book, "Traps: The Drum Wonder," a biography of Buddy Rich, published by Oxford University Press, which is also reissuing Mr.
Torme's 1970 memoir about Judy Garland, "The Other Side of the Rainbow." "Memories of You" is offered in tribute to Mr.
Rich and "Get Happy" in memory of Miss Garland.


Tyson Stays Calm at Center of the Storm
The scene is always the same these days.
Let Mike Tyson alight from an airplane or appear in public and the bright lights of the television cameras fire up, flashbulbs pop and he is suddenly at the center of a vortex.
Around him -- moving quick-step stride for stride with him -- are the hired hands of the news media with their microphones and notepads, followed by curious people who, on sighting the fighter, mouth his name with gaping jaws.


Style Makers; Lalit Ghera, Embroidery Manufacturer
When the fashion designer Todd Oldham sketches a skirt that will be made of embroidered tapestry, and when his colleague Maria Snyder paints a flower on a dress and wants its petals beaded, they call Lalit Ghera.
Mr.
Ghera, 26 years old, was born in Bombay, India, where his father's family employs 1,200 people, mostly men, in six factories to do intricate beading and embroidery.


Anne R. Charlton Weds P. H. Stone
Anne Read Charlton, a daughter of Carol Buckley of Sharon, Conn., and Thomas J. Charlton of Saxe, Va., was married yesterday to Perry Hunter Stone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Stone of Summit, N.J.
The Episcopal ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Kenneth Swanson at the First Christ Congregational Church in Sharon.
Mrs.
Stone, 27 years old, is the controller of the finance department at Practice Management Systems in Needham, Mass.
She and her husband graduated from Connecticut College.
Her mother is a social worker; her father an environmental consultant.
She is a niece of former Senator James L. Buckley, Republican of New York, and of William F. Buckley Jr., the columnist and author.


From Resistance of the Few to Revolt of the Masses
AFTER the revolution, comes the hype.
As a country that long ago mastered the art of forging myth out of revolutionary upheaval, the Soviet Union is finding it hard to resist the temptation to embroider last month's bungled coup into a new national legend.
A listener can hear the flourishes of dramaturgy in the sepia-toned television documentaries, in the self-inflating reminiscences of politicians, in the eulogies to the three partisans who died when, as the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, extravagantly put it, "all of Russia rose to the defense" of democracy.


Hurricane Reshapes Cape Cod
In the aftermath of Hurricane Bob on Cape Cod, visitors who head down the Mid-Cape Highway this fall will be struck by a dramatically altered landscape.
An early fall has struck, with shriveled brown leaves beginning to drift from trees and shrubs -- the result of the fierce, salt-drenched winds.
Along Route 6 in Eastham the scale of the forests seems lower.
Many of the fast-growing, shallow-rooted locusts planted in groves 60 or 70 years ago have been uprooted while the frail survivors dangle overhead; groves of oak, maple and pine have been "pruned by nature," as the professionals put it.
Many Cape Codders are left with unaccustomed sunlight and a decade's worth of firewood.


Mary Meyers Is Married
Mary Kathleen Meyers, the daughter of Mrs.
Allen Hovey Good of Summit, N.J., and Robert Whitney Meyers of Baycliff, Tex., was married yesterday to David Richard Miller, the son of Rosalie Zittel of Long Beach, Calif., and the late Gerald Ralph Miller.
The Rev.
John J. Egan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Rose of Lima Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Miller, 26 years old, is an assistant therapist with the Sports, Cardiac and Orthopaedic Treatment Team in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Miller, 32, is an assistant director of engineering at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in New York.


BAKER, IN BALTICS, PROMISES U.S. HELP
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d made a whistle-stop tour of all three newly free Baltic republics today, promising them help in joining international organizations to solidify their break from the Soviet Union and limited American economic aid.
The Baltic leaders made it clear to Mr.
Baker that despite the new independence, 100,000 Soviet soldiers remained on their soil with no firm agreement on withdrawal, American officials said.
Leaders Still Wary
Mr.
Baker told republic leaders that Washington was prepared to give them $14 million this fiscal year in the form of assistance programs divided among the three republics.
The Baltic leaders were clearly hoping to get more, but the chief issue on their agenda was security issues.


Lisa Ochs and Rome Arnold 3d Marry
Lisa Mary Ochs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Karl Ochs of Southampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Rome George Arnold 3d, a son of Mrs.
Arnold 2d of Chicago and Guadalajara, Mexico, and the late Mr.
Arnold.
The Rev.
Charles Hood officiated at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Bridgehampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Arnold, 33 years old, is a vice president for institutional sales in the municipal bond department of Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Her father, who is retired, was an international account executive for International Business Machines in New York.
Her mother, Arlene Ochs, is president of Gale Greetings, a stationery company in Southampton.


On Preserving Outdoor Metal Items
OUTDOOR metal items will last longer if they are cleaned and protected from rust and corrosion before winter.
Because some cleaning products are hazardous, follow manufacturers' instructions and safety precautions carefully.
If necessary, wear rubber gloves and wash your hands thoroughly after finishing.
Unless you are using detergent and water, work in a ventilated area to avoid inhaling fumes.


Growing Up


CONFIDENT STYLE
A dynamic executive, an auto-racing star, an actor, a dancer, a journalist and a provocative film maker -- at a glance, the professionals profiled in this issue have little in common.
But a closer look reveals that all have opinions on fashion that are as enlightened and informed as their feelings about their work.


Museums Study Safe Passage for Art
Sending a valuable work of art into the great unknown of careless airport workers, prying customs officers and unconcerned truckers understandably awakens high anxiety in museum officials and conservators who regularly ship masterpieces around the world.
Such is the concern about the process that more than 300 delegates from as far away as Japan and Australia attended a three-day conference here this week on the packing and transportation of paintings.
The conference was organized by the National Gallery of Art in Washington, the Conservation Analytical Laboratory of the Smithsonian Institution, the Canadian Conservation Institute of Communications Canada, and the Tate Gallery.
It dealt with every aspect of art transport, from humidity-controlled packing cases to computerized analysis of a painting's fragility.


Questions To Thomas Fall Short of the Mark
DAVID E. FELLER, a law professor at the University of California at Berkeley, was one of relatively few Americans to watch all four days of Judge Clarence Thomas's confirmation hearings this week.
But Mr.
Feller, a confessed C-SPAN junkie, has himself a system -- and, more importantly, a video cassette recorder.
He is what could be described as a nonpartisan fast-forwarder.
Each day he taped the proceedings before the Senate Judiciary Committee, which is considering President Bush's nomination of Judge Thomas to the Supreme Court.
Then he played them back, his trigger finger ever on the fast-forward button.
He fast-forwarded through the questions of Republicans Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, and Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, either because he felt they pontificated more than probed or read scripted questions whose answers they cared little about.
But for the same reason, he also skipped Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Howard Metzenbaum of Ohio.
He listened to the panel's chairman, Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Delaware Democrat, and to Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican, who actually seemed curious about Judge Thomas's responses.
He left Alan Simpson, a Wyoming Republican, on "Play," as well -- not because his questions were particularly penetrating -- in fact, he asked few -- but his perorations amusing.


Sanderson Interrupts Red Sox Charge
Just when the Boston Red Sox had taken on the hardened look of a serious contender, Bill Buckner's ghost took command of their defense.
One play does not make a season.
On the other hand, it might characterize a franchise.
In the second inning at Yankee Stadium yesterday, the Red Sox committed three errors on what began as a simple pickoff attempt, directing them to a 3-1 loss to the Yankees, who ended their own nine-game losing streak behind the eight-inning, three-hit shutout pitching of 15-game winner Scott Sanderson.


S. J. Kapp Weds Constance White
Constance Crosby White, the daughter of Mrs.
Sumner W. White 3d of Summit, N.J., and the late Mr.
White, was married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of St.
Simon-by-the-Sea in Mantoloking, N.J., to Stuart Jackson Kapp, the son of Mrs.
Thomas Liebermann of Brookside, N.J., and the late Edward S. Kapp.
The Rev.
William Strain officiated.
Mrs.
Kapp, 25 years old, is an archivist at TV Channel One in New York, a commercial broadcaster of news programs for schools.
She graduated from Pine Manor College.
Her father was a vice president of the First Boston Corporation in New York.
Her grandfather the late H. H. S. Phillips Jr. was the founding publisher of Sports Illustrated.


Alluring


Brian Jones Weds Crystal McKenzie
Crystal G. McKenzie, a daughter of the Rev.
Miles R. McKenzie of the Bronx and the late Mrs.
McKenzie, was married yesterday to Brian Gregory Jones, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse Jones of Washington.
The Rev.
Charles Ayers, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
Mrs.
Jones is the president of Crystal McKenzie Inc., a graphics design company in Manhattan.
She graduated from Cooper Union and attended New York University and the Universita Cattolica di Milano in Rome.
Her father, who is retired, was a minister at Holy Trinity Presbyterian Church in the Bronx.


All About/Gasoline Cleanups; When Water Isn't the Only Thing Coming Out of the Well
The Amoco gasoline station here has an environmental problem not unlike those of other stations around the country.
Over the years, thousands of gallons of gasoline have seeped undetected from the station's underground storage tanks into the sandy soil here, in the central part of the state.
Cleaning up the soil and ground water at stations like Amoco's has become big business for a handful of publicly traded engineering and construction companies that specialize in ground water cleanup.
At Clarksburg, the cleanup operation belongs to Handex Environmental Recovery Inc. of Morganville, N.J.
With stricter new regulations in place, Handex's sales swelled to almost $50 million last year from $19.5 million in 1988, while net income more than doubled to $5.8 million.
The company's shares, first sold to the public in 1989, trade over the counter at about $31 a share.


Corrections
Because of a fashion company's financial reorganization, captions today on pages 65 and 67 of Men's Fashions of The Times, part 2 of The Times Magazine, carry outdated information on designs by Ronaldus Shamask.
They are available only through Barneys New York, by special order.


High Up on the Magnificent Mile
CHICAGO is a convention town and thus, unavoidably, a town with more than its share of 2,000-for-a-banquet-no-problem hotels that can overwhelm the casual tourist.
It is known for its mix of gracious dowager hotels that evoke the industrial age and for modern glass towers with familiar chain names and spectacular views of Lake Michigan.
As a hotel city, it is constantly expanding, with more than half a dozen new major hotels in the last few years, each crowding as close as it can to the lakeshore.
As cautious and tradition-bound as the heartland itself, accommodations in Chicago tend toward the safe and predictable.
But a sum of money that will get you a room with no view in New York might land you a suite in Chicago with the lake at your feet.


2 Men and a Baby?


POSTINGS: Changing Times; Park Slope Auction
When it was begun in 1988, the 38-unit condominium at 100 Sterling Place in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn was an indication of how far the New York City housing boom had come.
Not only was it the first new construction in the neighborhood in years, but in addition, the developers -- a team headed by David H. Ward of Manhattan -- rejected the option of building a 10-story tower, which would have been allowed on their parcel under zoning rules.
Instead, they built a four-story structure designed to blend in with the 19th-century brownstones of the neighborhood.
Their asking prices were lofty: $170,000 to $350,000 for one- to three-bedroom apartments.


Fresh Faces With Eye Toward Environment
"What kind of store is this?" is probably the most-asked question of the staff at the one-month-old Origins shop at 8 Brattle Street in Cambridge, Mass.
It is a question that can't be answered in a word or a phrase.
The Origins shop offers be-kind-to-nature cosmetics, skin-treatment products, environmental fragrances, sensory-therapy products, books, candles, stationery and gift items.
It promises that no ingredients are derived from or tested on animals, that recycled paper is used whenever possible, and that containers can be returned for recycling.


A Railroad Terminal, a Golf Course and 'Hallowed Ground'
ONE spring morning in 1958, Morris Pesin, a Jersey City lawyer, took his children to the Statue of Liberty.
After spending more than three hours getting there, Mr.
Pesin said, he looked west from Liberty Island, saw his hometown just a half-mile away and thought, "It's so close. There's got to be a better way."
A few days later, Mr.
Pesin and a local reporter borrowed a canoe, went down to the waterfront, put the canoe in the water and paddled to the Statue of Liberty.
That trip instilled in Mr.
Pesin the dream of a waterfront park that would serve as "America's gateway" to the Statue of Liberty.
Eighteen years later, Liberty State Park was dedicated.


Corrections
An article in the special Education Life section on Aug. 4 about older undergraduates misidentified Temple University's adviser for student publications.
She has pointed out in a recent letter that her name is Kate Bozich.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Massey Clings to a Lead at the du Maurier


Curry: A Flavor Among Western Tastes
TO make an authentic Indian curry, spices are roasted, ground and mixed together in careful proportions.
An Indian cook would no more use a supermarket curry powder than a French chef would use garlic powder on snails or bottled Roquefort dressing on a salad.
But curry powder is becoming more and more popular as a flavoring in Western dishes.
Not a lot is used, just enough to add an unexpected and interesting dimension.
At the West Street Grill, an American bistro in Litchfield, Conn., one of the most popular dishes is pasta with curry-flavored scallops.
James O'Shea, the owner, says that curry as a flavoring has long been popular in his native Ireland.
"People there have a passion for anything curried -- just as they do across the sea in the British Isles. Perhaps it's a legacy of the empire, but curry is nursery food for them."


New York on $450 a Night (Sodas and Fruit Free)
At the most expensive hotel in New York City, suitcases are taken to the room by an "associate." Room service is delivered and lint is removed by a personal "maitre d'etage" wearing white tie and tails.
Soft drinks, fresh fruit and local phone calls are free.
These are the courtesies that managers cite to explain why the St.
Regis Hotel reopened in the middle of a recession and expects guests to pay from $350 to $450 a night when other luxury hotels nearby offer rooms for nearly $100 less.


Goaltending It Isn't
To the Sports Editor:
Even without consulting the N.B.A.'s rules, I beg to differ with Sam Goldaper that the United States Postal Service's Basketball Centennial stamp ("What's Wrong With This Picture," The Times, Aug. 30) depicts a goaltending violation.
The player about to dunk the ball still has the ball in his hand; he has not yet shot.
The defender has a chance to swat the ball from the shooter's hand before a shot has been attempted.
If he succeeds in so doing, it is not goaltending, at least in my book.
MARTIN DOMB New York


Miss Andrews, A Lawyer, Wed
Margaret Dorey Andrews was married yesterday to Kirk Addison Davenport 2d at the Westhampton (L.I.) Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
Charles Carey officiated.
Mrs.
Davenport, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Dorey Andrews of Concord, Mass.
A graduate of Amherst College and the University of Chicago Law School, she is an associate at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
Her father is a professor at the Harvard Law School.
Her mother, Shirley Andrews, teaches flute in Concord.


For the Soviets, Not Mere Charity
One way or another, the West will meet Mikhail Gorbachev's desperate plea for food to get his country through the winter.
But even then, Soviet citizens will be left with a crumbling economy; they need something beyond charity.
The Soviets are poised, finally, to make the leap to a market system.
The West is the only place they can turn for help; and it would be monumentally in the self-interest of the Western powers to give it.


A Soviet Guess at the New Pecking Order


Tricia Daly Married to Edwin Frank
Patricia Mary Daly, the daughter of Patricia S. Daly of West Hartford, Conn., and Edward J. Daly Jr. of Hartford, was married yesterday to Michael Edwin Frank, a son of Paula L. Lewis of Portland, Ore., and the late Richard S. Frank.
The Rev.
Thomas W. Cummins, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Emmanuel Church of Boston.
Mrs.
Frank, who is 32 years old and known as Tricia, is a mall manager and marketing director at Northland Investment Corporation, a real-estate management and investment company in Newton, Mass.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is a partner in the Hartford law firm of Silvester, Daly &amp; Delaney.
Her mother owns the Runner Up, a sporting-goods store in West Hartford.
The bride's grandfather Edward James Daly was the chief justice of the Supreme Court in Connecticut and one of three United States presiding judges at the Nuremberg Trials.


Foreign Affairs; Bush vs. the Jews
President Bush stepped in front of the cameras near high noon on Thursday and declared political war on Israel.
He did it partly because House Speaker Tom Foley and the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, winked at the idea.
They told Mr.
Bush they could not otherwise hold back their troops from opposing him and voting now for loan guarantees to resettle Soviet Jews in Israel.
And he did it partly to pre-empt compromise by Secretary of State Baker in Israel this week.
He wants the confrontation and worries that Mr.
Baker would otherwise pursue a separate Nobel Prize agenda.


New York City Plans a TV Network to Link Jails and Courts
New York City officials say they have devised a new way of getting prisoners to court -- by closed-circuit television.
In an experiment that will start next year, the city will install a television network linking the city's jail complex on Rikers Island in the East River with courthouses in Manhattan, Brooklyn, the Bronx and Queens.


Cara Alongi Weds Brian McDonough
Carolyn Marie Alongi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlo J. Alongi of Monroe Township, N.J., was married yesterday to Brian Patrick McDonough, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. McDonough of Lafayette Hills, Pa.
The Rev.
Stanley Jarosz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in Helmetta, N.J.
Mrs.
McDonough, who is 26 years old and known as Cara, was until recently the development coordinator at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in Manhattan.
She is also a professional singer.
She graduated cum laude from Vassar College.


Communism's Unfinished Job, and Capitalism's; Latvian Tolerance
To the Editor
A Sept. 7 article on citizenship for nonethnic Latvians in Latvia (chiefly Russians and other Slavs) brings up important historical questions concerning the traditional ethnic diversity of the eastern Baltic.


The Simple Secret of Teaching Dance
What makes a good dance teacher?
Good teaching must be founded, of course, on a solid technical base.
But that is not enough, as the superb young performers of the Katherine Dunham Student Workshop in East St.
Louis, Ill., suggested in an informal program early last month.
Here were children who traveled through space with an appetite for movement that in no way blurred the lines between the ballet, modern dance, tap and traditional-style African and Caribbean dance they were performing.
Their teachers, Lee Nolting and Darryl Braddix, had created dances of radiant simplicity.
But most of all there was none of the stilted, carefully correct negotiation of space that one sometimes sees in young and not-so-young dancers in an era when supreme value is placed on virtuosic technique.


The Free Books Store: Closing Will Be a Loss
I regret the impending closing of the Free Books Store, the source of many of the children's books I donate to the Fresh Air Fund  [ "Bookshop Founded to Help the Homeless Gets Its Eviction Notice," Sept. 1 ] .
Whenever I visit White Plains, I lug home a bag of carefully selected children's classics.
I repair them -- if necessary -- and sort them to distribute at the fund's four camps in Fishkill. (I am not uncomfortable donating used books; they are in the same condition as books circulating in public libraries.)


Karen E. Kaynor, Model, Married
Karen Elizabeth Kaynor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kirk Gilbert Kaynor of Seattle, was married last evening to Marc Henri Robert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yves Henri Robert of Easthampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Samuel B. Materrazzo, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the St.
Vincent Ferrer Church in New York.
Mrs.
Robert, 28 years old, is a fashion model with Bethann Model Management in New York and Paris.
She graduated from Columbia University.
Her father is a captain with United Airlines, based in Seattle.


Joan F. Curran To Marry in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Curran Jr. of State College, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Joan Frances Curran to Scott Sargent Frautschi, a son of Judith Guild Stewart of Chapel Hill, N.C., and Richard Lane Frautschi of Fort Matilda, Pa.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Curran, 29 years old, is an administrative officer in Boston for the investment banking firm of Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University, as did her fiance.
Her father retired from New York Telephone as vice president for government relations.


State's Tax Chief Welcomes a New Era
ON Feb. 1 Allan A. Crystal was appointed Commissioner of the State Department of Revenue Services.
With the implementation of a state income tax on Sept. 1, and withholding scheduled to start on Oct. 1, no other state agency has seen so much change in the way it does business this year.
The 4.5 percent income tax, the first to become effective in state history, has several tax credits and exemptions designed to make it progressive.
But critics contend that these provisions will make the tax unwieldy and confusing.
Mr.
Crystal will also oversee a lowering of the sales tax, to 6 percent from 8, a broadening of the items and services subject to the sales tax and numerous other changes in the tax structure.


Catherine Ufford Married in Jersey
Catherine Latourette Ufford and Richard Lerold Chase were married yesterday in a Quaker ceremony at the Stony Brook Friends Meeting House in Princeton, N.J.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Ufford Jr. of Princeton and the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
Lerold W. Chase of Buffalo.
A graduate of Haverford College, Mrs.
Chase, 25 years old, is the program director of the American Friends Service Committee's office in Tucson, Ariz.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
She is a granddaughter of Dr.
John Archibald Wheeler of Hightstown, N.J., a recipient of the National Medal of Science and a professor emeritus of physics at Princeton University.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 15


Sharon Feldman Is Married on L.I.
At Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., Sharon Elise Feldman was married last evening to Neil Winter Danzger.
Rabbi David Rosenzweig officiated.
Mrs.
Danzger, 25 years old, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George Feldman of Lawrence.
A cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, she is a senior financial analyst with the Prudential in Roseland, N.J.
Her father is a retired endodontist.
Her mother, Lenore Feldman, is a former president of the National Council of Jewish Women.


Professionals Offer Help To High School Writers
DANIEL E. DOYLE recalls that when he was a college basketball coach, the players he was trying to recruit were well liked and respected in their high schools.
But since he wrote a novel two years ago, Mr.
Doyle said, he has visited high schools and has come to realize that no matter how talented, young writers are generally unknown in their schools.
"I thought that was absurd," said Mr.
Doyle, a former varsity basketball coach at Trinity College in Hartford and the author of the novel "Are You Watching, Adolph Rupp?" (Stadia Publishers, 1989).
"Promising athletes always have coaches and others helping them, but apart from their teachers, I realized that young writers in school were not getting any reinforcement."


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
Elizabeth Swados's description of her brother's tragic struggle with schizophrenia was riveting ("The Story of a Street Person," Aug. 18).
This is the worst-case scenario that haunts every family facing this illness.
The taboo that silenced the Swadoses 30 years ago continues to isolate families.
In the late 1970's, small groups of overwhelmed family members began to meet to educate themselves about schizophrenia and to share any solutions they could.
Since then, this grass-roots movement has grown to include over 1,000 state and local chapters united under the umbrella of the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill, based in Arlington, Va.
JEAN HEBB
New York, N.Y.


Morocco Expels Dissident Jailed for 17 Years
Morocco freed its most prominent political prisoner on Friday, expelling him to France 17 years after he was jailed for plotting against the state.
The exile, Abraham Serfaty, 65 years old, was one of the longest-held political prisoners in Africa and a founding member of the Moroccan Communist Party.
He had been the focus of a human-rights campaign seeking a pardon from King Hassan II.


Managing; Rewarding Employees for 'Wellness'
At Mesa Limited Partnership, T. Boone Pickens' Dallas oil company, employees who take no sick days, file no medical claims, clock in at a decent weight, blood pressure and cholesterol level and exercise at least 13 times a month can make up to $354 extra a year.
"Boone understands money as a motivator, and he'd rather motivate people to be healthy than sick," said John A. Durkin, Mesa's fitness manager.
Atco Properties and Management Inc. pays $500 to employees who climb 16 flights to their Manhattan real estate offices every day for a year. (Atco takes their word for it.) Overweight workers get $10 for every pound they lose ($100 a pound for senior staff), and smokers who quit get $500.
"I may up the ante to a Caribbean vacation to get our last two smokers to stop," said H. Dale Hemmerdinger, Atco's president.


Mirella Pollifrone Is Wed
Mirella M. Pollifrone, the associate publisher of The Connecticut Law Tribune in Fairfield, Conn., and Frank M. Harrison, a certified public accountant in Stamford, Conn., were married yesterday at St.
John's Roman Catholic Church in Stamford by the Rev.
Michael R. Moynihan.
Mrs.
Harrison, 28 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Giuseppe Pollifrone of Stamford.
Mr.
Harrison, 29, is a son of Francis E. Harrison of Stamford and the late Irene M. Harrison.


MR. SOFTWARE
The personal computer industry will innovate faster and produce more wealth for society if Microsoft chairman Bill Gates sets the pace and his competitors respond to his moves rather than try to deprive Microsoft of its leading position through lawsuits or other means.
Apple Computers, for example, sued Microsoft because Microsoft's Windows provides cheap software emulations of Apple's high-priced Macintosh line.
Apple would like to continue making money by selling old technology at high prices in small volumes.
I.B.M. has traditionally followed the same strategy.


World Markets; Is the Life Back in Tokyo's Market?
After a stock market decline of more than 45 percent over a year and three-quarters and in the face of an economic slowdown that is now worrying business leaders, some analysts are seeing some real opportunity -- and some life -- in the Tokyo stock market.
Although many people have had their investments in Japanese stocks run aground, there are arguments for re-entering these treacherous waters.


Can American Schools Be Educated?
SMART SCHOOLS, SMART KIDS
Why Do Some Schools Work?
By Edward B. Fiske with Sally Reed and R. Craig Sautter. 303 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


Camera
On the day before Charlie Chaplin left the United States for what turned out to be exile in Europe, he telephoned the photographer Richard Avedon.
Not believing it was Chaplin, Mr.
Avedon told the caller, "This is President Roosevelt," and hung up.
For months, Mr.
Avedon had been writing to the actor asking for a sitting, drawing no response.
But in his next call on that day in 1952, Mr.
Chaplin was convincing, and a meeting was set.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the history of the Soviet Union misidentified the English King who was Czar Nicholas II's look-alike cousin.
He was George V, not Edward VII.
A table with the article, illustrating the linguistic diversity of the Soviet Union as reflected in everyday words, reversed two Moldavian words.
"Tata" means father, and "apa" means water.


Soviet Star Awaits a Peek at Rangers
While the Rangers opened their preseason schedule tonight against the Islanders, the young Soviet star Aleksei Kovalev was catching a flight from Moscow to New York for a first-hand peek at his future.
Kovalev, the Rangers' first-round draft pick this year, would join the team Sunday or Monday for a two-week training-camp visit that might be considered the start of an extended engagement period.
The 18-year-old left wing, a premier prospect, is considered a big part of the Rangers' farflung, international rebuilding process.


The Adventures of The Toxic Avengers Have Barely Begun
WHEN the Department of Energy's chief environmental official unveiled the blueprint earlier this month for the next five years of cleaning up the nuclear bomb production complex, he began by introducing six students from a high school near the department's Washington headquarters.
"This is a 30-year plan," said the official, Leo P. Duffy Jr.
"None of us who are working on the plan at the present time are going to be working on the solution."


Jeffrey A. Teper Married To Alexandra L. Rynczak
Alexandra Lavinia Rynczak, a daughter of Philippa Rynczak of New York and the late Alexander Rynczak, and Jeffrey Allen Teper, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Teper of Potomac, Md., were married last evening at the Woodbury Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Irwin Lowenheim and Father Robert Allmen, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Teper, 28 years old, graduated magna cum laude from New York University.
She has an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College and is an associate at the MAC Group, a New York management consulting company.
Mr.
Teper, 27, graduated summa cum laude from New York University and has an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
He is a senior vice president at Colonial Consulting Corporation, a New York investment company.


Some Hotels Block Access To Phone Lines
A note of caution has been sounded for business travelers and tourists abroad who have been shaving the cost of calls back to the United States by using direct dial services like A.T.&amp;T.'s USADirect or Sprint's Express.
According to officials at A.T.&amp;T., some hotels are deliberately blocking access to these numbers, which enable guests to avoid high hotel telephone service charges by dialing a local access number that connects them directly to a United States-based operator.
The caller then bills the call collect, or charges it to a credit card number.
For many hotels overseas, the proliferation of these services has not been good news.
Hotels regularly tack service charges -- sometimes as high as 400 percent -- onto the cost of international calls dialed directly through the hotel's own telephone system.
That means a call for which the ordinary trunk charges are $1 a minute, for example, will be billed at $5 a minute by the hotel.
But for guests who use USADirect, for example, the only fee that is billed to the caller by the hotel is the cost of the single local telephone call to the local access number, regardless of how long the phone conversation lasts.


Finally, the Democratic Can Tango
FORMER Senator Paul Tsongas sometimes seems to have been the lone Democratic Presidential candidate forever, but within a month or so it won't be possible to walk through the party's political ring without stepping on somebody's hat.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia announced last week that he, too, had heard the call, and a half-dozen others could be seen pacing in the wings.
Mr.
Wilder, the first black elected governor, was uncharacteristically self-effacing in casting himself as "the longest of longshots" who "may not get but a few votes." Then, to supporters' cheers, he struck the classic pose of the outsider compelled by conscience to offer himself for the Presidency.


INSIDE
United Europe: How Big?
The European Community is divided over whether the new democracies of Eastern Europe may join.
Page 12.
Portrait of Judge Thomas
Clarence Thomas's image is in some ways more blurred after his Senate testimony.
News analysis, page 28.
Jackson Nears Decision
Jesse Jackson meets with supporters today to discuss a bid for the Presidency.
Political Memo, page 18.


David Ingle Wed To Eliza Wilson
Eliza Parmenter Wilson, the daughter of Mrs.
Mortimer Hall of Millbrook, N.Y., and William Parmenter Wilson of New York, was married yesterday to David Jervey Ingle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Addison Ingle 3d of Charleston, S.C.
The Rev.
Kenneth Swanson performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church in Millbrook.
Mrs.
Ingle, 23 years old, graduated from Middlebury College and studied with the Merce Cunningham and Eric Hawkins dance companies.
She is to join the Robert Ivey Company in Charleston next month.
Her father is a motion picture producer and a partner in the Screen Connection Company, a film distributor in New York.
Her mother, Penelope Hall, is a fiction writer.
Her grandmother Elizabeth Boatwright Coker writes historical novels.
Her grandfather the late James Lide Coker 3d was a president of Sonoco Products, a packaging company in Hartsville, S.C.


N.F.L. to Offer Labor Plan
National Football League owners have a proposed collective bargaining agreement ready for presentation to players, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue said Friday.
During a meeting of the league's owners here, Tagliabue said that Harold Henderson, executive vice president of the N.F.L. executive committee, would soon present a "quite comprehensive" proposal to the players' lawyers.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Aug. 31 MANHATTAN  Flatiron District 760,000
17 East 16th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 3,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; eat-in kitchen, high-ceilings, art studio and darkroom, 4 exposures; maintenance $1,025, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia/Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village 345,000
155 Perry Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,268 sq.-ft. condo in a renovated loft building; elevator, fireplace, 12-ft. ceilings; common charge $288, taxes $7,068 (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)  Greenwich Village 515,000
1 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, Washington Square Park view; maintenance $1,208, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Anne Weintraub)  Upper East Side 525,000
144 East 84th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1,600-sq.-ft. terrace, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $1,440, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties-Halstead Property Co.)  Upper West Side 535,000
336 Central Park West  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, maid's room, dining room, fireplace, Central Park view; maintenance $1,539, 33% tax deductible (Broker: Eden Realty)  BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area 210,000
1044 211th Street  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Realty World/Gold Circle Realty) Williamsbridge 130,000
3306 Cruger Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining area, storage room, attached, 1-car garage, 17-by 54-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope 550,000
35 Prospect Park West  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, fireplace, Prospect Park and harbor views; maintenance $1,794, 34% tax-deductible (Broker: Joseph Berman Realty)  Prospect Heights 145,000
60 Plaza Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; entry foyer, raised dining area, terrace; maintenance $654, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  Sheepshead Bay 275,000
2318 East 7th Street  3-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit, 2 bedrooms in another and one in the third; 1 bath, dining room in each; finished basement, 2-car garage. 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  QUEENS  Forest Hills Gardens 570,000
206 Greenway North  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; entry foyer, dining room, fireplace, hospitality suite in finished basement, 33-by 158-ft. lot; taxes $3,600 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  Jackson Heights 227,000
32-51 72d Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, in each; front porch, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,740 (Broker: Century 21/Metalios Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 163,000
331 Colon Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining room, family room, terrace, 24- by 96-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Sunset Hill 160,000
698 Bement Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, brick Cape Cod; dining room, fireplace, 1-car garage, 37- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HARVEST OF HONEY
On Saturday Timothy Grilley, beekeeper at the Thames Science Center in New London, will put on a beekeeper's suit and harvest the honey from 60,000 bees in the center's hives.


SELF-ASSURED
Men are dressing with increased confidence -- as the six who appear on these pages demonstrate. when asked to select from a variety of options what they would wear in these photographs, each moved unwaveringly to the look that best suited him.
In their personal styles, as in their professional lives, these men clearly have minds of their own.
Reginald F. Lewis
Like TLC Beatrice International, the food business Reginald F. Lewis acquired in 1987 and then transformed, this chief executive's wardrobe bears his own distinctive stamp.
A man who remains stubbornly partial to understated blue suits at a time when some of his board-room peers have indulged more flamboyant whims, Lewis, 48 years old, has his clothing tailored to his taste.
"What I shoot for," he says, "is relaxed elegance." Lightweight fabrics suit his peripatetic life -- he shuttles between homes in New York, Paris and Long Island -- but more to the point, he adds, "I like the way they feel."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Chatham 385,000 94 Lisa Street 3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 18-year-old ranch; master-bedroom suite, deck, screened porch; taxes $2,001.


Beer-Hall Hopping in Munich
Traditionally, the first kegs are tapped mid-morning to accompany a second breakfast of Weisswurst (minced veal sausage), sweet mustard and pretzels.
Officially considered "liquid bread," the drink is allowed to be sipped in the office.
Some Bavarians leave their personal steins on shelves in the beer halls, and reserve regular tables (with little bells for summoning the waitress), an institution called Stammtisch, literally, "the table you're used to."


Candlewood Is Offering A Revival Of 'Evita'
IN 1985, when "Evita" was last seen at the Candlewood Playhouse, it was the musical of the moment in suburban theaters.
Since the rights to produce the show were just then released, two years after the Broadway closing, the "Evita" blitz was on, with six professional productions showing up locally in as many months.
The glut is over, but the musical's mysterious allure goes on.
Given the demand for tickets, the theater in New Fairfield has extended the show's run for an additional week.
"Evita" -- with its glamorous, wicked anti-heroine hurling invective and blowing kisses to the masses that she duped -- is about media manipulation.
Grimly beginning with a funeral and requiem, and ending with a death scene, "Evita" is no occasion for uplift.


Making a Difference; Big Blue's 'Paradigm Shift'
Years from now, when computer industry followers look back at last week's big product announcement by the International Business Machines Corporation, "they'll recognize a revolution," said Carl J. Conti, I.B.M.'s senior vice president and general manager of enterprise systems.
Indeed, "I would characterize this announcement -- along with other things we've done -- as representative of a paradigm shift," said Mr.
Conti, who is 53 and has been with I.B.M. long enough -- since 1959 -- to know such a shift when he sees one.
As head of enterprise systems since January 1988, he has been in charge of developing large computers and their software.


With Paper as a Starting Point
NO one who has seen paper pulp soaking in buckets can fail to appreciate its allure as a medium.
Not only does it take dyes beautifully but also promises the kind of tactile fun normally reserved for preschoolers.
Small wonder that during the 1970's, when art began cuddling up to crafts (and vice versa), the making of paper objects took off, becoming a veritable epidemic.
It did not hurt, either, that Kenneth Noland, Frank Stella and Ellsworth Kelly were leading the way.
Tyler Graphics reports that James Rosenquist achieved his characteristic airbrush effect in paper with a pattern pistol, the device used for spraying stucco on walls.


Allen Hall Wed To Dana C. Berg
Dana Christina Berg, a daughter of Mrs.
Coleman Jeffrey Charnok 3d of Westport, Conn., and Fredric Lewis Berg of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday to Howard Allen Hall Jr., a son of Mrs.
Robert A. Burch of Wilton, Conn., and Dr.
Hall of Providence, R.I.
The Rev.
John H. Branson performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ and Holy Trinity Church in Westport, assisted by the Rev.
Marshall T. Ware, the bridegroom's godfather.
Mrs.
Hall, 28 years old, is the Middle West marketing representative at Prudential Securities Investment Management in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father founded and heads the Washington Mint, a direct marketer of rare coins in Weston.
Her mother, Diana C. Charnok, is the vice president of marketing for Scott Pools in Woodbury, Conn.
The bridegroom, who is 25 and is known as Allen, is a currency trader at the Trout Trading Company in Chicago.
He graduated from the College of William and Mary.
His mother, Isabel W. Burch, is the director of finance at the Nature Center for Environmental Activities in Westport.
His father is a gynecologist in Providence.


Region; New York's Democratic Experiment
COME January, the roll call at the New York City Council is likely to sound more than ever like one in a World War II movie.
There will probably be a McCabe and a Robinson, a Weiss and a Sabini, a Linares and other newcomers representing the largest mix of races, creeds and stated sexual preferences ever to populate what was formerly an insular, overwhelmingly white, middle-class body.
And for many, that's cause for cheer.


'Outsider Art' Goes Beyond the Fringe
There is a dim twilight zone where high art, popular culture and the collective unconscious overlap with particular ordinariness.
At the moment a sizable portion of this art netherworld is in full view at Metro Pictures in SoHo.
The gallery's touchingly modest yet many-splendored display, "Thrift Store Paintings," offers 177 orphaned works created by anonymous hobbyists and amateurs, all retrieved from thrift stores, swap meets and Salvation Army depots over the past decade.
The show offers the latest evidence of the ever-expanding field of visual culture that surrounds, influences and continually infiltrates the bastion of high art.
The paintings are the project, if not the passion, of Jim Shaw, a 39-year-old artist from Los Angeles whose own small, wildly eclectic narrative paintings stood out in last spring's Whitney Biennial.
The dizzying array at Metro includes portraits, interiors, nudes, abstractions and animal pictures.
The show begins with 10 portrayals of American First Ladies and ends with a pre-expansion rendering of the Guggenheim Museum.
The only clues to any of the paintings' creators are the names and dates that sometimes appear in the lower-right corners: R. Gilbert, Brenda, Roehl, Elmer D. Sandry, Clifford '59, Milton '56, Ruth E., Welsh 1963.


RECORD BRIEFS
Overweight Pooch: 'Female Preacher'
A&amp;M 7502 15349 2; CD and cassette.


Poland's Parliament Rejects Economic Power for Walesa
Poland's predominantly Communist Parliament today rejected the Government's request for extraordinary powers for issuing economic decrees.
Parliament voted 196 to 99 with 32 abstentions in favor of the bill, just shy of the two-thirds majority of 215 votes needed to pass the measure.


P.T.A. at Alternative School Sues Local Board in Bronx
The Parent-Teacher Association of the Bronx New School, an alternative elementary school that parents and teachers established three years ago, has sued the district school board for what the P.T.A. called "arbitrarily and capriciously" making changes in curriculum and staffing without consulting the P.T.A.
Justice Bertram Katz of State Supreme Court in the Bronx on Wednesday ordered the superintendent of District 10, John Reehill, and the school board president, Sandra Ramos-Alamo, to justify in court why they made or allowed changes in the Bronx New School that the P.T.A. said fundamentally altered the nature of the school.


For Zoo Admission, No 'Free Lunch'
In regard to the Aug. 18 article about the Van Saun Zoo fees ("Dinosaurs Are Fun, but the Zoo Fee Is Not"): As Bergen County residents, we have enjoyed the zoo, at no charge, many times over the years.
We must all eventually realize that in the 1990's there is no such thing as a "free lunch."
But raising the train ride from 35 to 50 cents can hardly be considered to be a tremendous burden.
As for the entrance fee to the zoo, which is charged only on weekends, it does not prevent one from enjoying the park or its large playground, which is equipped with play elements for children of all ages and physical abilities.


Tyson Stays Calm at Center of the Storm
The scene is always the same these days.
Let Mike Tyson alight from an airplane or appear in public and the bright lights of the television cameras fire up, flashbulbs pop and he is suddenly at the center of a vortex.
Around him -- moving quick-step stride for stride with him -- are the hired hands of the news media with their microphones and notepads, followed by curious people who, on sighting the fighter, mouth his name with gaping jaws.


Fabled for Details, C.I.A. Nominee Faces Questions on Forgetfulness
Robert M. Gates has such a good memory that he can recount family anecdotes no one else seems to remember and has such an innate sense of order that he has never needed to wear a wristwatch.
As the deputy national security adviser, he is the detail man in the President's inner circle, the one charged with making sure, for instance, that the executive order authorizing war against Iraq was photocopied and distributed to the right people.
He is so proud of the way he organizes issues, manages mountains of paper and recalls details that he enjoys needling Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, about occasional lapses of memory, and telling his boss that the reason he cannot remember things is that he is always falling asleep in meetings.
Character and Judgment
So it is no wonder that members of the Senate Intelligence Committee find it strange that Mr.
Gates, whose confirmation hearings as the nation's chief spymaster begin on Monday, says he cannot remember a conversation that one of his immediate subordinates clearly recalls.
In an interview, Richard Kerr, the acting Director of Central Intelligence until Mr.
Gates or another candidate is permanently confirmed for the job, says he told him about the Iran-contra affair in August 1986 -- more than a month before Mr.
Gates has said he first heard about it.


Hidden Corners of Lower Manhattan
AFTER you've rubbed your eyes once or twice and shaken off the notion that it's impossible, the delightfully incongruous truth becomes clear.
A bow-backed, Federal-style town house from the early 19th century -- perhaps the work of Pierre L'Enfant, who planned the city of Washington -- still stands in Manhattan's financial district.
You won't find the Robert Dickey House in most guide books.
It is not an official landmark.
What was once a garden was long ago covered by an ugly one-story addition.
Perched precariously near the yawning entrance to the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, its Flemish-bond bricks painted battleship gray, the house almost disappears into the background.


Whose Fault Is It, Anyway?
Thanks for "Borderline Personality Disorders Getting New Attention"  [ Aug. 18 ] .
Though moralists may cavil, the article left me persuaded that some correction of our faults becomes possible in understanding that to an important extent our faults are not our faults -- or necessarily anyone's.
EDWIN RITCHIE Elmont


POSTINGS: Landlord-Tenant Law; Updated Booklet
The laws governing landlord-tenant relations in New York City do not strive for brevity or simplicity.
They begin with the landlord's responsibility (apartments must be safe, have heat and hot water), cite tenant's duties (pay the rent, don't wreck the place) and after that you need a lawyer.
Or a copy of the Citizens Housing and Planning Council's new version of its handbook, "What Every Landlord and Tenant Should Know," which recently has been updated and republished.


Vermont Ski Pass For Students
A season pass specially priced for full-time high school and college students is being sold by Stowe and Sugarbush ski areas in Vermont.
Called the Big Pass, it will cost $299 through Oct. 28 and $399 after that date, and will permit use of lifts at both areas for the entire ski season except for the Christmas and President's holidays periods.
Comparable adult season passes, valid at only one ski area, sell for $695 at Stowe and $540 at Sugarbush when bought early in the fall.
Students from 13 years of age and up can buy the season passes through the mail or by telephone using credit cards.
They must present valid I.D. cards from a high school or college to get a photo-pass for the season.
For information contact Sugarbush at (800) 537-8427 or Stowe at (802) 253-3000.


TOTE BAGS AND T-CELLS
Perri Klass's description of the International Conference on AIDS in Florence hardly leaves one optimistic that significant breakthroughs in dealing with the epidemic will be forthcoming ("Frescoes, Tote Bags and T-Cells," Aug. 18).
Instead of pulling together to deal with this unprecedented emergency, each separate interest group seems to be pushing its own agenda and figuring out how it can profit from the crisis.
The most prominent AIDS reseachers seem more interested in fighting over credit for past discoveries than in making new ones.
An organization called New Jersey Women and AIDS Network wants to make it easier for HIV-infected women to get disability benefits, and Act-Up wants to get media attention whether or not anyone really knows or cares what it is protesting for.
AZT and DDI may prolong some people's lives, but the undisputed fact is that there is no cure for AIDS and no vaccine.
The only way to save lives is to stop the spread of the disease.
Meanwhile, people who want to give clean needles to IV drug abusers are accused of promoting drug addiction and those who want to make condoms available in high schools of promoting teen-age promiscuity.


Curry: A Flavor Among Western Tastes
TO make an authentic Indian curry, spices are roasted, ground and mixed together in careful proportions.
An Indian cook would no more use a supermarket curry powder than a French chef would use garlic powder on snails or bottled Roquefort dressing on a salad.
But curry powder is becoming more and more popular as a flavoring in Western dishes.
Not a lot is used, just enough to add an unexpected and interesting dimension.
At the West Street Grill, an American bistro in Litchfield, Conn., one of the most popular dishes is pasta with curry-flavored scallops.
James O'Shea, the owner, says that curry as a flavoring has long been popular in his native Ireland.
"People there have a passion for anything curried -- just as they do across the sea in the British Isles. Perhaps it's a legacy of the empire, but curry is nursery food for them."


DIFFERENT STROKES
AFTER "THE GODFATHER," no one could think about massage the same way again.
The scene was unforgettable: Moe Green, Las Vegas kingpin, lay stretched out on a table as steam-room attendants energetically rubbed the kinks and cares of a felony-filled day from his flaccid body.
Suddenly, a burst of commotion.
Armed intruders rushed into the room.
Green looked up, outraged.
Outrage began to shade into dismay but never quite made it, as a bullet ripped through his right eye, leaving a shattered eyeglass lens in its wake.
It was a murder that gave new meaning to the term "rub out."
The audience was glad to see Green go.
In the movie's moral terms, he deserved what he got.
He wasn't taking care of business.
He was soft.
He liked massage.


Love Pangs in 2 Musical One-Acters
TWO halves of a broken heart frame the stage for the Arena Players production of "Romance Romance," a lighthearted musical with book and lyrics by Barry Harman and music by Keith Herrman.
Each half of the heart represents one of the two one-act musical concoctions that constitute the evening in East Farmingdale.


Watering Holes, West Indian Style
AT home we were never pillars of the congregation, but during annual vacations to Jamaica in the early 1960's, Father insisted the family attend the nearest Presbyterian church, although
church
is a misleading term for the structure in which the Rev.
Herbert Swaby gathered his flock.
We met beside the sea east of Ocho Rios in the Galleon Club, once a moderately disreputable dance hall, night club and all-around West Indian joint, until the day its owner experienced what Dr.
Swaby called a "new awakening in his heart." The bar flies and dancing girls were put out and the church invited in.
His awakening apparently stopped somewhere short of providing renovations.
Dr.
Swaby delivered the Word not from a pulpit, but a bandstand.
The choir sang from a stage.
Worshipers sat in a former dance hall under a ceiling bespangled with cutout stars and crescent moons.


Unseen AIDS Patients: Scarred Adolescents
HE looked like any other 19-year-old.
He wore baggy painter's pants, high-top sneakers with the neon laces undone and an oversize sweatshirt.
But when he kicked up the sand on the beach one recent morning, he was nervous and worried.
He was constantly looking over his shoulder to make sure he was talking in confidence.
John, who became infected with the human immunodeficiency virus through the blood supply more than six years ago, said:


Celeste P. Colyer Weds P. C. Boele
Celeste Patricia Colyer, the daughter of Patricia Benedict Colyer of Greenwich, Conn., and John M. Colyer Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Pieter Cornelis Boele, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Geert-Jan Boele-Eschauzier of Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
The Rev.
John W. Bishop, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Christ Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Boele, 27 years old, is the founder of Gift Success, a personal shopping service in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is president of his own real-estate and investment company in New York.


Noreen Delaney Weds Joseph Polidoro
Noreen Elizabeth Delaney and Joseph Richard Polidoro were married yesterday by the Rev.
Louis Jerome, a Roman Catholic priest, at Immaculate Heart of Mary Church in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Delaney, who is keeping her name, is 28 years old and a graduate of Boston University.
She is an account executive for Allure magazine.
She is a daughter of Paul C. Delaney of Bronxville, N.Y., a real-estate broker with his own firm in White Plains, and Kay Delaney of New York, a senior vice president of Turner Broadcasting International.


Jenny Volk Is to Wed Donald J. Healey
Mr. and Mrs.
Norman H. Volk of New York and Maplewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jenny Elizabeth Volk, to Donald John Healey, the son of Mrs.
Donald J. Healy of Mendham, N.J., and the late Mr.
Healy.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Volk, 25 years old, graduated from Denison University.
She is an administrative assistant at Lynch &amp; Mayer, a money-management firm in New York.
Her father founded and heads Chamberlain &amp; Steward Associates, a New York asset advisory concern.
Mr.
Healy, 26, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is a trader at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.


Venice Journal; Sun City Is Stood Up By Guest Of Honor
In this, the land of the endless summer, summer never came.
Where bathing suits and deep tans were once the order of the day, pale skin and long sleeves made a comeback.
This summer, now in its final days, may have been a disappointment for sun worshipers, but for the merchants whose shops and stands line the Venice boardwalk it has been a disaster.
Under cloudy skies more typical of San Francisco than Los Angeles, the customary mass exodus to the beach that keeps lifeguards busy, police officers on edge and businesses alive never materialized.


Good Credit
Some law enforcement authorities in Pakistan didn't think Asif Ali Zardari could have done nearly as well as he did in business if his wife, Benazir Bhutto, had not been Prime Minister.
In particular, Mr.
Zardari stood accused of using his wife's influence while she was in office to force the state-run Habib Bank to lend $34 million to a hotel in London.
Ms.
Bhutto's supporters insisted that and other charges against Mr.
Zardari were politically motivated.
And so far, at least, there is apparently no evidence to support the prosecution.
In May, two bank fraud charges against him were dropped and last week the Habib Bank case was dismissed.
But Mr.
Zardari, who spent nearly a year in jail, still faces trial on some other charges, ones that, on conviction, are punishable by death by hanging.
In connection with the killing of 28 supporters of a rival party, the 39-year-old businessman has been charged with kidnapping, extortion and murder.


THEATER: Theater on the Verge in the Middle East; Palestinian Drama Is An Expression Of Identity, 'Even Sanity'
Theater under conditions of conflict has a special resonance.
The Mideast for two New York directors was the destination for recent separate trips, both after the end of the Persian Gulf war.
They arrived in Israel with different itineraries.
JoAnne Akalaitis, the newly named artistic director of the New York Shakespeare Festival, wanted to meet Palestinians involved in theater; Gene Saks, the Broadway director -- most recently of "Lost in Yonkers" -- was interested in seeing theater in Israel.


Miss Tintle Weds Andrew M. Reder
St.
Andrews Dune Church in Southampton, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Jennifer Lynn Tintle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Myles L. Tintle Jr. of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., to Andrew Michael Reder, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jason A. Reder of Pittsfield, Mass.
The Rev.
Peter Larson performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Mrs.
Reder, 26 years old, is an account executive for the Dictaphone Corporation in Conshohocken, Pa.
She and her husband graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a vice president and general manager of Miltope Business Products in Melville, L.I.
Her mother, Carol Tintle, is a vice president of the Daniel Gale Real Estate Agency in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.


Sunday Outing; A 'Larky Life' in a Cottage On the Staten Island Shore
She persuaded her friends to preen for the camera and pretend to be drunk on tea.
She hammed it up herself, posing in men's clothes or short skirts (above the ankle!) and smoking cigarettes.


Jump-Starting Sales for New Housing
ARTHUR COLLINS thought he had the market figured in the summer of 1988 when he started building three-story condominiums in Greenwich, Conn., with flats on the first level and duplexes above.
But the market slump that stunted home sales in the region held some surprises.
The flats sold to the empty-nesters they were aimed at, but the stairs in the duplexes frightened off the elderly, while their $600,000 prices put them beyond the means of young families.


Screws Missing on Tail Wing of Plane in Crash Fatal to 14
The night before a Continental Express Commuter plane crashed here on Wednesday, killing all 14 people aboard, workers at the airline's Houston hangar failed to screw on a part of the tail that is now missing from the wreckage, Federal investigators said Friday night.
The investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board said they confirmed their finding by examining the wreckage and by looking at maintenance records that showed mechanics unscrewed part of the plane's tail wing, replaced some of the wing, but failed to refit 43 screws that hold the part in place.


Jean McAndrews Has Wedding
Jean Curran McAndrews, a daughter of James J. McAndrews of Madison, Conn., and the late Mrs.
McAndrews, was married yesterday to William Rust Koehler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Koehler of Cleveland.
The Rev.
Ronald Torina performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Roman Catholic Church in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Koehler, 26 years old, is the director of Jewel Grassroots Tennis, which develops youth tennis activities in Connecticut.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was an account executive in New York for Hanes, the hosiery manufacturer.
Her grandfather the late Thomas F. McAndrews was a justice of the Court of Special Sessions in New York and the secretary to Mayor James J. Walker.


MR. SOFTWARE
As capitalists, we are taught from the cradle to be visionaries, to break ground, to create a business and fight to make it succeed ("Mr. Software" by Fred Moody, Aug. 25).
That's exactly what Bill Gates has done with Microsoft, and now everyone is mad at him for doing it.
As Apple Computers, the I.B.M.
Corporation and the Federal Trade Commission marshal their forces, they should remember one thing: competition.
Gates is the Henry Ford of our generation, and if you don't like it, go build a Honda.
DON ROSS
New York, N.Y.


Corrections
The New York Stock Exchange listing in the Business section today carries an erroneous price issued by the exchange for shares of the Loral Corporation; the error also appeared in Business Day yesterday.
The stock closed on Friday at 38 1/2, down 1/2 for the week.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Bloomfield
BLOOMFIELD, a 5.4-square-mile industrial area turned bedroom community in Essex County, can trace its history through the nation's wars.
Named for the Revolutionary War General Joseph Bloomfield, the community is built around a marching green where rebel troops trained.
Its bootmakers supplied footwear to soldiers in the War of 1812.
A half century later, its Oakes Woolen Mills clothed the Union Army and in World War II the Westinghouse Plant on Arlington Avenue built components for the atomic bombs dropped on Japan.


With Government Growing, More Spending Won't End Deficit
To the Editor:
Tom Wicker proposes in "Investing in America" (column, Aug. 18) massive Government spending on infrastructure and the return of more Federal money to states and localities in the name of pump priming.
Mr.
Wicker seems to have fallen for the misguided claim that the 1980's witnessed some sort of rollback in the size of government.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


Miss Bowers Wed To Brian Griffiths
Allegra Ann Bowers, the daughter of Edith Hollmann Bowers of Boston and Dr.
Jack F. Bowers of Amesbury, Mass., was married yesterday to Brian Robert Griffiths, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenney E. Griffiths of Westboro, Mass.
Justice of the Peace Edward English officiated at the Algonquin Club in Boston.
The bride, 27 years old, was until recently an account officer at the Bank of Montreal in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Haverhill, Mass., and at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary in Boston.
Her mother is art director for USTrust, a bank in Boston.


Native American Festival in Manhattan


Continental Is Out, Family-Style Is In
DESPITE the banner outside La Vigna reading "Grand Opening -- Family Dining," this Greenvale restaurant is no newcomer.
It is a 16-year veteran looking for a new identity.
La Vigna was one of a wave of northern Italian restaurants that swept across the North Shore about 20 years ago.
They were elegant and expensive and served the now-tired Italian-French food blend called Continental.


Twins Toss a To-and-Fro Strategy
The Minnesota Twins have been doing more than winning games and building an insurmountable lead in the American League West.
They have been thinking and planning, too.
While publicly proclaiming that the division race by no means over, the Twins' brain trust quietly devised their pitching strategy for the pennant playoff and the World Series, if they are good, or lucky, enough to get there.


Braving World and Big City, Young Missionaries Go Forth
They believe that people are basically good, but Mormon missionaries in New York City still don't take any chances with their bikes.
Bjorn Pendleton, a tall and earnest 20-year-old from Bountiful, Utah, already had one stolen, so the sleek black mountain bike goes wherever he does -- the other day to the top of a Brooklyn apartment complex.


Asters Can Be Ordinary or Spectacular
SUMMER has gone, and soon fall will be here officially.
Roadsides and fields are touched with the purple-blue haze of the native asters.
These ubiquitous wild plants are not usually the sort that anyone would care to have in a garden, because they can become kind of weedy.
Also, the plants have the bad habit of losing their bottom leaves or, worse, turning brown-black as the season advances.
These wild asters have daisylike flowers and belong to that huge Composite genus.
It is so large, in fact, that the genus has been divided into tribes, and the aster tribe has around 500 members.


Special Today: Men's Fashions of The Times/Magazine Part 2


A Quota for Abortion Questions?
How come, asks Senator Orrin Hatch, Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee have "singled out" Judge Clarence Thomas for extensive questioning about abortion?
They weren't anything like that insistent when they questioned past nominees for the Supreme Court, the Utah Republican insists.
Why last year, they asked David Souter a mere 36 abortion questions but have asked Judge Thomas twice that many.
Senator Hatch's pointed question doesn't mention that Judge Thomas is black and the previous nominees were white, but the implication of racist motive was plain -- and ugly.
It also ignored the obvious: Each nomination to the Supreme Court is different, and each set of hearings bears inevitably on the next.


Making a Difference; Throwing A Line to Armenia . . . and Helping a Region
When Carol C. Adelman was named head of the United States Agency for International Development's Bureau for Europe and the Near East in 1988, Eastern Europe's affairs just didn't concern her much.
But since 1989, when the upheavals in the Soviet bloc began, the region has gotten the lion's share of her time.
In fact, the agency recently narrowed her bureau's responsibility to aid for Europe.
And she has asked Congress for $470 million in fiscal 1992 -- up from virtually nothing two years ago -- to provide it.


Traffic Alert
Columbus Avenue Festival: Columbus Avenue will be closed today from 66th to 96th Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
New York Is Book Country Fair: Fifth Avenue will be closed today from 48th to 57th Street from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.


Batter Up
"Today we're going to make choc'late cake/ And it's a very special, very choc'lately, bittersweet lovely cake," announces the winsome lady in a warbled voice that is instantly familiar to anyone who has watched television cooking programs during the last 30 years.
The only difference is that the chef is singing her lines in an operatic fashion as she stirs, whisks, drips and drops.
"Bon Appetit!" a one-woman musical monologue with Jean Stapleton, which begins previews tomorrow at the CSC Repertory Theater and opens Sept. 25, is based on a 1961 "French Chef" program with Julia Child.
The musical score is by Lee Hoiby, the opera composer.


Parker Signs With Blue Jays
DAVE PARKER, cut by California last week after losing his batting stroke at age 40, signed yesterday with the Toronto Blue Jays for the final three weeks of the season.
Parker will not be eligible for the postseason if the Blue Jays make it that far.


Candiotti Gives Blue Jays A Bit More Breathing Room
Tom Candiotti scattered five hits over seven innings as the Toronto Blue Jays blanked the Oakland Athletics, 6-0, today and increased their American League East lead to four and one-half games over Boston.
John Olerud hit a two-run double, rookie Eddie Zosky hit a two-run single and Joe Carter and Candy Maldonado homered as Toronto won for the eighth time in 11 games.
Boston lost, 3-1, to New York earlier in the day.


Love Among the Ruins


Helmick Role at Stake, Olympic Groups Say
Robert Helmick's role as a paid consultant to groups seeking to expand their ties to the Olympics has damaged his credibility as president of the United States Olympic Committee, members of the International Olympic Committee and the U.S.O.C. say.
They also contend that the mere possibility that his dual responsibilities could be construed as a conflict of interest might cost him another term as president of the U.S.O.C. and the chance to become an officer of the I.O.C.
He is known to covet both.


Capriati's Squeaking Shoes
To the Sports Editor:
A gross lack of sportsmanship was displayed by Jennifer Capriati during her United States Open quarterfinal match against Gabriela Sabatini.
Squeaking her tennis shoes at critical moments in her attempt to break her opponent's concentration proved successful for Capriati this time.
Good sportsmanship precludes such behavior.
PATRICIA DEPHILLIPS  Westfield, Conn.


South American Jewish Sites
A 13-day Jewish heritage tour of South America, visiting Buenos Aires, Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, and four shorter packages in Brazil that can be added to it, is being offered by Grand Prix Journeys.
The main tour combines visits to centers of Jewish history, culture, public service and religion with chances to observe the life of Jewish communities.
It also includes a day at Iguassu Falls on the Brazil-Argentina border.
The three- and four-night extensions in Brazil, where Jewish sites are also visited, are to Bahia, Manaus, Ouro Preto and Rio Grande do Sul.
The land price of the 13-day tour is from $1,429 to $1,744 a person, two people to a room, except during the Christmas-New Year period when the range is $1,569 to $1,879, and during Carnival in Rio de Janeiro, starting Feb. 22, when rates are $1,599 to $2,149.
Included are hotels, breakfast daily and six lunches and two dinners with Jewish congregations, two dinner-and-show evenings and sightseeing, taxes and tips.


Preparing for Primaries
STATE
DATE
Iowa
Feb. 10
N.H.
Feb. 18
S.D.
Feb. 25
Alaska*
March 2
Colo.
March 3
Idaho
March 3
Md.
March 3
Minn.
March 3
Ariz.
March 7
Nev.
March 7
S.C.
March 7
Wyo.
March 7
Del.
March 10
Fla.
March 10
Ga.
March 10
Hawaii
March 10
La.
March 10
Mass.
March 10
Miss.
March 10
Mo.
March 10
Okla.
March 10
R.I.
March 10
Tenn.
March 10
Tex.
March 10
Ill.
March 17
Mich.
March 17
Conn.
March 24
Vt.
March 31
Kan.
April 7
N.Y.
April 7
Wis.
April 7
Va.
April 11
Utah
April 20
Pa.
April 28
D.C.
May 5
Ind.
May 5
N.C.
May 5
Ohio
May 5
Neb.
May 12
W.Va.
May 12
Ore.
May 19
Wash.
May 19
Ark.
May 26
Ky.
May 26
Ala.
June 2
Calif.
June 2
Mont.
June 2
N.J.
June 2
N.M.
June 2
N.D.
June 9
*Caucuses take place the week of March 2. (Source: Congressioanl Quarterly)


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
ISLAND-SIZE HORSES
TOM WELSH, a horse trainer from Maryland, finished jumping a 3-year-old stallion named Cody, and he was panting.
Mr.
Welsh, that is, not Cody.


Michelangelo's David Is Damaged
Michelangelo's David, arguably the world's most famous sculpture, was damaged in a Florence museum today when a man the police described as deranged broke part of a toe with a hammer, saying a 16th-century Venetian painter's model ordered him to do so.
Officials at the Galleria dell'Accademia museum said the damage was reparable since all the fragments from the shattered toe had been collected.
But the museum's director, Antonio Paolucci, added: "The moral impact remains. The world's most famous statue has been damaged."


Syria Warns of Israeli Pressure for U.S. Aid
Syria said today that Middle East peace would be doomed if Washington submitted to Israeli pressure for loan guarantees.
The official daily Tishreen said the differences between President Bush and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel were "a test of strength between U.S. pragmatism and the Zionist lobby."


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
TUESDAY.
Written and illustrated by David Wiesner.
Clarion Books. $15.95. (Ages 4 to 8) One Tuesday evening at moonrise, myriad amphibians perched on lily pads rise out of the swamp and fly into an ordinary suburban neighborhood.


A LA CARTE: BUDGET INN
EATING out is often expensive.
Desserts and salads for $7 are commonplace, and entrees that top $20 are not uncommon.
Even a glass of Coca-Cola can cost $2 or $2.50.
Prices like those are formidable for those with high-paying positions, but impossible for young people.
The parents of students or people in their first jobs often ask about restaurants where the young people can eat without exhausting their funds.


'Black Athena'
To the Editor:
In his review of Volume Two of Martin Bernal's "Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization" (Aug. 11), John Baines does not look beyond the colon in the book's title when he claims that Mr.
Bernal believes "the roots of our civilization are black, not white." Mr.
Bernal's argument is not rooted in black or white or Africa or Athens but rather in syncretism, as his subtitle implies.
He does not deny the existence of an indigenous population in Greece, nor does he deny a migration from the north.
His painstakingly supported and persuasive claim is that there were other significant influences that came to Greece from the south and the east (black and yellow, as Mr. Baines puts it) bringing religion, myth, artistic skill and knowledge of writing, influences that have been all but ignored in Western scholarship.
He maintains that it was the synthesis of these influences that inspired the culture that became ancient Greece.


A Yankees Fan Immortalizes His Heroes
AS a boy growing up in Pel ham, Chris Brown had two passions music and the Yankees.
Regrettably, Mr.
Brown, now 35 years old, became an avid Yankees fan when his sports idol, Mickey Mantle, was nearing the end of his career and the Yankees were going downhill.
But Mr.
Brown also had a sense of Yankees history, mainly because of his father, Richard, a lifelong Yankees fan who had spent hours telling his son about the team's glory days of the 30's, 40's, 50's and early 60's and about such heroes as Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig and Phil Rizzuto.


Historic Inn Offers a New American Menu
WHY is Lake Waramaug still unknown to so many residents of Connecticut?
The crystalline lake -- north of New Milford, between Litchfield and Kent -- is almost a halcyon getaway spot, a getaway made easy by the presence of four inns on the lake.
One veteran is a sprawling hillside property on the lake's north end, the Inn on Lake Waramaug, parts of which date to the 1800's.
We last visited the Inn in the summer of 1979 when its premises were charming but its kitchen lackluster.
Since then there have been changes in ownership, management and chefs.
The result is a much improved dining experience geared to the 1990's, not the 1800's.
Farewell, tired Indian pudding.
Welcome, chocolate hazelnut mousse cake.


Discontent in Egalitarian Sweden Threatens Socialists in Vote Today
Sweden has a clean environment, virtually no poverty or slums, minimal unemployment and an impressive array of world-class manufacturers like Volvo and Electrolux.
Taxes cover tuition through graduate school, almost all health care and 85 to 90 percent of child day care.
Nearly half of the country's adults own or have a relative who owns a vacation home, which Swedes have plenty of time to enjoy given their minimum of five weeks and two days of vacation.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
CIVIL WAR SECRETS
A secret Civil War military installation comparable to Alamagordo of World War II fame, now buried under more than a century's worth of debris, is the subject of a talk by Dr.
Joel Grossman, Saturday at 8 P.M.
The lecture is sponsored by the Putnam County Historical Society in Cold Spring.


The Barriers To Western Aid Are Disappearing
PRESIDENT Mikhail S. Gorbachev was Crazy Eddie last week, offering Cuba, the Kurile islands, even Afghanistan, all at prices that were
INSANE
.
But there was a method to the madness, and a logic that could soon force the United States to consider not only more economic aid to the Soviets than it has been willing to think about up to now, but bigger nuclear arms cuts than looked possible or desirable only six weeks ago.


Remembering


Sports of The Times; The Ali Connection To Tyson
IN the commotion over Mike Tyson's approaching heavyweight title fight while Tyson is under indictment on a rape charge, one school of thought is based on the Ali Argument.
According to the logic course in this school of thought, if boxing organizations stripped Muhammad Ali of the heayvweight title in 1967 for refusing to take the oath of induction into the armed services during the Vietnam War, why should Tyson be permitted to earn $15 million before his Jan. 27 trial begins?


Sean Penn, Human Tempest, Settles Into the Auteur's Life
Sean Penn exhales cigarette smoke and coughs.
"I have no argument with anybody who doesn't agree with punching out anybody," he says.
"But then don't punch out the man who punches you."
Mr.
Penn, widely known as both a human tempest and an actor of sizable gifts, is in New York to publicize a new movie he has written and directed, "The Indian Runner," which opens on Friday, but he's responding, of course, to the most common and longstanding inquiries about him.
How does he explain his reputation as Hollywood's most hostile star, its biggest spoiled brat, its loosest cannon?
How does he justify the behavior -- the nasty intolerance of fans who approach him in public, the vile and occasionally violent outbursts against paparazzi -- that has led him to be skewered mercilessly in the press?


Funeral for Firefighter Is Postponed One Hour
The funeral tomorrow for firefighter Kevin C. Kane, who died after the roof of a burning building in Brooklyn collapsed on him on Thursday, has been delayed for an hour so that Mayor David N. Dinkins and other officials will be able to attend, a Fire Department spokesman, Tom Kelly, said yesterday.
Firefighter Kane's funeral had originally been scheduled for 10:30 A.M., but that conflicted with the funeral for Police Officer Hector Fontanez, who was killed in the line of duty on Thursday.


Beauty/Fashion; The Mirror Cracked
IT USED TO BE THAT BEAUTY WAS IN the eye of the beholder, but these days the beholder doesn't know where to look.
How do you express fragmentation and still have fun?
Mix and match.
Many people laughed at fans of the post-modern esthetic for quoting from a hodgepodge of traditions, but now it's permissible to combine elements from many classes, subcultures, erotic types, eras.
What's beautiful now is the Composite.
In their age-old quest to solve the problem of self-presentation, women have marched into this stylistic breach with both gusto and anxiety.
What's more, all kinds of women mix and match: style-obsessed women, offhand women, frivolous women and serious women.


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section on Aug. 11 about the Riverside South plan for Manhattan omitted the identity of Paul Willen's original co- designer.
He was Daniel Gutman, who continues to work on the project, and who reported the omission in a letter dated Sept. 9.Because of a fashion company's financial reorganization, captions today on pages 65 and 67 of Men's Fashions of The Times, part 2 of The Times Magazine, carry outdated information on designs by Ronaldus Shamask.
They are available only through Barneys New York, by special order.


The Great Absentee  Shows Up at the Frick
One of the cardinal events of the fall season in New York will be the arrival in the Frick Collection of its first-ever painting by Jean-Antoine Watteau.
It is 23 years since the Frick last bought a painting, and this particular one will fill a gap that has been conspicuous ever since the collection first opened to the public in 1935.
It is on Oct. 30 that the Watteau "Portal of Valenciennes" will go on view, and it will be a happy day.
Watteau was always the Frick's great absentee.
Fragonard at the Frick has royal status.
Boucher's little portrait of his wife is seduction itself.
Chardin, Greuve, Nattier, Pater -- all are held in honor.
Yet without Watteau somewhere around, something indispensable has been lacking.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My kitchen cabinets are made of pine that has been stained to give them a cherry look.
I would like to give them a look more like my bleached-oak table and chairs.
Is there any way I can attain this look without having to completely strip the cabinets?
A.
You can approximate the look by using a semi-opaque white or off-white stain over the existing finish, or you can use a thinned-down white flat paint the same way.
The stain, or paint, is brushed on and then partly wiped off with a rag or cheesecloth.
That will still leave a darker cast, the cherry color, showing through the white, and so it still may not be as light as you would like.
But how much of this original color shows through will depend on how thick or opaque the white stain is, and on how much of it you wipe off.
Be sure you clean off all wax and polish before you start, and then experiment first on the back of a door or the inside of a drawer to see if you can get the effect you want.


Communism's Unfinished Job, and Capitalism's; Trident, Not a Fork
To the Editor:
Under a photograph of Ukrainians holding up three fingers (Aug. 29), you indicate their fingers symbolize "a fork," which is the symbol of Ukrainia.
It is more than a fork.
It is a trident, such as one might find in the hand of Poseidon, the Greek god of the sea.
It was the emblem of the Family of Rurik, who ruled Russia (through various descendants) until Czar Ivan the Terrible.
How do I know this?
I am a descendant of St.
Vladimir, who was a grandson of Rurik.  (Rev.) ANDREW L. J. JAMES Athens, Ohio, Aug. 30, 1991


Chess
The ideal strategy is never to let your opponents know what strategy you will use from game to game.
But it is hard to be perfectly well rounded.
Even some world champions were biased in one direction or another: Alexander Alekhine was marvelous on attack, poor on defense; Emanuel Lasker was stronger on defense; Tigran Petrosian avoided anything that might look the slightest bit risky.


Series Picks Emerson To Open Its 38th Season
IN 1954 a promising young ensemble called the Juilliard String Quartet played a recital at the Pierre Van Cortlandt School in Croton under the auspices of a new community group called Friends of Music.
Time has treated both organizations well: the Juilliard plays its 45th anniversary gala at Carnegie Hall next month, and the Friends begin their 38th year of concerts Saturday. .
Appearing for the Friends this time, at an 8:30 P.M. concert at the Ossining High School Auditorium, their performing headquarters since 1976, is another first-rank American string quartet, the Emerson.
Its performing membership is unchanged since its founding 14 years ago by the violinists Eugene Drucker and Philip Setzer, the violist Lawrence Dutton and the cellist David Finckel.
Renowned for its Beethoven performances, the Emerson has scheduled both the Harp Quartet, Op. 74, and the Grosse Fuge, Op. 133, along with works of Haydn and Shostakovich.


Nuclear Reactor in Bulgaria Is Closed Down After a Leak
A nuclear reactor in Bulgaria has been closed down after a leak of radioactive water, plant workers said today.
An engineer inside the plant at Kozlodui in northern Bulgaria said the leak was caused by a faulty water pump.
He said the 440-megawatt, Soviet-built reactor was switched off for repairs at midnight Friday.


Talking: Water Meters; Mandatory Installation Spreading
THE compulsory installation of water meters in New York City, begun in 1988, has started to affect rental apartments, co-ops and condominiums.
Before this year, virtually all installations were in one-family homes.
The city is now shifting to multifamily buildings, starting in the western Bronx, northern Manhattan and the Maspeth and Glendale sections of Queens.
All neigborhoods should be reached within three to five years.


New Commission Will Take Up Wallenberg Case
The Swedish Government says a new commission will probably meet in Moscow in one to two weeks to begin investigating the fate of Raoul Wallenberg, the Swedish diplomat who saved tens of thousands of Hungarian Jews in World War II.
Less than two weeks after a new head of the K.G.B. promised unparalleled cooperation in the Wallenberg case, hopes are high here that Moscow will keep its pledge to uncover the truth about Mr.
Wallenberg, whose family and supporters insist could be alive.
They say there is a report that he was alive in a Soviet prison camp as recently as late last year or early this year.


Cuba Says U.S. Troop Pullout From Base Is Also Necessary
Asserting that a Soviet troop pullout would leave it open to attack from the United States, Cuba today demanded a simultaneous withdrawal of American forces at a naval base on the island.
Signaling a widening rift with its long-standing superpower ally, Cuba's Communist Government bitterly reproached President Mikhail S. Gorbachev for his announcement this week of plans to withdraw 11,000 Soviet troops from Cuba, describing it as "equivalent to a green light to the United States to carry out its aggressive plans against Cuba."


Jewish History in Provence
THE nondescript exterior of a narrow building in the old center of Cavaillon, a Provencal town known throughout France mainly for the succulence of its melons, gives no clue to the splendor it harbors.
A stone stairway outside leads to its main hall, one flight up.
The room is small and nearly square, but its ceiling is high, tall enough to accommodate a balcony supported on Corinthian columns along the end wall left of the entrance.
The walls are lined to mid-height with gracefully carved woodwork featuring polychrome wreaths, bouquets, musical instruments and heraldic shields painted in delicate tints of blue, gray and yellow, and underlined by gilding.
Elegantly forged iron grillwork, eight bronze candelabra and seven pewter holders of single candles, all suspended from the ceiling, and a few motifs of painted stucco complete the decor of what appears to be a perfectly restored, patrician 18th-century salon in the Louis XV manner.


Sunday Dinner; Provocative Changes Of Pace for the Palate
Not long ago the Indian restaurant scene was fairly predictable, with virtually all establishments serving similar styles of Mogul fare from the north.
Mogul cuisine is known for its meat dishes (kababs, koftas and roasts) as well as elegant rice dishes.
While all of these are available today, there are now restaurants featuring uncommon dishes from other regions of India.
Here are three suggestions for places to have savory meals.
Bukhara
148 East 48th Street, (212) 838-1811 -- There is something wonderfully primordial about watching Madison Avenue moguls roll up their shirtsleeves and tear into slabs of roasted lamb with their hands, then lick their fingers and snag a clump of cauliflower along with some barbecued shrimp.
This peculiar scene unfolds daily at Bukhara, the Indian restaurant that specializes in what is called frontier cooking.
While it may not be the most appropriate place for a business lunch to review scripts for the new advertising campaign, Bukhara has a lot going for it as an exotic dining spot serving some provocative food.


XXV ON TV
When viewers last saw the Enterprise, Worf was torn between staying with Starfleet or joining his people in a civil war in Klingon.
The suspense resumes on Saturday, Sept. 28, at 7 P.M. with the season premiere of "Star Trek: The Next Generation."
The episode is part of a daylong 25th-anniversary marathon. (In New York the programming will be shown on Channel 11; schedules vary elsewhere in the country.) At 9 A.M., Channel 11 will begin showing the 10 most popular episodes of the original series.
At 8 P.M. there will be a two-hour special, featuring cast members from both series and clips from "Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country."


Polish Church and Press Criticize Each Other
Poland's Roman Catholic Church, smarting from a survey that ranks it behind the army and the police in public opinion, has lashed out at the press for what it calls distortion and "blasphemous utterances."
In a letter to be read at Sunday Masses throughout the country, Poland's bishops charge that news organizations "have lost the elementary sensitivity to the important problems of our nation."


Sarah H. Maxim, Student, Marries
Sarah Hemingway Maxim, the daughter of Mimi Patterson Maxim of Farmington, Conn., and Hiram Percy Maxim 2d of Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday to Nobertus Nuranto, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Polycarpus Swantoro of Jakarta, Indonesia.
The Rev.
David Good performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Lyme, Conn.
The bride, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Yale University and is a doctoral candidate in Southeast Asian history at Cornell University.
Her mother is the director of the annual fund at Choate Rosemary Hall in Wallingford, Conn.
Her father owns the Prentis-Maxim Company, a blueprint reproduction concern in New London, Conn.


The Pop-Gospel According To Mariah Carey
Mariah Carey has the air of an ambitious teen-ager who was forced to grow up too fast.
One-half diffident youth, one-half brusque sophisticate, she seems to be a woman who doesn't believe in wasting words.
And her shyness is only partly concealed by the determined set of her jaw.
One day last July, the 21-year-old singer, who had been up until 6 in the morning, was back in the studio by 2 in the afternoon, helping mix final vocals on her new album.
She was clearly relishing her workhorse schedule.
For, appearances to the contrary, Ms.
Carey did not magically ascend from nowhere 15 months ago to the top of the pop charts.


Ms. Stempel Wed To G. R. Cohen
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Stempel of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter, Andrea Heidi Stempel, to Gene Robert Cohen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Cohen, also of Brooklyn.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stempel, who is 25 years old, is a lawyer with the New York law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke.
She is a graduate of Williams College and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is a professor at the Schwartz College of Pharmacy of Long Island University.
Her mother, Rina Stempel, is the principal of South Shore High School in Brooklyn.


Jane Cameron Briggs Has a Wedding
Jane Cameron Briggs, a daughter of Dr.
Mary Ellen Brademas of New York and Basil Manly Briggs of Birmingham, Mich., was married yesterday to Christopher Dunn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter H. Dunn of Dunwoody, Ga.
Msgr.
D.
Declan Murphy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Carmel Mission Basilica in Carmel, Calif.
Mrs.
Dunn is an actress, known professionally as Jane Cameron.
She has appeared in the NBC series "Another World" and other television shows.
She graduated from Hilldale College and received a master's degree in fine arts from New York University.
Her mother is chief of dermatology at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in New York.
Her father is of counsel to the law firm of Miro, Miro &amp; Weiner of Detroit and New York.
Her stepfather is John Brademas, the president of New York University.
Her great-grandfather the late Walter O. Briggs and her grandfather Mr.
Briggs Jr. were both owners of the Detroit Tigers baseball team and the Tigers Stadium, then known as Briggs Stadium.


As Yogi Says . . .
Who is the most widely quoted American of our era?
John Kennedy, perhaps ("Ask not what your country can do for you . . ." or "The torch has been passed . . .").
But recent evidence makes a strong case for Yogi Berra.
The New York baseball great has for years been known as a master of mangled language.
Now, however, prominent figures have been transforming him into an enduring folk philosopher, and in the process even creating their own Yogi-isms.
After the Persian Gulf war, when an NBC News interviewer asked Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf about his plans, he replied: "Well, as Yogi Berra said, 'The future ain't what it used to be.' "


Sheila Pastore Is Married
Sheila Hanan Pastore, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Burton Hanan of Stuart, Fla., was married yesterday to John Gardner Lathrop, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Clarke Lathrop of Siasconset, Mass., at the Siasconset Chapel.
The Rev.
Dr.
Adam Craig performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Mrs.
Lathrop, 42 years old, graduated from Pine Manor Junior College.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Mr.
Lathrop, 45, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is studying for a master's degree in education at Harvard University.


Big Boo for Irish
To the Sports Editor:
Notre Dame deserved the "boos" it got last Saturday in its game against Indiana.
In the final two minutes, leading Indiana by a comfortable margin, with a fourth and long, in kick formation, they "faked" the kick and threw the ball for a completion.


Correction
An article on Sept. 1 about the Italian painter Artemisia Gentileschi misidentified the King of England in 1637.
It was Charles I, not Charles II.


Julie Lizabeth Wagman Is Married To Warren Arthur Logan in New York
Julie Lizabeth Wagman, the daughter of Karen Kronenberg of New York and Martin Wagman of Roslyn, L.I., was married yesterday to Warren Arthur Logan, the son of Marian B. Logan of New York, and the late Dr.
Arthur C. Logan.
Rabbi Frederick Dworkin officiated at the bride's mother's home in New York.
Mrs.
Logan, 26 years old, was until recently a real-estate sales agent for Cooper Square Realty in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her mother is an artist who formerly taught the third grade at the Collegiate School for Boys in Manhattan.
Her father is the sales manager of book-binding equipment for the eastern region of Heidelberg Eastern, manufacturers of printing equipment.


Wall Street; A Shortcut for Foreign Firms? Investors Say No
When Rule 144A was added to the Federal securities rule book in April 1990, the idea was to permit foreign companies to raise capital privately from institutional investors in the United States without having to comply with the supposedly cumbersome disclosure standards that govern issues sold in the public market.
Well, don't bet on investors accepting a stingy disclosure.
Almost two-thirds of the 50 institutional investment managers who answered a survey by Broadgate Consultants, a New York investor relations firm, believe issuers under Rule 144A should provide at least as much information as public issuers.


Noted With Pleasure
Reclaiming the Sacred
The things we count sacred may change from age to age, a fact reflected in our art, the poet W. S. Di Piero suggests while contemplating the work of Gustave Courbet.
This is from his collection "Out of Eden: Essays on Modern Art" (University of California).


Tech Notes; Using Microwaves to Dry Clothes
IN the never-ending quest to cut the time spent on domestic chores, researchers are trying to bring the benefits of microwave energy to the laundry room.
The Electric Power Research Institute in Palo Alto, Calif., has built a prototype of a microwave clothes dryer that it hopes will substantially cut electricity costs in addition to reducing drying time.
The experimental dryer, which looks and functions like a conventional dryer, will also lessen shrinkage and damage to clothing because it produces less heat, said Dr.
John P. Kesselring, a senior project manager at the institute.


Making a Difference; Mr. Walsh Takes the Field for Tenneco
Three decades after Michael H. Walsh dislocated both shoulders while charging into opposing linemen as a running back on the football team at Stanford University, he still likes to meet challenges head-on.
Tenneco Inc. rushed Mr.
Walsh's planned appointment as president ahead by three weeks so that he could deliver a harsh message last week directly to Wall Street analysts.
Hurt by its faltering J. I. Case farm and construction machinery unit, Tenneco would pare its yearly dividend in half, sell assets valued at $1.05 billion and slash capital spending and operating costs by a combined $500 million, Mr.
Walsh said.


Asters Can Be Ordinary or Spectacular
SUMMER has gone, and soon fall will be here officially.
Roadsides and fields are touched with the purple-blue haze of the native asters.
These ubiquitous wild plants are not usually the sort that anyone would care to have in a garden, because they can become kind of weedy.
Also, the plants have the bad habit of losing their bottom leaves or, worse, turning brown-black as the season advances.
These wild asters have daisylike flowers and belong to that huge Composite genus.
It is so large, in fact, that the genus has been divided into tribes, and the aster tribe has around 500 members.


It's Another Busy Season
The doldrums of summer gave way to a crush of social benefits last week to raise money for New York City's many charities and cultural institutions.
On Thursday, the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation held a benefit dinner-dance at the newly restored St.
Regis Hotel.
The chairwomen of the event were Brooke Astor and Barbaralee Diamonstein-Spielvogel.


Georgia Tech Tops Boston College
Rodney Wilkerson rushed for his first two college touchdowns in a sloppy first half and Shawn Jones ran for two in the second half today as Georgia Tech beat Boston College, 30-14.
Jones rushed 12 times for 91 yards, including touchdowns of 14 and 35 yards, and completed 15 of 29 passes for 224 yards.


On Preserving Outdoor Metal Items
OUTDOOR metal items will last longer if they are cleaned and protected from rust and corrosion before winter.
Because some cleaning products are hazardous, follow manufacturers' instructions and safety precautions carefully.
If necessary, wear rubber gloves and wash your hands thoroughly after finishing.
Unless you are using detergent and water, work in a ventilated area to avoid inhaling fumes.


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
I wonder if Elizabeth Swados is aware that she has two stories to tell -- her brother's and her own.
The pain, frustration, rage and grief reflected in the cover photograph is as profound as the story she tells.
I wonder how many of us will remember her story when platform issues are presented by political candidates this fall.
Unfortunately, those who most need the assistance of increased funding for mental health aren't strong lobbyists.
NANCY STARK
Williamson, N.Y.


Strangers at the Gate
JON MOISE, A ROMANIAN GYPSY, SAT ON A DARK AND deserted platform in the railway station at Gorlitz, a town on the German-Polish border, screaming at the German policemen in a language they could not understand, the wound from his suicide attempt still oozing.
He and 15 members of his extended family, including 3 children, had sneaked across the border earlier that day.
They were demanding political asylum, the only words of German they knew.


A Daring Michigan Downs The Irish
The words of the prophet are no longer written on the subway walls.
They are conceived by entrepreneurs, silk-screened onto T-shirts, and sold by the dozens.
And at Michigan Stadium, these were the words that were placed on sale today:
"You Da Man, Desmond."


On the Street; Summer's Last Flowers
Children dressing up to attend Rosh ha-Shanah services last Monday gave way to the dictates of a warm summer day.
Young girls arriving for the afternoon service at Temple Emanu-El on Fifth Avenue arrived in flower-printed cotton dresses.
They held the hands of adults who chose lightweight summer suits or dresses.
One young teen-ager waiting on Fifth Avenue for the service to begin cooled herself with a fan painted with flowers that coordinated with her ankle-length skirt.
Several young boys were allowed to attend the Jewish New Year services in short-sleeved open-neck shirts.
Others wore more traditional jackets and ties.


Brenda C. Harper Marries in Paris
Brenda Christian Harper, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Harper of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday at the American Cathedral in Paris to Marc Robert Vandamme, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Vandamme of Lille, France.
The Rev.
Benjamin Shambaugh, an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
Joseph Chone, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride is a vice president in the international private banking department of J. P. Morgan in Paris.
She graduated from Harvard University.


A New Breed: The Pre-First Grader
IT'S show-and-tell time in Beverley Taylor's classroom.
The children, who sit with crossed legs in a circle, are as freshly scrubbed as their desks.
Some can't wait to share a special toy or talk about a recent trip.
Others, still shy after the long summer vacation, lower their heads and decline to participate.
Signs of a new school year abound.
Posters of kittens, puppies and Mickey Mouse decorate the walls, along with alphabet charts, birthday lists and newly assigned classroom jobs.
It could be any first-grade classroom, with the neatly placed desks and chairs scaled just right for 6-year-olds.
It could be -- except for the blocks, toys and stuffed animals strategically placed in the room.


Citing Fires, Dinkins Aide Orders Removal of Homeless From City-Owned Property
The Dinkins administration has ordered its commissioners to secure all city-owned buildings and property so that homeless people can no longer find refuge there.
The order, issued on Friday by Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel, follows a blaze last Sunday that forced the temporary closing of the Staten Island Ferry Terminal at Battery Park and the death of a firefighter after a blaze on Thursday in an abandoned building in Brooklyn.
Homeless people have been implicated in both of those fires.
It could not be determined yesterday, however, whether the abandoned building in Brooklyn had been taken over by the city.


Jane Flynn Weds George Taniskidis
Jane Marie Flynn, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William F. X. Flynn of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to George Taniskidis, the son of Maj.
Gen. and Mrs.
John Taniskidis of Athens.
The Rev.
Theodore Bagleneas officiated at the Greek Orthodox Church of Our Saviour in Rye, N.Y.
Mrs.
Taniskidis, 29 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College and received a law degree from Harvard University.
She is a marketing associate with Procter &amp; Gamble in Athens.
Her father is the director of otolaryngology at the New Rochelle Hospital Medical Center.
Her mother, Jody Flynn, is a real-estate broker with Cleveland E. Van Wert in Scarsdale.


Girl Hit by Stray Bullet Dies From Wounds
A 16-year-old Bronx girl died on Friday from a gunshot wound she received 11 days earlier when she was hit by a stray bullet while leaning out her bedroom window, the police said.
The girl, Karen Edwards, of 645 East 232d Street in the Woodlawn section, had been shot once in the chest about 4:10 P.M. on Sept. 2, as she looked out her fourth-floor apartment window, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen.


How Subic Bay Became A Rallying Cry for Philippine Nationalism
EVEN among Filipinos who want the United States military to stay, it is commonly said that this is a nation that has never been allowed to progress beyond adolescence, beyond an immature need to hide behind someone or something else for protection.
When Filipinos go abroad to live -- to Europe, to the Middle East, to the United States -- they thrive, their communities as industrious and self-reliant as any.
But at home, on the 7,100 volcano-born islands that make up the Philippines, many Filipinos admit that too often they seek out godfathers rather than take responsibility for their own actions.


Karen Ellis Wed To Lee Roberts
Karen Ellis, the business manager of Boston University's physics department, and Prof.
Bradley Lee Roberts, the department's associate chairman, were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Yarmouth Port, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
John P. Robertson officiated.
Mrs.
Roberts graduated cum laude from Yale University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of the late Barbara Koehler Ellis of Englewood, N.J., and Dr.
Kent Ellis, a radiology professor at Columbia University.


Black Teen-Agers Smoke Far Less Than Whites, Federal Study Finds
Federal researchers have found that about two and half times as many white high school students smoke as black students, and that the rate of smoking among black children has apparently dropped greatly over the past decade.
Dr.
Gary Giovino, chief epidemiologist of the Office on Smoking and Health at the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, said the rise in the cost of a pack of cigarettes was probably the most significant reason for the drop in smoking among black high school students over the past decade.
Smoking among white students dropped only slightly in the same period.


TWO BLACK GROUPS AND PRETORIA SIGN PEACE AGREEMENT
After months of difficult negotiations, South Africa's two main black political groups and the Government agreed today on a comprehensive peace plan designed to end black factional violence that has cost thousands of lives.
But the violence continued today with at least 15 slayings in black townships around Johannesburg.
And tensions rose even at the conference called to sign the pact, as supporters of one of the two rival black groups, the Inkatha Freedom Party, staged a raucous mass demonstration, brandishing clubs, spears, shields and swords in defiance of the accord's ban on provocative public displays.


Battle Set on Gay Rights in California
The Legislature has set the stage for an emotional and bruising political confrontation between homosexuals and religious fundamentalists in California with the final passage Friday of a bill barring discrimination against homosexuals in employment.
But in one of their last acts of business on Friday, state lawmakers killed a measure that would have shaken up the 1992 national Presidential sweepstakes by moving up California's primary from one of the last in the nation to one of the first.


BEST SELLERS: September 15, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war, and a floundering President may not be able to cope.
2
1
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
3
2
27
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
4
2
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older brother.
5
3
12
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
6
7
17
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
7
13
2
FLOWERS IN THE RAIN, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $20.) A collection of short stories, many of them set in Scotland.
8
8
77
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
9 *
5
19
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
10
6
7
MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) A woman probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck Florida judge. (LP)
11
9
8
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
12
1
RUSSKA, by Edward Rutherfurd. (Crown, $25.) Eighteen centuries in the lives of four families of different cultures residing in a Russian village.
13
15
2
THE GARDEN OF RAMA, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $20.) For the third time in the 23d century, astronauts from Earth contend with alien forces.
14
10
12
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
15
5
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Doubleday, $18.) A young woman who has always been able to wrap men around her finger meets her match on a visit to her hometown.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
2
2
13
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
3
4
8
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
4 *
3
43
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
5
5
13
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
6
7
18
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
7
6
11
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
8
10
11
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
9 *
8
2
ANNE SEXTON, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The life of a gifted poet who was hampered by mental illness.
10
9
11
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
11
1
HARD COURTS, by John Feinstein. (Villard, $22.50.) A journalist's behind-the-scenes look at a year of professional tennis.
12
13
10
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) Two former F.B.I. agents report on the downfall of Paul Castellano, head of the Gambino crime family.
13
3
THE BEAUTY MYTH, by Naomi Wolf. (Morrow, $21.95.) An argument against our society's emphasis on the importance of women's physical appearance.
14
14
2
THE MANSIONS OF LIMBO, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) A collection of pieces about currently celebrated people.
15 *
16
15
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are being taught and treated on many campuses.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
5
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
4
124
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's advice about how to make a personal fortune.
3
44
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
4
2
10
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
5
5
87
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
BLOOD MEMORY, by Martha Graham. (Doubleday, $25.) Dictated in the final months of her life, this intense autobiographical memoir by the great choreographer who died in April at 96 goes far to explain how she got to be such a passionate creature; with about 100 photographs from her own collection.
MARTHA: The Life and Work of Martha Graham, by Agnes de Mille. (Random House, $30.) Long a friend and critic of Martha Graham, never a collaborator, Agnes de Mille offers a biography with many important characters Graham neglected to mention.
TWO LIVES: "Reading Turgenev" and "My House in Umbria," by William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) A pair of short, elegantly elegiac novellas that trace the stories of two women who live very different lives -- one a resourceful widow newly sprung from a mental institution, the other a retired prostitute in Italy.
MEMOIRS, by Kingsley Amis. (Summit, $25.) Low opinions of nearly everybody and everything that has crossed Sir Kingsley's path, rendered in his everyday dazzlingly addictive prose.
KOOP: The Memoirs of America's Family Doctor, by C. Everett Koop. (Random House, $22.50.) A revealing and provocative autobiography by the former Surgeon General who got his job by being opposed to abortion, then astonished everyone -- especially his sponsors -- by talking and acting like a physician.
THE WHISTLING SONG, by Stephen Beachy. (Norton, $19.95.) An on-the-road novel whose narrator is a desperate boy in desperate times, by an exuberant, nervy writer who respects the open road.
DOWNTOWN, by Ed McBain. (Morrow, $20.) All the twists, turns and surprises one expects from the author, merged in a wildly comic plot and situations -- and all without the 87th Precinct.


Dallas Finds Money to Rehire Laid-Off Teachers
The city's School Superintendent, Marvin Edwards, has announced that the district has found the money to hire back nearly all of the 257 teachers laid off three weeks ago because of a budget shortage.
In a showy demonstration of support, school board members and representatives of four teachers' organizations joined Dr.
Edwards at a news conference on Thursday to endorse the superintendent's latest plan.


Susan Kaplan Engaged to Wed Charles Feldman
October wedding plans for Susan Gail Kaplan and Charles Scott Feldman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Feldman of Brooklyn, have been anmnounced by her parents, Rosalind C. Kaplan of Seaford, L.I., and Robert S. Kaplan of Belle Harbor, Queens.
Miss Kaplan, 28 years old, is a pediatric nurse at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo.
The future bridegroom, 31, is a principal in Tax Network Resources, an executive search concern in New York.
He is a graduate of Brooklyn College.


Item-Pricing Measure Is Vetoed by Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins, issuing the second veto of his administration, on Friday refused to sign an item-pricing bill unanimously passed by the New York City Council last month.
He called the measure inadequate and cumbersome.
Under the bill, stores that did not place price tags on most individual supermarket items would be fined a maximum of $1,000 for a first violation and up to $4,000 for subsequent violations.


LET US NOW PRAISE FAMOUS SWAMPS
In light of the Bush Administration's proposal to remove protection from so many environmentally valuable areas that had previously been classified as wetlands, your article might have been titled "Let Us Now
Pave
Famous Swamps." JARED BRENNER
New York, N.Y.


Tea With Mother Leads a Director To 'Boys and Girls'
If there is a lesson to be learned from the critical and commercial success of "The Story of Boys and Girls," which opened recently at the 68th Street Playhouse, perhaps it is that listening to mother can pay off.
Pupi Avati, the Italian writer-director of the film, lives not far from his mother in Rome.
"I go to her place every morning for a cup of tea," he said during a recent visit to New York.
And when the 53-year-old director decided to make a movie set in the rustic countryside of Emilia-Romagna in the time before his birth, his mother's recollections provided the basis for his script.
"I used all the things regarding my family that my mother tells me every morning."


Motorist Is Slain After He Chases Car on Highway
A driver was shot to death late Saturday in a traffic dispute after he had been cut off by a passing vehicle on the Harlem River Drive, the police said.
It was the second killing over the weekend that began as a fight in traffic, they said.
The police said James Hrabal, 24 years old, of 135 Brook Avenue in Passaic, N.J., was shot five times in the torso after he angrily chased down and confronted four men in a car that had changed lanes in front of him.
He was pronounced dead on arrival at Harlem Hospital Center.


No Headline
International A3-12
The U.S. base in the Philippines was defended by President Corazon C. Aquino, who called for a popular vote on whether to extend the naval station's lease.
The vote is a last-ditch effort to work around the opposition in the Philippine Senate.
Page A1
News analysis: Secretary Baker displayed a keen interest in economic issues during his trip to the Soviet Union reflecting the conclusion of American officials that economic improvement is needed to sustain recent reforms.
A1
A rural Soviet town is slow to learn of tumultuous events in the "center," that remote place -- organizationally if not geographically -- where governments are formed and polices are made.
Even when a coup occurs, the main effect on the populace is which portrait is hung on the wall.
A12
U.S. weighs aid to the Soviet military A12
Tense United States-Israel relations worsened as an Israeli Cabinet minister called President Bush an anti-Semite and a liar for his stand on loan guarantees.
Top Government officials repudiated the comments from a Minister Without Portfolio belonging to a far-right party.
A1
Bush's dispute with Israel upsets many leading JewsA8
Israeli soldier is shot and killed in a West Bank ambush A8
Swedes ousted the Social Democrats by giving a slim majority to Sweden's five non-Socialist parties.
While the election will change policies, its main effect will be to produce a more divided Government.
A1
Yugoslav force strikes back in Zagreb A3
Paris Journal: After the party, there's life in the fair A4  National A14-17, B8-10
The scandal surrounding B.C.C.I. is raising questions about the performance of the bank's auditor, Price Waterhouse.
Although auditors wrote to the directors of the troubled bank about questionable transactions, weeks later they signed the bank's annual report for 1989.
A1
Life insurance companies are considering the establishment of a giant emergency fund, financed by the companies themselves, which could provide assistance to insurers with short-term cash troubles.
D1
NASA is trimming its sails.
In an effort that could save billions of dollars, the space agency is shelving plans for large spacecraft in favor of relatively small and simple ones.
A1
Shuttle deploys satellite to study ozone layer B8
Congressional study challenges use of private contractors A14
Report urges science funds be used for educationA17
Censure is urged for AIDS scientist B10
The U.S. logging interests in the West are jeopardizing the high valleys of the northern Rockies, where clean rivers support grizzly bears and 20-pound bull trout, forest managers say.
These officials say they are being pressured into allowing too many trees to be cut.
A1 The nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court has divided America's blacks, leaving many torn over whether he is an appropriate choice for the Court.
A16
Thomas opponents seek to bring up issue of race A16
Old issues, and some new, as Gates returns to testify B10
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa roared into the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination and in his announcement said the election would offer a stark choice between government for the privileged and government for the people.
B8
Mississippi's Governor, Ray Mabus, was elected by proclaiming that the state "will never be last again." But as he runs for re-election, his achievements have been mixed -- education reform was approved by the Legislature but financing was not.
B8
A homeless woman's sizeable estate, left to a Massachusetts legislator and his aide in gratitude for their assistance, has become a political liability for that legislator.
The legislator is being investigated by state and Federal officials and some say accepting the $500,000 gift was wrong.
A14
Kansas campus debates ouster of black leader A14  Regional B1-7
New York City's Dominicans have transformed the city in the 1980's, the decade of much of their immigration.
With nearly 400,000 Dominicans in the region, they operate many of the bodegas and livery cabs and have revived Washington Heights.
A1
Unions organizing in New York City are working to counteract the trend against them.
Rather than move from workplace to workplace, unions are trying to build support from community to community.
B1
Two marches by Jewish groups to protest what they called the anti-Semitism of a City College professor -- one near his home in Teaneck, N.J., the other in Manhattan -- attracted about 150 protesters each without any serious violence.
B3
Holtzman defends Dinkins after criticism at synagogue B3
Billy Graham's Central Park crusade next Sunday is the climax of a fouryear effort named Mission New York, which has already drawn 550,000 people around the state to hear the 72-year-old evangelist.
B1
In Trenton, court takes on toxic- damage cases B2
Motorist is slain in traffic fight on Inwood road B7
A top New York City school official resigned because he was angered by budget cuts, other officials said.
The head of school construction, Charles E. Williams, was facing $750 million in cuts in plans to build 50 new schools and remodel 70 others.
B1
Hillside Journal: In search of history among the headstones B3
Connecticut's nuclear waste is fast becoming Connecticut's problem.
While the state is not ideal for dumping nuclear waste, it has reactors and beginning in 1993 no other state will have to take the waste.
B1  Business Digest D1  Sports C1-C10
Baseball: Elster and an umpire exchange hot words C3
Braves rout Dodgers, 9-1 C3
Canseco powers A's past Blue Jays C4
Column: Anderson on the Giants C8
Features: Sidelines C2
Football: Giants lose to Bears C1
Bills rally to edge Jets C1
U.S.C.'s fine defensive effort stymies Penn State C3
Redskins trounce Cardinals, 34-0 C6
Carter leads Vikings over 49ers C6
More than game plan needed to beat Bills C7
Big play for Bears' Anderson C8
Hockey: N.H.L. at a crossroads C1
Gretzky sidelined by back injury in Canada Cup C9
Horse Racing: In Excess captures Woodward C2
Olympics: The outlook on a successor to Helmick C9  Obituaries B12
Russell Lynes, former managing editor of Harper's
John K. Fairbank, professor of Chinese studies at Harvard
Robert Hanley, lawyer in A.T.&amp; T. antitrust suit  Arts/Entertainment
Metropolitan plans to renovate Impressionist galleries C13
Testing pay-per-view opera on cable C13
A Bernhardt biography from a piano duo C13
Theater: "Sublime Lives" C14
Music: Randy Weston's sounds of Africa C12
Aretha Franklin, in concert and on display C13
John Stubblefield, saxophonist C15
Barbara Cook and Broadway C15
Word and Image:"Against the Wind," a novel C20
Nutrition on television C18
Alive From Off Center, dance C20
Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18
Homeless, but not helpless
Fewer arms, tighter controls
Stalin's brain
A new lease for estrogen
Letters A18
William Safire: Bush at the U.N.  A19
Anthony Lewis: Which Judge Thomas?  A19
David L. Boren: Gates -- just the man for the job?  A19
Bill Bradley: Gates -- now, questions about Iraq A19
Jamaica Kincaid and Ellen Pall: Out of Kenya A19


Robert Hanley, 67, Trial Lawyer Who Won Suit Against A.T.&amp; T.
Robert F. Hanley, a leading civil trial lawyer who once won a $1.8 billion jury award in an antitrust suit against A.T.&amp; T., died yesterday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
Mr.
Hanley, who was 67 years old, had returned to Chicago in July to start a new law firm.
He was hospitalized about a week ago with an undiagnosed illness.
An autopsy is planned to determine the cause of death, a family spokesman said.


John K. Fairbank, China Scholar Of Wide Influence, Is Dead at 84
John K. Fairbank, the Harvard history professor who was widely credited with creating the field of modern Chinese studies in the United States and was a leading advocate of diplomatic recognition of the People's Republic of China, died Saturday in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 84 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said Roderick MacFarquhar, a colleague.


INSIDE
Insurers' Emergency Fund
Insurance companies may finance a fund that would provide loans to cash- strapped companies.
Page D1.
School Builder Steps Down
The head of New York City's school construction agency, said to be angry over budget cuts, resigns.
Page B1.


Richton International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
The Los Angeles Lakers guard EARVIN (MAGIC) JOHNSON and EARLETHA (COOKIE) KELLY were married Saturday in Lansing, Mich., before a slightly larger crowd than expected, The Associated Press reported.
The couple were surrounded by 3,000 cheering fans when they left the small Union Missionary Baptist Church, not far from where Mr.
Johnson entertained high school and Michigan State University basketball fans in the 1970's.


Ms. dePolo Weds Peter B. Becker
Adrianne Elizabeth dePolo and Peter Barnes Becker were married yesterday in Rye, N.Y., at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather, Lydia and Arthur Emil.
The Rev.
Giles Spoonhour, a priest of the Federation of Christian Ministries, officiated.
The bride, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is the associate picture editor at Travel and Leisure magazine in New York.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father, Harry Rudolph dePolo, is an architect with William B. Tabler Architects in New York.
Her mother is a founding partner of the New York design firm of dePolo/Dunbar, and her stepfather is a senior counsel at the law firm of Jones Day Reavis &amp; Pogue in New York.


2 Black Media Concerns To Offer Package Deals
Robert L. Johnson, the chairman of two leading black media companies, has announced the formation of an advertising sales venture offering marketers multimedia packages.
The move had been expected since May, when Mr.
Johnson, the chairman, chief executive and principal shareholder of Black Entertainment Television, a cable network, acquired a controlling interest in Emerge Communications Inc., which publishes the monthly news magazine Emerge.
Mr.
Johnson said that he would become publisher of Emerge, a position vacant since May, and that its ad sales would be handled through a new division of the cable network, called B.E.T.
Media Sales.


CHRONICLE
KURT MASUR, the new music director of the New York Philharmonic, made an unexpected exit before the orchestra played a single note on Friday evening in Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center.
Everything had been just what the audience was expecting: the lights dimmed and Mr.
Masur crossed the stage, stepping up to the podium for "Tromba Lontana" by JOHN ADAMS.
But before he gave the downbeat, Mr.
Masur stepped down.
"So sorry, no spectacles," he said as he left the stage.
He returned a moment later, with glasses.
After the concert, he said he had realized too late that he could not read the score on his music stand, a manuscript.
Mr.
Adams wrote "Tromba Lontana" in 1986.


Norman Berle Wed to Elana Silberman
Elana June Silberman and Norman Michael Berle, senior staff lawyers for the Legal Aid Society in Brooklyn, were married yesterday at Temple Emanu-El in Yonkers by Rabbi Peter Gluck.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is 29 years old and is a daughter of Cora and Murray Silberman of Yonkers.
She is a graduate of the State University of New York at Albany and has a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father, a retired United Nations official, is a consultant.
Her mother is a professional violinist and social worker.


Naylor Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Activated Mike Macfarlane, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Announced the retirement of Warren Cromartie, designated hitter.


You Got the Nerve Baby, Uh-Huh
Sometimes, a story emerges after the fact, such as the one about a little 2-inch-square shoulder patch that reads "Uh-Huh" -- like the one JIMMY CONNORS wore on his sleeve recently in the United States Open.
The patch first appeared when Connors played in a semifinal match against JIM COURIER.
Connors had not worn it earlier in the tournament.


Old Issues, and Some New, As Gates Returns to Testify
When Robert M. Gates, the nominee for the nation's chief intelligence post, appears before the Senate Intelligence Committee on Monday, he will come as a different man and in different circumstances from when he testified before the same body in his unsuccessful bid for the same job in February 1987.
At that time, the committee was reluctant to approve a candidate whose role in the still-unfolding Iran-contra affair was unclear, and Mr.
Gates withdrew his nomination for Director of Central Intelligence.
Since then, he has added to his his career credits, mainly by serving as President Bush's deputy national security adviser, earning both a more prominent public profile and more friends in high places.


Defenses Turned Up the Heat As Ranked Teams Are Upset
Despite the fact that the Division I-A record for rushing in a game was broken Saturday night, players like Southern California linebacker Kurt Barber reminded the world of college football that defense is still a vital part of the game.
Barber and his teammates went after Tony Sacca, the Penn State quarterback, and managed to disrupt the Nittany Lions' offense in a 21-10 victory at Los Angeles.
It was splendid for the Trojans after a 24-10 upset loss to Memphis State in their opening game 12 days earlier.


Marshall Bolsters Redskins In Their Shutout of Cardinals
When Wilber Marshall in 1988 became the first National Football League free agent to switch teams since 1977, moving from the Bears to the Redskins for a five-year, $6 million offer that the Bears were unwilling to match, the Redskins' locker room became green with envy.
Marshall would be making more money than any other Redskin.
His first three seasons here were good but not spectacular, somewhat steady and nowhere near stellar.
Marshall was even trade bait before the season, rumored to be shipped to the Houston Oilers.
Marshall heard the rumors.


Scranton Wins du Maurier


Whittle Deal For Healthlink
Whittle Communications says it has reached an agreement to buy the Healthlink Television Network, the main rival to its video service for medical waiting rooms.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed but a person familiar with the deal, speaking on condition of anonymity, said it was about $18 million.


The Hearings On Television
Today's Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court will be broadcast by the Public Broadcasting Service, beginning at 10 A.M.
Eastern time.
The Cable News Network will monitor the hearings and offer spot coverage.
None of the three network news divisions plan live coverage.


Fewer Arms, Tighter Controls
For four decades, Washington and Moscow relied on huge nuclear arsenals for mutual deterrence.
Now, with the Soviet Union in disarray, the more urgent task is to insure foolproof control over nuclear arms.
Control would be easier to assure with fewer weapons, and that's why a prescient report from a National Academy of Sciences panel is must reading for President Bush.
Completed before the recent convulsions in the Soviet Union, the report recommends much deeper cuts in U.S. and Soviet strategic arms, and talks to tighten the grip on the arms that remain.
And it urges that "cooperative security" replace containment at the center of American strategy.


Sports of The Times; The Giants Are Doing Too Little Too Soon
SUDDENLY, the reigning Super Bowl champions are 1-2, down there under .500, down there with all those teams that won't make the playoffs.
Maybe their 1-2 start will turn out to be a wakeup call for the Giants, too good a team not to make the playoffs.
But they're already two games behind the Washington Redskins in the National Conference East.
They seem to be asleep, as if still hypnotized by the dazzle of the diamonds on their Super Bowl rings.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons., New York, is offering $200 million in debentures due in 2011 at 99.212 to yield 8.96 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co..
The noncallable debentures have an 8 7/8 percent coupon and are rated A-2 by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. *
Viacom Inc., New York, priced $200 million in 10-year senior subordinated debentures through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. to yield 10.25 percent.
Noncallable, the issue received a Ba-3 rating from Moody's and a B+ from S.&amp; P.


Jayark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Pop; Aretha Franklin Almost Turns a Concert Into a Fashion Show
There comes a moment in every Aretha Franklin concert when the queen of soul sits down at the piano, strikes a gospel chord and becomes transfused with a spirit that elevates her singing to a higher plane.
Nowadays, alas, such moments are few and far between.
On Friday, in the first concert of a two-night engagement at Radio City Music Hall, there was exactly one moment of magic.
Announcing that she would sing a number "from the Billy Joel album," Ms.
Franklin seated herself at the piano and transformed his ballad "And So It Goes" into an introspective pop-gospel anthem of towering proportions.


GW Utilities reports earnings for Year to June 30


Paris Journal; If the Old Party's Dying, There's Life in the Fair
By the time word arrived from Moscow that the party was over, the dates had been fixed, the invitations printed and the musicians hired.
So French Communists went ahead with their annual festival here this weekend as if they still had something to celebrate.
There were bumper cars and other rides for the young, and scores of stands serving sausages, pates, wine and beer for others.
Music blared from four stages and there were even a few tents given over to intense debates about everything from unemployment to immigration.


Halifax Developments reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Honda Sets U.S. Exports To France
The American Honda Motor Company says it has received "verbal approval" to import American-made Honda Accord station wagons into France after several months in which French authorities had barred the cars.
If the auto maker receives formal import certification from French customs authorities this week, as expected, a potential trade conflict between the United States and France will be headed off.


Humble Sludge Holds Wealth of Soil Nutrients; Cleaning L.I. Sound
To the Editor:
A critical point not included in your otherwise excellent survey of the sewage treatment plants for metropolitan New York (The Week in Review, Aug. 18) is that all the plants perform only secondary treatment of sewage.
They lack the facilities for tertiary treatment to remove the dissolved chemicals in our sewage, which are devastating the ecology of Long Island Sound.
Nitrates in particular cause blooms of microscopic organisms, which use up most of the oxygen in the marine waters.


Yer Fat, Yer Worse: Elster and Ump Tangle
At the end of the miserably hot afternoon it was likely that there would be fines as high as the temperatures, and perhaps an inquiry by the National League resulting from a game that otherwise had no great significance.
In an extraordinary exchange of anger and accusations today, Mets shortstop Kevin Elster and umpire Harry Wendelstedt attacked each other verbally after a 7-2 Cardinals victory in which Elster was ejected in the sixth inning.


Judging Robert Gates: Dialogue - Farewell to the Old C.I.A.; Now, Questions About Iraq
When the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence begins hearings today on the nomination of Robert Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, the first questions will be about his involvement in the Iran-contra arms scandal.
But we must also appraise Mr.
Gates's whole record as Deputy Director and on the National Security Council to insure that he meets high standards of integrity and judgment, including evaluation of his performance on two issues central to U.S. security in recent years: the Soviet Union and Iraq.


A Bernhardt Biography From a 40-Year Piano Duo
She grew up in the demimonde of mid-19th-century Paris, the illegitimate daughter of a Jewish courtesan from Amsterdam.
Trained to follow in her mother's footsteps, she instead became an actress, which in those days wasn't much different.
She was known for sleeping in a coffin, as well as with hundreds of men.
Her friends and admirers included Victor Hugo, Gustave Flaubert, Gustave Dore, Alexandre Dumas (father and son) and the Prince of Wales.
Decades before movies and television, long before the age of huge publicity machines, she achieved international fame on a scale previously unknown.


A New Lease for Estrogen
Twenty-five years ago, estrogen replacement therapy was hailed as a veritable fountain of youth for post-menopausal women.
Those who took estrogen were said to look better, feel cheerier and be healthier than those who didn't.
In the 1980's, the pendulum swung the other way.
Estrogen therapy appeared to offer protection against heart attacks and osteoporosis.
But it also appeared to increase the risk of breast and uterine cancer.
Now only 15 percent of post-menopausal American women take estrogen supplements; and "damned if you do, damned if you don't" may be the thought that prevails among the remainder.


Reviews/Theater; Moliere's Fools at a Breathless Pace
By the end of the Pearl Theater Company's production of Moliere's "Tartuffe" one is a little suprised that any of the actors has breath left for a last laugh.
There is something to be said for fast pacing in a venerable old comedy like this.
But the director, Shepard Sobel, rushes the cast through the play so quickly that meaning and emotion are lost in key scenes.


The Dodgers Go South As Braves Go Up 1 1/2
After offering a remarkable display of their hitting, pitching and fielding talents today, the Los Angeles Dodgers headed home to continue their pursuit of the National League West championship.
Based on their play today, that's exactly where they'll be when the playoffs begin next month -- at home.
The Atlanta Braves, the league's No. 1 surprise this season, delighted their chanting, tomahawk-waving, drum-beating fans by blasting the Dodgers, 9-1, taking the critical series, two games to one, and building a one-and-one-half-game lead over the Dodgers.


Whitman Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Major Renovation Of Met Museum's Impressionist Halls
The Metropolitan Museum of Art is about to begin a $10 million renovation of its most widely visited galleries, the second-floor halls containing Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings.
The galleries will close next Monday for about a year and a half.
The reconstruction will change the nature of the exhibition area from a sprawling, modern, open space to a series of traditional, classically styled rooms.
Included will be the paintings bequeathed to the Met this year by Walter H. Annenberg in the largest single gift of art made to any museum in over half a century.


Between 2 Worlds: Dominicans in New York -- A Special Report; Between 2 Worlds: Dominicans in New York
Martin Gomez starts all his mornings in America in the same place, at the foot of the George Washington Bridge, waiting for his ride and his future.
As the commuters from New Jersey begin to flow across the bridge to their jobs in midtown Manhattan, Mr.
Gomez and hundreds of other Dominican immigrants are heading the other way, in an alternative rush hour imported from the streets of Santo Domingo.


Miss America


Israeli Loan Dispute Turns Ugly; Rightist Calls Bush 'Anti-Semite'
Israel's bitter confrontation with the White House over United States loan guarantees turned nastier today when a Cabinet minister called President Bush an anti-Semite and a liar and the Government vowed that there would be no retreat on its request for American aid.
The Israeli Defense Minister, Moshe Arens, later repudiated the attack on Mr.
Bush by his fellow Cabinet member, Rehavam Zeevi, a minister without portfolio from a far-right party.
Mr.
Arens said that Mr.
Zeevi's remarks did not reflect the Government's view or Israeli public opinion.


Pro Bono
*
TBWA Advertising, New York, which creates advertising for Carilon Importers Ltd. brands like Absolut Vodka and Bombay gin, has created a national television public service announcement for the Children of Alcoholics Foundation, New York.
James Quest, executive vice president at TBWA and a foundation board member, said the agency saw no conflict in its activities.
The spot depicts children talking about how their parents' drinking affects them, closing with a voice-over that says, "Help them learn they are not to blam."


Carole Blank Is Married
Carole Ellen Blank and Kenneth Michael Brown were married yesterday by Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman at the Inn at Pound Ridge, N.Y.
She is an assistant treasurer at Reader's Digest in Pleasantville, N.Y., and he is the magazine's promotion director.
Mrs.
Brown, 35 years old, is a graduate of Cornell University and the daughter of Harriet and Charles Blank of North Hills, L.I.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.
Mr.
Brown, 45, is a son of Millie and Harold Brown of Niagara Falls, N.Y.
He graduated from Niagara University.


Connecticut Confronts Being Its Own Nuclear Waste Site
If geologists were to devise a hypothetical worst state in which to build a nuclear waste dump, it would probably be very much like Connecticut.
This state has steep, rocky granite hills and high water tables, which are unsuitable for placing such a dump, and it is one of the most crowded states in the nation.
But with four commercial nuclear reactors, a reactor owned by the Navy, a nuclear fuel manufacturer and a base where nuclear submarines are built, this 4,844-square-mile state is one of the major producers of radioactive waste.


Venezuela Is Surging Again After a Period of Difficulties
After a hiccup caused by low oil prices and a shift to free-market policies, Venezuela has reclaimed its position as the nation in the Americas with the highest economic growth rates.
The gross national product, which grew 5 percent in 1990, expanded by an annualized rate of 10 percent during the first half of this year, according to figures released here in late August.


CHRONICLE
It's one of the hottest tickets in town, the one providing admission to the New York Public Library for a talk on "American Intellectual Life in Crisis" to be given Oct. 1 by CAMILLE PAGLIA.
As of last week, all 500 seats had been spoken for.
Dr.
Paglia, the author of the provocative book "Sexual Personae: Art and Decadence from Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson," a critical analysis of sexuality in Western art that is also a diatribe on the underlying premises of feminism and liberalism, has enraged feminists and academics with her scathing observations.


Warburg Describes Its Salomon Role
The S. G. Warburg Group, the British investment house, yesterday disclosed details of its relationship with Salomon Brothers Inc., portraying itself as a victim of Salomon's illegal actions in the Treasury market scandal.
The disclosures were the first details of the scandal provided by Warburg and its affiliate, Mercury Asset Management, which says its name was submitted by Salomon without authorization in a February auction for five-year Treasury notes.


African-American Parade in Harlem


Giants Dominate Bears Except on Scoreboard
Except for a few slip-ups, the Giants dominated the Bears today.
But those slip-ups were costly.
One allowed the Bears to score on a 75-yard pass play; another let them score on a cleverly conceived 42-yard fake bootleg, and another spoiled a 35-yard Giants field-goal attempt with 15 seconds left that would have tied the score.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Ad Scene; In Fashion, More Attitude Than Clothes
EVEN in lean advertising times, the fall fashion magazines are still fat, alluring and revealing.
Fashions mirror the times.
And one who ignores fashion ignores the parade of life.
It is said that when Marcel Proust was working on "Remembrance of Things Past," he sent someone to find out the color of the feathers on a woman's hat worn more than a decade before.
Nowadays, the details and flourishes that characterize the times are perhaps harder to pin down.


Jetronic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


P.&amp; G. Gives Ayer Bain de Soleil Account
Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York, has lost the Bain de Soleil advertising account after more than a decade of creating campaigns for the sun-lotion line.
On Friday, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company reassigned the account to Ayer Inc., New York.
Advertising executives, who insisted on anonymity, estimated billings at $5 million.


The Hearings On Television
The Senate Intelligence Committee hearings on Robert M. Gates's nomination as Director of Central Intelligence will be shown on two channels today, beginning at 9 A.M.
Eastern time.
The Cable News Network will have what it describes as selective live coverage, with several opening statements, including Mr.
Gates's, and a return to selected question-and-answer sessions in the afternoon.


Homeless, but Not Hopeless
To most Americans, the word "homeless" conjures up images of mental patients, drunks or drug addicts huddled in doorways or begging on the streets.
Yet for years, New York and other cities have struggled to help a much larger, less visible group: families with no place to live.
A new commission appointed by Mayor David Dinkins of New York to address the needs of both groups should find no lack of sound responses -- especially if Washington would show more interest.


Ames Department Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Books of The Times; Back From the Edge, in a Thriller
Against the Wind  By J. F. Freedman 423 pages. Viking. $19.95.
Something must not like Will Alexander, the hero of J. F. Freedman's gripping first novel, "Against the Wind." For one fine morning Will wakes up with a terrible hangover, and a woman he doesn't know is in bed beside him.
When he arrives at his law office in downtown Santa Fe, N.M., his two partners call him into the conference room and tell him that they think he's gone out of control and needs to take an extended leave of absence.


Sabine Royalty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Dance; Communication by Way of Enigmas
Ideas as well as movements filled "Kick the Soil," the program that Nimrod Fried and Jeff Bliss presented Saturday night at the Kampo Cultural Center.
Steps and thoughts danced harmoniously in two pieces by Mr.
Bliss.
He recited a text in "Root" about a desire to send down roots into the earth and to blossom forth from it.
As he spoke, he adopted a firm stance, then dropped to the ground and struggled upward, his deeds matching his words.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 16
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams had the day off.


Cooper Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Accounts
*
The Daily News, New York, to Della Femina, McNamee, New York, for an account with estimated billings of about $7 million.
The agency was the only one considered, said a Daily News spokesman, adding that Robert Maxwell, the new owner of The News, personally made the choice after meeting with Jerry Della Femina, the agency's chairman and chief executive, whom Mr.
Maxwell characterized as the "quintessential New Yorker." The account previously was at Gearon Hoffman Conlon &amp; Nye Advertising, New York.


Storage Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ms. Stroll Marries David Aronstein
Lesley Jane Stroll, a senior vice president and marketing director of the Dreyfus Service Corporation in New York, was married yesterday to David Howard Aronstein, president of Finite Solutions, a New York software consulting firm.
Cantor Bruce Halev officiated at Maxime's Restaurant in Granite Springs, N.Y.
Mrs.
Aronstein, 33 years old, is a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Stroll of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
Her father is the vice president of Food Gems Ltd., dessert makers in Queens.
Her mother, Muriel Stroll, is a sales consultant for the company.


Hillside Journal; In Search of History Among the Headstones
In the shadows of the Gypsy headstones of the Evergreen Cemetery, along the winding carriage paths that lead to the section for the aged women and orphaned children, the Civil War soldiers and the resting place grave of the author Stephen Crane, a white-haired woman roams the graveyard, as she has for 13 years.
"I never thought I'd be doing this," said Jean-Rae Turner of Newark, rolling through the 115-acre graveyard in her blue Chevy Nova.
But, as she once told a librarian, "I keep digging up more interesting people."


Harkin Announces Bid for Presidency


People
*
Robert Curry, a former principal at Welch Currier Curry Anderson, Boston, has been named senior vice president and associate creative director at Houston, Effler &amp; Partners, Boston. *
Thomas R. Evans has been promoted to senior vice president, associate publisher at U.S.
News &amp; World Report, New York, from vice president and advertising sales director.
He will be assuming some responsibilities of Richard Thompson, senior vice president and publisher, who is assuming a part-time schedule as of Jan. 1.


Newark's Housing Stock Can Match That of Most Other Cities; Blame the Tunnel
To the Editor:
Your special report "The Two Newarks: Boom Amid Bust" (front page, Aug. 13) questions whether or not Newark can become "livable" again to match its downtown business zone and regain the population it has lost since World War II.


Thomas B. Swift Wed to Joan Gillespie
Joan O'Neill Gillespie, the financial manager for Agnes Bourne Inc., a San Francisco furniture company, and Thomas Benton Swift, an executive vice president of Hines Interests, a real-estate development company in San Francisco, were married yesterday.
Judge George Revercomb of the Federal District Court in Washington officiated at Anderson House in Washington.
Mrs.
Swift, 32 years old, is a daughter of Mrs.
Julian Edgeworth Gillespie Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Mr.
Gillespie, an executive vice president of Johnson Lemon &amp; Company, a Washington securities brokerage.
The bride graduated from the University of Virginia and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.


Maynard Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NASA MOVES TO END LONGTIME RELIANCE ON BIG SPACECRAFT
In a change that could save billions of dollars, the space agency is reluctantly shelving many of its plans for large spacecraft in favor of ones that are relatively small and simple.
The 7-ton, 32-foot-long, $710 million satellite put in orbit yesterday morning by the space shuttle Discovery is the largest American craft ever built for monitoring the earth's environment, but it could be the last of its kind.


National Gas &amp; Oil reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The U.S.-Soviet Agenda; Moscow's Economic Struggle Is Paramount, As Baker's Week of Talks Makes Evident
When he was meeting in Moscow with the new K.G.B. chief, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d asked for a small favor.
Would the K.G.B., Mr.
Baker asked, please help the leaders of the new Soviet economic council locate and total up all Soviet gold reserves so they could prepare an economic reform plan that the West could seriously respond to?


Israeli Soldier Is Shot and Killed In an Ambush in the West Bank
An Israeli soldier was shot and killed in an ambush over the weekend in a West Bank village, an Israeli Army spokesman said today, calling the attack the latest indication that Palestinians are increasingly using firearms instead of stones in their uprising against Israel.
"There's been an escalation in attempts to use firearms against military and non-military targets in the West Bank and Gaza Strip in general and in my district in particular," said an army commander responsible for the Jenin region 45 miles north of Jerusalem where the shooting occurred on Saturday.


PLM Equipment Growth Fund L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The nation's large life insurers have quietly begun exploring the establishment of a giant emergency fund that could provide short-term assistance to cash-strapped companies.
The fund, which would be financed by the insurers, would probably be modeled after the Fed's lending program for distressed banks.  [ Page D1. ]


Billy Graham Is Back to Save New York
When the Rev.
Billy Graham preached his first sermon in New York, at Madison Square Garden in 1957, it was to a mostly white middle-class Protestant audience.
He read the lesson of Sodom and Gomorrah from the Bible, substituting "New York" for the names of the cities of sin.
When Mr.
Graham returns to New York next Sunday, preaching in Central Park, his audience and his message will be different.
The people behind the event are from 900 New York churches that are dominated by black, Hispanic and Asian members.
And Mr.
Graham said last week that he wanted to tell them "some of the good things about New York."


Sweden's Socialists Suffer Major Defeat, But Rivals Are Split
Sweden's long-governing Social Democrats suffered their worst election defeat in more than 60 years today when voters punished the party in a rebellion against the Western world's most extensive welfare state.
Financial problems including high taxes and a stagnant economy prompted Swedish voters to swing sharply to the right, giving the five non-Socialist parties together about 53 percent of the vote.
Prime Minister to Resign


Viking Office Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


D. B. Klein Wed To Janet S. Hong
Janet Syeunghee Hong and Dorian B. Klein were married last evening at Memorial Church in Boston.
The Rev.
Preston B. Hannibal, the Episcopal chaplain of Harvard University, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Klein, 27 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Soon Sung Hong of Weston, Mass.
She graduated from Harvard and its business school.
Her father is a managing director of Goldstar Precision Company Ltd., an electronics manufacturing company in Seoul, South Korea.


Comptroller Defends Dinkins
At a ceremony yesterday honoring a Hasidic student slain in Crown Heights last month, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman defended Mayor David N. Dinkins and criticized the police after a series of Jewish speakers had attacked the actions of both in relation to the area's racial disturbances.
Ms.
Holtzman was the final speaker at Congregation Ahavas Moishe, at 1612 Maple Street at the edge of Crown Heights, as its sanctuary -- pierced by a bullet last week -- was renamed for Yankel Rosenbaum, who was fatally stabbed in apparent retaliation for the killing of a black 7-year-old boy by a Hasidic driver in Crown Heights last month.


Whiting Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Madeline Klein Has Wedding
Madeline Gail Klein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Klein of Killingworth, Conn., was married yesterday to David Kleinbard, a son of Joan Kleinbard of Rye, N.Y., and the late Martin Kleinbard.
The bride's mother, Barbara Klein, a justice of the peace in Killingworth, officiated at the Stonehenge Inn in Ridgefield, Conn.
Mrs.
Kleinbard, 27 years old, was until recently a history teacher at St.
Vincent Academy in Newark.
She is a graduate of Earlham College.
Her father, a retired poultry farmer, is a consultant to the Agency for International Development.


Unions Court Old Allies: Immigrants and Unorganized
"Welcome to the Williamsburg workers' center," a handwritten sign on the wall says in Spanish.
The place is unprepossessing.
Inexpensive wood paneling lines the walls of the three plain rooms.
An unmarked red metal door faces out on a quiet industrial street in Brooklyn.
But to anyone willing to sign up and pay a $12 fee, the center offers a chance to take an English-language course or find out how to obtain unemployment insurance.


In Trenton, Court Takes On Toxic-Damage Cases
The New Jersey Supreme Court is searching for an easier way to let people who say they contracted cancer from exposure to toxic substances to get their claims before a jury.
Medical experts are uncertain about the exact cause of most cancers, and plaintiffs who claimed that the cancer contracted by them or their relatives was caused by exposure to a toxic substance have had to rely on statistical evidence presented by "expert witnesses" to try to establish their claims.


Stalin's Brain
In a startling instance of glasnost, a Soviet journalist has revealed the existence of the actual brains of Lenin, Stalin and other historical figures.
They were pickled or stored on slides in a hitherto obscure Brain Institute in Moscow.
The idea for this ghoulish enterprise was Stalin's.
A staff of scientists has labored for 67 years to confirm, without apparent success, the old tyrant's belief that the cranium would disclose a physiological reason why some individuals towered over others.
Remarkably, the institute persisted into the Gorbachev era; a prized recent acquisition is said to be the brain of Andrei Sakharov.
One can guess why no findings were ever published.
It has long been known that among normal human beings there is a considerable difference in brain weight without any discernible correlation to intelligence.
And the belief that the shape of a skull determines character was the specious premise of phrenology, a pseudoscience that flourished a century ago.


More Than Game Plan Needed to Defeat Bills
After all the strategy and creative Jet game plans on offense and defense today, at the end it came down to the players.
And the Buffalo Bills have the better players.


Out of the Lab And In Your Face
On the playgrounds, the nonscientific term is "in your face."
In his physics classroom at Brooklyn College, though, Prof.
PETER BRANCAZIO has devised a formula for that defiant sports gesture, the slam dunk:
V=48T
.
V
stands for vertical leap in inches,
T
equals hang time in seconds.


Judging Robert Gates: Dialogue - Farewell to the Old C.I.A.; Just the Man For the Job?
The confirmation hearings on the nomination of Robert Gates as Director of Central Intelligence give us an opportunity to look into the future as well as the past.
I am not among those who have rushed to a negative judgment about Mr.
Gates.
He would clearly bring valuable experience to the position, having been both a producer of intelligence after serving in several different positions at the C.I.A. and a consumer of intelligence as a member of the National Security Council staff in the Carter and Bush Administrations.
At the same time, serious questions have been raised about his purported knowledge of the Iran-contra affair that demand thorough examination.
I will not reach any conclusions about Mr.
Gates's nomination until I have obtained answers to these questions in the hearings, which begin today.


Review/Cabaret; Barbara Cook's Broadway
Even though it was 40 years ago when Barbara Cook made her Broadway debut as the ingenue lead in the Broadway musical "Flahooley," an aura of dewy wholesomeness still clings to the Atlanta-born singer, who is appearing at the Cafe Carlyle, 35 East 76th Street in Manhattan, through Sept. 25.
Looking back to days of "The Music Man," "Plain and Fancy" and "Candide" at Thursday's early show, the singer recalled that at the time she had no idea she was living through what is now called the golden age of the Broadway musical.
"Nobody told me," she said in a voice that still carries a homey Southern twang.
"I was just wondering where my next show was coming from."


Heritage Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Redbook's Favorite J-Word Will No Longer Be 'Juggler'
TO herald a new focus for Redbook, a $2 million trade advertising campaign is redefining the audience of the women's service magazine.
So bid adieu to the "juggler" and say hello to the "squeezer."
For the last nine years, Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, the agency for the Hearst Magazines monthly, has portrayed the Redbook reader as deftly juggling her marriage, career, family and home.
That message was reinforced in a series of advertisements, using themes including "Nobody reads the juggler like Redbook," that grew to become among the most familiar in the field.


Serbs Remember Who Sided With Nazis; Croatia's Support
To the Editor:
In "Think Before You Say, 'Poor Croatia' " (Op-Ed, Aug. 17), Bob Djurdjevic tries to liken the policies of the Government of Serbia with those of the Government of Croatia.
His attempt simply does not stand against facts.


Review/Pop; Nicely Raw Saxophonist
One of the more fascinating things about Wednesday night's show at Symphony Space was that in its variety of music, it proved that cliches don't necessarily respect stylistic boundaries.
The show, put on by the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians and featuring a percussion ensemble and the saxophonist John Stubblefield's group, moved from functional mainstream jazz to dusty, ostensibly progressive compositions.
The evening began with a piece by the composer Muhal Richard Abrams called "Percussion 26 Number One." Featuring six percussionists (some of whom also played mallet instruments), Bud Revels on tenor saxophone and clarinet and Mr.
Abrams on piano and synthesizer, it moved slowly from section to section.
Some parts were heavy on crashing cymbals, others flirted with a march feel; some contrasted the sound of the tenor saxophone with mallet instruments.
At times the music seemed tightly composed and at others it seemed as if the musicians had only suggestions about the direction in which the improvisations should move.
But for the most part the piece kept the solemnity and seriousness that characterize modernist experimentalism, and in its avowal of pleasure it kept the musicians more important than the audience.


Greenstone Roberts Advertising Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


U.S. Weighs Aid to the Soviet Military
Scrambling to adjust to the changing Soviet military, the Defense Department is considering giving technical and organizational help to Moscow's armed forces and those of the newly independent Baltic countries.
In a gesture that would have been virtually unthinkable a decade ago, Pentagon officials now say they are prepared to offer -- if asked -- advice on how to reorganize shrinking Soviet forces, draft military budgets subject to legislative control, convert weapons factories into commercial businesses and broaden exchanges on the command and control of nuclear weapons.


Compaq to Show Computers
The Compaq Computer Corporation plans to introduce four computers on Monday with several parts that can be replaced when more advanced versions of those parts are produced.
Three new machines that use Intel's more powerful 80486 computer chip are priced from $3,199 to $7,199, offering a wide range of speed and memory.
Three versions of the fourth machine, which has an 80386 chip, are priced below $4,000.


Militant Jews March Past New Jersey Homes of Controversial Blacks


Reviews/Music; African Sounds as Heard By an American Jazzman
Last week might have been Symbolism Week at Lincoln Center.
On Wednesday, Kurt Masur began his tenure as the New York Philharmonic's music director with a concert that invoked Europe and the United States.
And on Friday night at Alice Tully Hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center opened its first fall season with a tribute, appropriately, to Africa, the fountainhead of jazz as well as innumerable other varieties of the world's music.
"Blues to Africa" presented African music as heard through North American ears.
It was a concert of pieces by and associated with Randy Weston, a Brooklyn-born jazz pianist who has traveled widely in Africa since the 1960's, that were arranged for the 13-member African Rhythms Orchestra by Melba Liston, who sat at stage left, following her scores.
Throughout the program, the music melded the riffs, short phrases and modal scales of African music with the extended harmonies and glinting dissonances of jazz.
Because African roots are so widely shared, the arrangements and solos could suggest brass-band dirges, calypsos, be-bop and other styles without surrendering their own character.


Humble Sludge Holds Wealth of Soil Nutrients
To the Editor:
Your articles on sewage treatment plants in New York City (The Week in Review, Aug. 18) are a much needed step in making us all aware of the unglamorous but essential realities of treating and disposing of the enormous quantities of waste water we generate.
One aspect mentioned briefly, the need to dispose of the sludge generated by treatment, contains an important inaccuracy and deserves greater scrutiny.


Elderly Woman Slain By Neighbor's Dogs
An 82-year-old woman paying a visit on a neighbor died when the neighbor's two mastiffs mauled her, authorities said.
The woman, Mildred McNeil, was found laying face down in her neighbor's driveway just after 11 A.M.
Saturday in Washington County about 40 miles north of Albany, the police said.


Gannett Challenge to F.C.C. Rules
In what promises to be a new wrinkle on the issue of media cross-ownership, the Gannett Company's recent purchase of five daily papers in the Washington suburbs has prompted a challenge to the company's license to operate WUSA-TV, a CBS affiliate based in Washington.
The current license is up for renewal on Oct. 1.
Two groups are fighting Gannett's application to renew the license on the ground that Gannett's ownership of the five dailies violates the Federal Communications Commission's rule against joint ownership of a daily newspaper and a television station in the same community.
The rule was adopted in 1975 to prevent any one party from exerting too much control over a community's sources of information and advertising.


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for 12mos to July 31


Susanne Hollander Wed To Avery Nelson Gilbert
Susanne Jenny Hollander, a vice president and director of editorial and science services at KPR Informedia in New York, was married yesterday to Avery Nelson Gilbert, the director of olfactory science at Givaudan-Roure, a perfume company in Geneva.
Jerome Kienlen, the Mayor of Basking Ridge, N.J., officiated at the Bernards Inn in Bernardsville, N.J.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 16: MONDAY Bunker Hill Inc Secs General Millls Lowes Cos NBD Bankcorp Inc


Bacteria Found In Water on S.I.
E. coli bacteria has been found in a water sample from Staten Island, and the City Environmental Protection Department declared an alert for Port Ivory yesterday.
The department urged the 3,000 people in the primarily industrial section to boil tap water before drinking or cooking with it.
The area is bounded by the Staten Island Expressway, South Avenue, the Kill van Kull and the Arthur Kill.
The alert will run until at least Wednesday, said Commissioner Albert F. Appleton.


In Excess Outperforms Other Woodward Stars
In a race run remarkably true to form, the Irish-bred colt In Excess swept past an all-star field at Belmont Park yesterday to defeat Farma Way and Festin in the $500,000 Woodward Stakes.
He won his fourth major stakes in a row and took a giant stride toward the season's ultimate prize: the Horse of the Year award.
His jockey, Gary Stevens, reflected on the horse's late surge to success this year and said, "Right now, we're looking at the Breeders' Cup Classic, and I wouldn't trade places with anybody."


Lauren R. Jaburg Weds Peter Lese
Lauren Renee Jaburg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Jaburg of the Bronx, was married yesterday to Peter Lawrence Lese, a son of Ruth E. Lese of New York and William M. Lese of New York and London.
Rabbi Thomas Weiner performed the ceremony at Central Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Lese, 28 years old, is studying for a master's degree in midwifery at Columbia University, where she received a bachelor's degree in nursing.
She also received a B.A. from Oberlin College.
Her father retired as the vice president of the Chain Furniture Shops in Manhattan.
Her mother, Frieda Jaburg, is a retired psychiatric social worker.


Vidcom Post Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Realty Refund Trust reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Senator Harkin Joins Race for President
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa roared into the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination today, scoffing at President Bush as a uncaring plutocrat with political "feet of clay" and casting the election as a stark choice between a government for the privileged and a government for the people at large.
With a fiery address delivered at a rally just south of Des Moines, Mr.
Harkin promised a hard and unyielding attack on Mr.
Bush, brushing aside all the months of poll data and expert analysis holding that the President will be very tough to beat.
"I know there are those who say it's a long shot," said the 51-year-old Mr.
Harkin, "that we might as well just call the election off."


Skylink America reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Television; Evoking Childhood Joy And the Darker Hours
Gilles Maheu and Carbone 14, a theater-dance company in Montreal, closed this season's Alive From Off Center series with "Le Dortoir" ("The Dormitory"), a bittersweet, intensely evocative look back at childhood.
Excerpted from a television adaptation of Mr.
Maheu's play of the same name, the piece, which will be seen on Channel 31 at 9:30 tonight and again on Friday at 1 P.M., mixes dance, words and film into a seamless fantasy rooted in a soul's dark night.
It opens with a man sitting alone on a bed in what could be an empty, echoing school dormitory.
Outside, a wind blows through the night.
As the camera moves around his desolate face, it reveals that the man is holding a gun to his chin.
But his attention suddenly shifts, his gaze turning upward.
A young girl floats gradually through a bleak industrial window.
The air fills with schoolgirls floating high over the heads of young men sitting on beds arranged in neat rows, holding their shoes close to their chests.


Abroad at Home; Which Judge Thomas?
"He has no anchor to windward," a prominent Republican lawyer said.
After a week of hearings, that seems a perceptive judgment on Clarence Thomas.
Judge Thomas comes across as an engaging person, sympathetic, disarming.
But we have seen little if anything of the strengths on which a justice must draw in the storms of the Supreme Court.


New Philharmonic Post
The New York Philharmonic has named Allison Vulgamore to the new position of general manager, effective immediately.
The orchestra's managing director, Deborah Borda, said Ms.
Vulgamore's responsibilities would include orchestra personnel, music administration, educational activities, recordings, broadcasts and tours.
Ms.
Vulgamore has been with the Philharmonic since November 1987, when she became orchestra manager.
She was acting managing director from last year until Ms.
Borda was named managing director in May.


Gretzky Is Lost for Cup After Injury Against U.S.
If Canada beats the United States in the championship round of the Canada Cup this week, it will have to be without Wayne Gretzky, the best player in hockey, who is out for the rest of the tournament with back spasms.
Gretzky suffered the injury Saturday night here when checked into the boards from behind by Gary Suter midway through Canada's 4-1 victory in Game 1 of the two-of-three games championship round.


New Software By Microsoft
Making a bid for the home- and small-business market, the Microsoft Corporation is scheduled to announce three new low-priced software programs today.
The programs -- Microsoft Works for Windows, Microsoft Money and Microsoft Publisher -- run under Microsoft's Windows operating system version 3.0, which gives I.B.M.- compatible personal computers much of the ease of use of Apple Computer's Macintosh.
They are intended for new computer users who do not need the power of Microsoft's larger programs.


Disarray on Ice With N.H.L. At Crossroads
Brett Hull remembers his college days, in the mid-1980's, when he could watch big-league hockey on cable television.
"It was great," he said.
"Every week, on ESPN and USA."
With or without TV this season, Hull wants to see Eric Lindros, the 18-year-old amateur sensation, in the National Hockey League.
"We need Eric Lindros," Hull said, "and we need people to get off his case."


Kansas Campus Ousts a Leader, Igniting Debate
Last spring, Darren E. Fulcher became the first black student body president at the University of Kansas.
But after admitting that he hit a former girlfriend he was ousted from office, touching off a campus furor involving issues of race, women's rights and journalistic ethics.
Some black and other minority students assert that the case against Mr.
Fulcher has been vigorously pursued by the largely white student senate because of his color.


Auditing The Auditors -- A special Report.; How B.C.C.I.'s Accounts Won Stamp of Approval
In the spring of 1990, relations between the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and its auditor were badly strained.
In a confidential report to the directors of the troubled bank on April 18, 1990, Price Waterhouse expressed its mounting concern about several matters of the "utmost urgency." They included a pile of troubled loans to customers, suspect lending to shareholders and transactions that Price Waterhouse said were "either false or deceitful."
Price Waterhouse told the directors that it had tried to identify all the fraudulent transactions.
But, the auditor added, "It is impossible, without an exhaustive inquiry, to know whether this has been achieved."


Holiday RV Supterstores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Recovery May Require A Bigger Cut in Yields
Long-term bond yields have fallen by nearly three-quarters of a percentage point in three months, but many credit market analysts say even steeper declines are necessary to revive the anemic economy.
Since 1989, the economy has been mired in what some economists have labeled a growth recession.


Labor Is Under Siege From Washington
To the Editor:
Since Thomas Geoghegan, author of "Labor Among the Ruins" (Op-Ed, Sept. 2), is a labor lawyer, he should know how difficult it is to be a union member in the United States today.
This is the only country in the industrialized world where union-bashing is Government and business policy.
Mr.
Geoghegan acknowledges that the labor movement is stronger in Canada, yet he neglects to point out that Canadian labor laws are more democratic and less restrictive than those in the United States.


Thomas Opponents Seek to Bring Up Issue of Race
When the Senate Judiciary Committee reconvenes this week to consider President Bush's nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, the judge's opponents will try to press a theme that has been muted in the hearings thus far: the issue of race and the courts.
After Judge Thomas completed four days of questioning on Friday, White House strategists were cheered by the apparent momentum in his favor.
The committee's Democrats who had started out the week pointedly questioning the nominee seemed suddenly discouraged on Friday by his stolid refusals to engage them in debate on several issues.


For Networks, Is No. 1 a Winner?
Although the green flag went up on the new television season last night, the annual ratings race has begun with less intensity than usual.
The reason: one of the three main competitors says it does not matter who wins.


Jay Jacobs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Eye Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Anderson Breaks for a Bit of Daylight
The way Neal Anderson remembered all the congestion he had endured at the start of his sixth season with the Chicago Bears, he sounded as if he were talking about a commuter's existence on the Dan Ryan Expressway at 5 P.M., not a running back's perspective at Soldier Field on a Sunday afternoon.
Through the first half of the Bears' game against the Giants this afternoon, too much of Anderson's season had consisted of moving slowly through too much traffic.
Today, his 4 yards in the first half gave him a two-and-a-half game total of 95.


Quotations of the Day
"It seems to me the Administration has really shot itself in the foot." -- Henry Siegman, the executive director of the American Jewish Congress.  [ A8:1. ]
"This is the fault of Shamir, not Bush.' -- Michael Lerner, the editor of Tikkun, a left-wing Jewish magazine in San Francisco.  [ A8:2. ]


Egypt Wants Powerful Central Bank
The Egyptian Government, confronting the second big scandal in the nation's financial industry in less than three years, is planning to give its central bank sweeping new powers to regulate the industry for the first time in two decades.
Egyptian officials described the new regulations, which will be put before Parliament in a few weeks, as an effort to build up the capital base of the country's banks and monitor their activities.


INQUIRY IS CRITICAL OF AIDS SCIENTIST
A preliminary report by scientific investigators has found no evidence of misconduct by Dr.
Robert C. Gallo in research leading to his landmark paper linking AIDS to a specific virus.
But the Federal inquiry has concluded that he deserves "significant censure" for permitting lapses and deception by scientists working under him.
The report by a panel of advisers to the National Institutes of Health said that though Dr.
Gallo's actions did not meet the formal definition of scientific misconduct, he had "created and fostered" an atmosphere in which falsification of laboratory results took place and had acquiesced in the wrongdoing of his colleagues.


Laser Recording Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Allercare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Helmick's Decision Sets Tone for Election
Robert Helmick's decision not to seek another four-year term as president of the United States Olympic Committee has expanded the campaign season for that position by more than a year and will likely cause the organization to consider a wider variety of candidates to succeed him.
Helmick announced his intention on Saturday, several days after the U.S.O.C. appointed a special investigator to review his work as a paid consultant to groups trying to expand their ties to the Olympics.


Corrections
Photographs on Sept. 8 with an article about a singles weekend at the Concord Hotel in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y., carried an erroneous credit line.
They were by David Jennings, for The New York Times.


World Economies


Wendy Gelfand Weds Bennett Chaite
Wendy Kim Gelfand, an associate in the New York law firm of Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon, and Bennett Steven Chaite, the owner of the A. C. Desk Company in Mineola, L.I., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Robert Rothman and Cantor Deborah Bard officiated at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
The bride, 30 years old, is a daughter of Myrna Wendinger of White Plains and Jay Gelfand of Winter Spring, Fla., and she is a former stepdaughter of Robert Wendinger of Eastchester, N.Y.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Maryland and received a law degree from Pace University.
Her mother is a nurse educator at the Burke Rehabilitation Center in White Plains and at Pace University in Pleasantville, N.Y.


Serbs Remember Who Sided With Nazis
To the Editor:
"Serbia vs. the New World Order" (editorial, Aug. 14) could have come from the World War I Viennese press.
A little more evenhandedness would be appreciated.
The phrase "Greater Serbia" is an Austro-Hungarian propaganda ploy and means the following: Under no circumstances should the Serbs ever be allowed to unite, even if they're the most populous people in the area.


A Shoe to Make Imelda Jealous
MORTEN ANDERSEN, the New Orleans' Saints kicker, buys one shoe at a time: the left one.
And the company that makes it says it costs $5,000 to produce.
Andersen, whose powerful left foot has made him one of the most accurate field-goal kickers in National Football League history (better than 77 percent), wears a shoe molded to his foot.
The size 11 1/2 shoe is customized by Strength Footwear of Metairie, La.
But the prototype was shaped in the company's factory in South Korea. . . .
Ever dream of scoring a front-row seat to watch a fourth-place team play a last-place team?
Now's your chance.
When the Mets play a doubleheader against the Expos in Shea Stadium tomorrow evening, season tickets won't count.
That means that all seats, including those field-level boxes normally occupied by Wall Street brokers and the like, are available on a first-come, first-serve basis at Shea Stadium or through Ticketmaster.
The games, originally scheduled to be played in Montreal, had be be shifted to New York because of the falling concrete that forced the temporary closing of Olympic Stadium. . . .
They go through, oh, thousands of tennis balls at the United States Open.
And now, kids somewhere are swinging at balls bashed by MONICA SELES or STEFAN EDBERG.
Since 1986, more than 19,000 Open balls have been donated to elementary and junior high schools.
Those interested should call (800) 253-USTA.


Lauren Winer and Michael Marrus Are Married
Lauren B. Winer, the publisher of the Journal of Portfolio Management and the Journal of Fixed Income in New York, was married yesterday to Michael E. Marrus, an associate at Fieldstone Private Capital Group in New York.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel and Cantor Harry Gelman officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Howard A. Winer of South Orleans, Mass.


Techknits Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


3D Doesn't Only Mean Third Down
It's Super Bowl XXXV, the year is 2001, and the Jets have the ball on the Packers' 33-yard line, with 54 seconds remaining, trailing by two points.
It's fourth-and-5.
Do you let 50-year-old PAT LEAHY go for a 50-yard field goal?


Toll Brothers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Top Official For Schools Is Resigning
The head of school construction in New York City, whose appointment three years ago was hailed as a promising step toward reducing building costs and delays, has resigned without warning out of anger over $750 million in budget cuts, school officials said yesterday.
They said the resignation of the official, Charles E. Williams, a retired general in the Army Corps of Engineers, was a blow to the city's efforts to remodel schools and to build new ones.
The School Construction Authority had got off to a "great start under his aggressive leadership," the Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, said in a statement in which he expressed regret at Mr.
Williams's decision.
Mr.
Williams was the authority's first president and chief executive.
Big Program Under Way
The authority was established in 1988 to award and supervise construction contracts -- a role previously performed by the Board of Education -- after civic groups and prosecutors complained about shoddy work and overcharges on construction projects.
Mr.
Williams was appointed soon afterward.
The authority had been moving ahead with a $4.3 billion plan to build 50 new schools and 30 annexes and to remodel 70 other schools over five years.
It had awarded more than $1.5 billion in construction contracts under Mr.
Williams.
The resignation, which was submitted on Friday and takes effect Oct. 15, appeared to take school officials by surprise.
James Vlasto, the spokesman for Mr.
Fernandez, said there had been no discussions about a successor.
"The resignation came in so suddenly," he said.
The authority's financing was originally patched together from New York City general obligation bonds and Municipal Assistance Corporation funds.
But last December the Dinkins administration, facing about a $3 billion budget shortfall, asked the board to scale back its ambitious plan for school construction and renovation by more than 20 percent over three and a half years, resulting in the $750 million reduction in the authority's budget.
That was too much for Mr.
Williams to bear, said Meyer S. Frucher, a trustee at the authority.
"He was unhappy about the cuts," Mr.
Frucher said.
"The project was cut substantially. We're all upset about the cuts."
Mr. Williams could not be reached for comment yesterday.
Mayor David N. Dinkins said through a spokesman, Jeff Maclin, that Mr.
Williams's resignation was "regrettable." 29 Years in Army
An Alabama native, Mr.
Williams, 52 years old, learned construction from his father, a subcontractor.
He graduated from the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama and, in the middle of his military career, received a master's degree in business administration from Atlanta University.
Mr.
Williams, a retired two-star general, spent 29 years in the Army Corps of Engineers, at first as a helicopter pilot in Vietnam ferrying engineers under enemy fire to repair roads or install wells.
Later he directed huge projects in Europe and the United States, including the construction in the mid-1980's of a $1.3 billion, 3,000-acre addition to Fort Drum near Watertown, N.Y.
He was commander the North Atlantic Division of the Army Corps of Engineers from 1986 to 1988.
In appointing Mr.
Williams, many school officials had said that his Army experience would help him negotiate the bureaucracy that had delayed school improvement projects in the past.
To accomplish that goal, the authority, in one of its first major policy changes, assigned a single manager to supervise on-site work, a practice widely used by private developers.
The project manager was given the authority to approve or deny job modifications sought by contractors after work had begun.
In the past, delays created by disputes over these modifications had slowed school construction and increased costs.
Exempted From Rules
To reduce pre-construction time, the State Legislature also permitted the authority to forgo land-use reviews and a host of other pre-construction steps.
It also let the authority eliminate undesirable contractors from the bidding pool.
More significantly, the Legislature exempted the authority for five years from the Wicks Law, which requires municipal agencies to hire separate contractors for plumbing, electricity and heating instead of having a general contractor in charge of the work.
Opponents of the Wicks Law say it has led to inefficient construction management..
The authority also adopted a policy that required contractors to receive full payment within 30 days of the completion of a specific segment of a project.
Previously, some payments were withheld for a year or more, discouraging qualified companies from seeking school work.
Mr.
Frucher said he did not believe that Mr.
Williams's departure would leave the authority in disarray.
"He has a deep staff," he said.
"We'll miss him, but we will carry on."


In a Town 130 Miles From Moscow, Democracy Filters Through Slowly
When intimations of a coup reached this town northeast of Moscow, the editor of the local paper mulled things over and took down the portrait of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
After a bit more reflection, he also pulled down Lenin's picture.
It wasn't that Vladimir P. Potapov, editor of the Suzdal News, favored or opposed the coup any more or less than most other folks out here.
It's just that in the provinces, the intrigues of Moscow have rarely meant more than changing portraits and slogans and waiting for new instructions to filter down.


Metro Matters; 3 Who Inspired Political Change Now Embody It
What Beverly Morris, Joy Clarke Holmes and Joanne Oplustil were doing on Primary Day last week was a metaphor for New York's political evolution.
The three women from Brooklyn had already been immortalized in legal annals as the plaintiffs in Beverly Morris et al. v.
Board of Estimate of City of New York, the suit filed 10 years ago that eventually transformed the structure of New York City's government.
The litigation culminated on Thursday in the nomination of candidates for an expanded City Council who are ethnically and racially more diverse, if ideologically largely homogeneous.


Forest Supervisors Say Politicians Are Asking Them to Cut Too Much
Supervisors of some of the nation's largest public forests say they have come under intense political pressure to cut more timber than the land can handle.
Already, grizzly bears and 20-pound bull trout are in trouble from excessive logging in the forests of the northern Rocky Mountains, biologists say.
Now, managers of these forests say they are slowing down the Government's logging program to protect fish and wildlife.
But they say they are doing so at the risk of their own jobs.


Ellen Stahl Weds Charles K. Bacon
Ellen Beatrice Stahl, a registered nurse at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, and Dr.
Charles Kingsley Bacon, a resident in otolaryngology there, were married yesterday in Glen Cove, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict officiated at Harrison House.
Mrs.
Bacon, 29 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Stahl of Huntington Bay, L.I., and a graduate of the University of Delaware.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Sid Harvey Industries, distributors of heating and cooling components in Garden City, L.I.


Ilio Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are scheduled for this week:
&lt;biAmerican Muni Term Trust Income II, six million shares.
Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc.


Alias Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mississippi Governor's Record at Issue
Four years ago when he was elected Governor of Mississippi at the age of 39, Ray Mabus gained national attention for his vow that "Mississippi will never be last again" and his promise of far-reaching governmental reform in the nation's poorest state.
Now, as Mr.
Mabus campaigns for re-election, it is clear that it was easier to proclaim "our day has come" than to deliver on the promise.
Mr.
Mabus, whose Ivy League pedigree and state-of-the-art New South oratory gave him the image of something of a Porsche politician in a Chevy pickup state, is a solid favorite to win the Democratic nomination in Tuesday's primary after outspending his opponent, former Congressman Wayne Dowdy, 5 to 1.
Vision vs.
Accomplishment


India Plans Investigation Of B.C.C.I. Activity There
Finance Minister Manmohan Singh announced on Saturday that he would ask the country's intelligence agencies to investigate charges that the Bank of Credit and Commerce International laundered money from India and maintained close contacts with drug barons.
"It was probably a mistake to bring this bank" into India, Mr.
Singh said during a six-hour debate in Parliament on the bank and its activities.
He said Arab countries, including Abu Dhabi, had put pressure on India to allow the opening of a B.C.C.I. branch in 1983 and also said domestic Muslim lobbies had joined in the pressure.


Out of Kenya
Last month, we spent six days in Nairobi with a group of writers planning to form a Kenyan chapter of PEN.
The time seemed auspicious for the venture.
In recent months, Amos Wako, Kenya's new Attorney General, lifted the ban on a major publication, the Nairobi Law Monthly, and ordered the release of several political prisoners.
The news we heard at the two official meetings we were granted was equally promising: one official assured us that Kenya had "a free press"; the Minister of Culture praised the "free atmosphere" his country offered to writers.


Reviews/Theater; Historical People in a Fabricated Tale
It might seem gratifying to some critics to think that actors would sell their souls for a good review.
It might seem even more satisfying for anyone on the other side of the footlights -- actors, directors, producers, even budding playwrights -- to believe that critics would sell their good opinion for a few dollars stuffed in an envelope.
Paul Firestone assumes both points of view in "Sublime Lives," his slight first play at the Theater Row Theater, in which the author has taken a cast of characters from the American theater of a century ago and tried to fabricate a morality tale around them.
Mr.
Firestone is clearly smitten by the theater, especially the fin de siecle era of actor-managers whose fame often rested as much on their egos as on their talent.
At the center of "Sublime Lives" is Richard Mansfield, who is about to commission the play "Beau Brummell" from an aspiring young playwright named Clyde Fitch.
In Mr.
Firestone's version, this rouses the jealousy not only of William Winter, the drama critic for The New York Tribune, who wants to write the play himself, but also of Beatrice Cameron, Mansfield's leading lady and future wife, who is afraid Fitch will seduce him.


Algonquin Mercantile reports earnings for Qtr to July 28


Aid Fund Considered By Insurers
The nation's large life insurance companies have quietly begun exploring the establishment of a giant emergency fund that could provide short-term assistance to cash-strapped insurers.
The fund, which would be financed by the companies themselves, would probably be modeled after the Federal Reserve's lending program for distressed banks.


Thomas Spurs Black Introspection
Time and again over the past few days, the Rev.
James W. E. Dixon 3d heard people arguing over Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court, and he became concerned by the acrimony that he saw settling over his congregation in the predominantly black Houston neighborhood of Acres Home.
"Black people are divided over Clarence Thomas," he said, "even divided inside themselves. And I decided to spend my energies trying to soothe these bitter feelings in my own community so we can move ahead."


Essay; Bush at the U.N.
The moment has come for the President of the United States to step up to his obligation to form and articulate American foreign policy in the wake of the death of Communism and the breakup of the Soviet Union.
The forum is the U.N. session opening this week in New York.
The need for a substantive speech, now scheduled for Monday Sept. 23, is all the more pressing because his last attempt -- his dismaying "Chicken Kiev" speech in Ukraine on Aug. 1 -- betrayed a misconceptual framework.
That was the first address by a U.S.
President that had to be followed by an op-ed article by his national security adviser to explain that what he said was not what he meant.


Testing A $35 Fee To Watch TV Opera
The pay-per-view television business has established that people will pay $35 to see Mike Tyson knock a man out or Hulk Hogan throw a man across a ring.
Next week, pay-per-view moves on to a new challenge: asking people to pay $35 -- $34.95 to be exact -- to see Placido Domingo go throat to throat with Luciano Pavarotti.


Evelyn Kaplan Has a Wedding
Evelyn Hazel Kaplan, the daughter of Ellen and Robert N. Kaplan of Rye, N.Y., and Steven Herbert Schulman, a son of Linda Raphael of Washington and Lee Schulman of Columbus, Ohio, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Norton Shargel and Rabbi Marc Lee Raphael, the bridegroom's stepfather, performed the ceremony at the Jewish Community Center in Harrison, N.Y.
Mrs.
Schulman, 24 years old, is a graduate of Wellesley College and a former account coordinator in Waltham, Mass., for the public relations firm of Hill &amp; Knowlton.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Kaplan &amp; Kilsheimer.


Viejo Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Inmates Escape; One Is Still at Large
Two inmates, one of them charged with kidnapping a woman at knife point, escaped yesterday morning from the Otsego County Jail by climbing over a fence, the authorities said.
Jason Gavioli and Kevin Kelly escaped about 7:35 A.M. by scaling a fence in the jail's recreation yard while a disturbance distracted guards, said Undersheriff Don Mundy, who added that the escape was planned.


David Golden Weds Susan Wilner in San Francisco
Susan Wilner, a daughter of Mitzi Wilner of San Diego and the late Adolf Wilner, was married in San Francisco yesterday to David Golden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Golden of Minneapolis.
Rabbi David Mayer officiated at Congregation Sherith Israel.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a principal at Schroder Ventures, a venture capital concern in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Buffalo and received a Ph.D. in public health from Harvard University.
Mr.
Golden is a vice president of Allen &amp; Company, a merchant bank in New York.
He received undergraduate and law degrees from Harvard.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday Business Inventories . . .
July


Resource Amer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Winston Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
Afternoon duplicate bridge in midweek has an appeal for many women but few men.
This fact gave birth, almost 35 years ago, to the idea of a "club within a club." Three energetic and popular players, Bea Meadows, Molly Wincor and Betty Baere, founded the "Club Finesse," a group of women who competed each Wednesday afternoon at the Grand Slam Club in the Beverly Hotel in Manhattan.
The idea was so popular that similar games were developed for Tuesday and Thursday afternoons.
Baere's Thursday game, played for many years at the Cavendish Club, now defunct, resurfaced on Friday at the Town Club, 9 East 86th Street.


A Rebirth for 2 Financial Magazines
When word leaked out in May that Corporate Finance, a small but respected magazine, was about to cease publication, the beleaguered magazine industry saw it as just one more publication that could not attract enough advertising to succeed.
But the coup de grace was never administered.
Ten days after the five-year-old publication shut down its offices, Financial World Partners agreed to buy Corporate Finance from its German parent, Verlagsgruppe von Holtzbrinck.


Perceptronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yugoslav Force Retaliates for Blockade
Fighting in the separatist Yugoslav republic of Croatia intensified today as the national army responded with punishing air and ground attacks to a day-old blockade of its garrisons by Croatian forces.
Tension rose markedly here in Zagreb, the Croatian capital, as two MIG fighters of the Yugoslav Air Force buzzed low over the city and air-raid sirens wailed, sending residents scurrying to shelters.


New Retail Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jets Hang Tough, but the Bills Hold On
The Jets stood tall in the face of the National Football League's most prolific offense today and gained a lot of respect but lost the game by letting the Buffalo Bills escape from Giants Stadium with a 23-20 victory.
Jim Kelly hit Thurman Thomas with a 15-yard touchdown pass with 4 minutes 14 seconds to go as the Bills rallied and remained undefeated at 3-0.
With 23 seconds left, Pat Leahy attempted a 51-yard field goal but the kick fell short.
So instead of going into overtime, the Jets went home with a 1-2 record and their second straight loss.


In Teaneck, Jewish Group Marches Past Jeffries Home
A militant Jewish group from New York City invaded the leafy suburbs of Teaneck, N.J., yesterday to stage a noisy march past the homes of a black City College professor whose remarks about Jews have caused an uproar and the black pastor of a Brooklyn church who has invoked inner-city racial issues for years.
At the same time, followers of a half-dozen moderate to militant Jewish groups marched through midtown Manhattan to protest what they called the anti-Semitism of the City College professor and other black advocates in New York and what they termed inadequate responses by established Jewish organizations.


PHILIPPINE SENATE VOTES TO REJECT U.S. BASE RENEWAL
The Philippine Senate voted today to reject a new treaty for the Subic Bay Naval Station and to end an American military presence in the country that has lasted nearly a century.
But President Corazon C. Aquino effectively extended the American lease by calling for a national referendum on the base's future.
In a vote of 12 to 11, the Senate adopted a motion to spurn the new treaty, which would allow thousands of American troops to remain at the base for another 10 years.
The current treaty on Subic Bay, the largest American military installation in the Philippines, expires today.


Elaine Sciolino, Librarian, Is Wed
Elaine Teresa Sciolino, the director of library services at the New York law firm of Simpson, Thacher &amp; Bartlett, was married yesterday to Kenneth Alec Kleinberg, a technical consultant for the accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand in New York.
David Jacobs, a justice of the peace in Hunter, N.Y., officiated at the Alpine Inn in Oliverea, N.Y.


Roadway Motor Plazas Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Victoria Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alligator Sighting in Central Park


Bush's Dispute With Israel Upsets Many Leading Jews
President Bush's demand that Congress delay debate on Israel's request for $10 billion in loan guarantees has deeply troubled many Jews who have been critical of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's Government, with most blaming Mr.
Bush for the confrontation but with some also faulting Mr.
Shamir.
"It seems to me the Administration has really shot itself in the foot," said Henry Siegman, the executive director of the American Jewish Congress.
His organization has expressed serious reservations about Mr.
Shamir's policy of building housing for Jewish settlers in the West Bank, territory Israel seized in the 1967 Middle East war.


Stars Are Money in the Bank
Last week, the Knicks' PATRICK EWING was described as the least marketable star in the sports world by BRANDON STEINER, whose Steiner Sports company puts athletes' faces on cereal boxes and signatures on book contracts.


Red Sox Set Back Yankees And Take Aim at the Jays
Jody Reed of the Boston Red Sox has played in enough close division races to know it is time to start looking for positive signs wherever you can find them.
The schedule, the Red Sox shortstop said, seems full of good things for Boston.
After all, the Red Sox, winging home after a 5-4 victory over the Yankees last night, have all 19 remaining games against the suspects of the American League East, all but seven at Fenway Park.


Teltronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sibling Beers Get Own Ads
Having combined two of its brands in a single advertising campaign in recent years, Van Munching &amp; Company, the United States importer of Heineken and Amstel Light beers, is now separating them.
For the last two years, television and print advertising linked the pair, using themes like, "You're the tops." But television commercials solely for Heineken, the country's best-selling imported beer, began appearing Saturday, while spots for Amstel Light, the best-selling light import, begin appearing this week.


Russell Lynes, 80, an Editor and Arbiter of Taste
Russell Lynes, a former managing editor of Harper's Magazine who for years was one of America's foremost arbiters of taste and mores, especially in architecture and the decorative arts, died Saturday night at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan and North Egremont, Mass.
He had been hospitalized several days for cardiac problems and his death was apparently caused by heart failure, said Michael Bessie, a friend.
Essayist, social historian, photographer and Renaissance man, Mr.
Lynes was an acclaimed expert on what was highbrow, what was lowbrow and what was no brow at all.
One reviewer called him "the maestro of an unpretentious brand of social commentary which is civilized and stimulating."


Spearhead Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Report Urges Science Funds Be Used for Education
A report made public today recommends that the Federal Government designate a portion of the $68 billion now spent annually on Federal science research and development for improving math and science education in public schools.
"We're trying to position the Federal Government to be a leader rather than a cheerleader for science and mathematics education reform," said Dr.
Rollin Johnson, project director for the Carnegie Commission on Science, Technology, and Government, which issued the report.
The commission was established in 1988 by the Carnegie Corporation to study ways to incorporate scientific and technological knowledge in Government policy-making.


Alloy Computer Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Results Plus
TENNIS Muster Defeats Skoff for Title  Thomas Muster defeated fourth-seeded Horst Skoff, 6-2, 6-4, yesterday in an all-Austrian final of the Geneva Open tournament.
The title was Muster's 10th of his career and his second this year.
Muster, 23 years old, also beat Skoff in Florence, Italy, in June.
Skoff, the 1990 Geneva Open champion, who is ranked 25th in the world, started the match badly.
He dropped his service twice in the 28-minute first set.
Throughout the match, he had difficulty with his service, putting in only 57 percent of his first serves. (AP)


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about new research on dyslexia referred incompletely in some copies to an expert on visual pathways in the brain that are critical to the ability to read.
He is Dr.
Bruno Breitmeyer, a psychologist at the University of Houston.


Review/Television; Nutrition's Good News And the 'But' Clauses
If you have not heard that meat and dairy products are not as good for you as vegetables, fruits and grains, you can hear it 10 or 12 times on "Eat Smart," whose producers evidently believe viewers suffer from short-term memory loss as well as a propensity to heart ailments and several forms of cancer.
This nutrition nagger, at 8 P.M. on Channel 13, is as exciting as an all-broccoli breakfast.
Judy Woodruff, looking fit but worried, talks to researchers, who say cancer and heart disease could be cut substantially if people would only lay off fatty foods; visits a supermarket, where she tells the obliging butcher she likes lean, and lunches at a Chinese restaurant (in Denver) and an Italian restaurant (in Southern Italy), both of which go light on you know what.
The colorful fruit and vegetables on display do little for the program's monochromatic theme.
The good news here is that a bagel makes an O.K. snack; the bad news is, no shmear.
Likewise, you can have pizza, without mozzarella.
Molto grazie.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about Congressional testimony by a New York Stock Exchange official on the Treasuries market scandal at Salomon Brothers rendered the official's name incorrectly.
He is Edward Kwalwasser.
A picture caption with the article referred incorrectly in some editions to three witnesses at the Congressional hearing.
The three, shown in the second row, were, from the left, Jack Bennett, a former Treasury official; Junius Peake, chairman of Peake/Ryerson Consulting, and Eugene Rotberg, a former official of the Securities and Exchange Commission and a former executive at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.


Market Place; Del Monte Sells Pay-in-Kind Issue
FOR the first time in more than two years, a new issue of pay-in-kind bonds -- securities that pay interest in more bonds rather than cash -- has been sold, providing more evidence that the junk bond market is reviving.
The $142 million in pay-in-kind bonds were sold by the Del Monte Corporation last month as it refinanced a leveraged buyout that it had completed 18 months earlier.


Enzon Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings for this week is limited to offerings of three- and six-month bills totaling $21.2 billion today, and $12.5 billion of one-year bills on Thursday.
By late in the day Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.16 percent, and the six-month bill at 5.20 percent.
For the outstanding one-year bill, the bid was 5.23 percent.


Congressional Study Challenges Federal Use of Private Contractors
The Federal Government could often save money by using its own employees rather than private contractors for certain work but sometimes lacks the personnel to do so, a report by an investigative arm of Congress said today.
The study by the General Accounting Office, which examined 75 support service contracts assigned by the Department of Energy, offers the first broad challenge to the practice of the Reagan and Bush Administrations of limiting employment as a way to reduce spending.


Bag Lady's Bequest Puts Lawmaker on the Spot
This is the story of the legislator and the bag lady.
Mary Guzelian was a familiar figure wandering the streets of the Back Bay section of Boston, wearing a heavy green coat, several pairs of woolen socks and a blue ski cap even in the summer heat.
She always carried huge shopping bags, some of which, it turns out, were stuffed with cash.


Newark's Housing Stock Can Match That of Most Other Cities
To the Editor:
The comments in "The Two Newarks: Boom Amid Bust" (front page, Aug. 13) on our city's housing stock create a misconception.


Donald Cotter, 68; Nuclear Arms Expert Held Federal Posts
Donald R. Cotter, a retired atomic energy and Pentagon official and a nuclear weapons strategist, died Tuesday at a nursing home in Arlington, Va.
He was 68 years old and died of prostate cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Cotter drew national attention in 1983 when, speaking as a private consultant, he publicly criticized the Administration of President Ronald Reagan.
He charged that it had drastically underestimated the number of missiles and launchers deployed in Europe by the Soviet Union and its allies.


Sports of The Times; Thomas Wants to Go To the Dance
FOR the first time since the Detroit Pistons won the championship in 1990, Isiah Thomas was back at the White House one night recently.
The President of Senegal, Abdou Diouf, was in town and he wanted to meet a star from the world-famous National Basketball Association.


Robert Irving, Conductor, Dies; Music Director for Dance Was 78
Robert Irving, music director of the New York City Ballet from 1958 to 1989 and conductor for other major dance troupes including the Royal Ballet and the Martha Graham Dance Company, died Friday at the Royal Hampshire County Hospital in Winchester, England.
He was 78 years old and lived in Winchester.
He died of a heart attack, said Diana Morrison-Corley, a niece.


Cuss and Effect: Mets to Talk to Elster
Both the Mets and the Major League Baseball Players Association said yesterday that they would speak with shortstop Kevin Elster regarding the incident he was involved in on Sunday with Umpire Harry Wendelstedt.
"What I found unusual was that the umpire gave public comments," said Al Harazin, the executive vice president of the Mets.
"Our plan is to sit down and review the situation with Kevin."


Muller Removes Skates and Walks Out
The phone rang in Lou Lamoriello's office this morning and the news was not good.
Lamoriello, the president of the Devils, was told by Gus Badali, the agent for Kirk Muller, that the captain of the team had decided to walk out of training camp effective this morning until his contract was renegotiated.
Badali went a step further this afternoon in a telephone interview from his Toronto office.
He said that Muller's days with the Devils were numbered unless a deal was struck fairly soon.


Girl Chained by Parents Says She Wants to Stay at Home
A 15-year-old girl whose parents had chained her to an iron pipe for two months in their Bronx apartment to keep her away from drugs said last night that she loved her parents, wanted to be back home and understood why they had disciplined her.
She was reunited with her parents last night and they gathered with friends in the apartment where she said she would even be willing to be chained again.


Coke's Tab Diet Drink Is on Comeback Trail
Tab, once the nation's best-selling diet soft drink, is being tested for a comeback.
Mal MacDougall, the chairman of the MacDougall Company, New York, yesterday confirmed a report in this week's issue of the trade publication Adweek that the Coca-Cola Company had hired his agency to produce advertising for Tab.


U.S. May Delay Withdrawal From Bases in the Philippines
The Bush Administration is now indicating that it may wait months before withdrawing from its bases from the Philippines, in the hope that President Corazon C. Aquino will prevail in her attempt to extend the lease on the installations, Administration officials said today.
President Bush and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said last week that the United States would make no further concessions on the lease terms and would begin withdrawing immediately if Philippines officials refused to extend the base agreement.


Ex-Salomon Trader Said to Seek Legal Deal
The trader at the center of the Salomon Brothers scandal has approached the Government about the possibility of negotiating a deal, Wall Street lawyers said yesterday.
But the negotiations for the trader, Paul W. Mozer, were said not to be progressing far because the Government and his lawyer had not agreed on many basic issues, including if some of the activities under investigation were crimes.


Review/Music; Baroque And Bop: Exploring The Piano
This fall, Composer's Forum is gathering different music around a common instrument.
In a series of four concerts at Merkin Concert Hall -- the first two were Thursday night and Sunday afternoon -- the forum is looking at how the 20th century feels about the piano.
The event this year has attracted two kinds of people.
There are those who serve the piano, who act as agents for its virtues, salesmen of its possibilities, investigators of its unexplored resources.
And there are also pianists for whom the instrument is simply a convenient medium for musical ideas.
It is, after all, a one-man band: a percussion instrument, a singer, a device with the capacity to squeeze many voices into two hands.


The President Is Right on Israel
President Bush is wisely standing firm in urging Congress to delay action on Israel's request for $10 billion in loan guarantees to resettle Soviet Jews.
His request has drawn fierce rhetorical fire from the Israeli Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and its American supporters, and an Israeli Cabinet minister offensively characterized the President as a liar and an anti-Semite.
But Mr.
Bush is serving America's best interests, and Israel's too, by making a successful peace conference his top Middle East priority.


THE SOVIET TRANSITION: Reporter's Notebook; Communism Is Dead; Other Problems Are Alive
The Moscow revolution of August 1991 took place in the streets.
The crowds of those days changed Soviet politics, perhaps forever, but excitement has since given way to the humdrum problems of daily life, which are much the same as they were before.
Communism may be dead, the great terror may be vanquished at last, but it is as if Moscow had yawned, taken it all for granted, and shuffled on toward its still uncertain economic future.


Casey's Final Words on Iran Heard Through Transcript
He died more than four years ago, but William J. Casey nevertheless delivered a final word today on the Iran-contra affair -- a soliloquy in which he was alternately crusty, artful, charming and, in the end, too tired to go on.
It came in a transcript of Mr.
Casey's final testimony on the scandal in late 1986, a bare three weeks before he collapsed in his office at the Central Intelligence Agency headquarters, fatally ill with a brain tumor.


Classical Music in Review
Music of African-American Composers Carnegie Hall
Moses Hogan, a pianist and conductor who directs an organization called the Festival of Choirs, has collaborated with the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture of the New York Public Library on a series of free concerts of music by black American composers.


Parking Rules
Because of Yom Kippur, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended tomorrow in New York City.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Campeau Set To Turn Debt Into Stock
The Campeau Corporation, the Canadian parent company that saw its major department stores in the United States go into bankruptcy this year, announced an agreement yesterday that would turn its biggest creditor into its largest shareholder and could lead to "a successful restructuring."
Campeau said in a statement that it had agreed with Olympia &amp; York, one of the world's biggest real estate and energy companies, on a plan to exchange new common stock for all of Campeau's existing unsecured debt and outstanding common and preferred stock.
Campeau had total outstanding debt of $1.702 billion (Canadian) on July 31, down from $2.319 billion on Jan. 31, 1991.


The General Gets an 'Incomplete'
Explaining his premature resignation as head of the New York City School Construction Authority, Gen.
Charles Williams says he has "accomplished everything that is needed to get the authority up to speed." That may be true.
But he had a full year left on a three-year contract and his agency is only halfway through a five-year plan, amid citywide economic uncertainty.
So: Why did he leave, and what's to become of the authority?
The School Construction Authority was created in 1988 as an independent agency to build new schools and renovate existing ones without the rigid Civil Service, contracting and land use procedures that had delayed projects supervised by the Board of Education by as long as 10 years.


JUDGE IN IRAN-CONTRA TRIAL DROPS CASE AGAINST NORTH AFTER PROSECUTOR GIVES UP
A Federal judge dropped all charges today against Oliver L. North, bringing to an abrupt end the five-year prosecution of the former National Security Council aide that was the most celebrated and hotly contested legal battle of the Iran-contra affair.
"This terminates the case," Judge Gerhard A. Gesell said at a brief hearing in United States District Court.
He ruled after Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra independent prosecutor, said he would abandon the prosecution of Mr.
North, a former Marine Corps lieutenant colonel.
Mr.
Walsh said prosecutors probably would be unable to show that the trial testimony used to convict Mr.
North had not been affected by testimony Mr.
North had given to Congress under immunity.


Cypriots Can Live Together in Peace
To the Editor:
"With New Talks Near, Cypriots Wonder How the Divide Can Be Bridged" (news article) seems to suggest that Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots do not want to and would not be able to live together peacefully if a settlement occurred.
I believe that this is a misleading view and unrepresentative of how Greek and Turkish Cypriots have lived and would live together in a free Cyprus.


Frito-Lay to Cut Costs, Eliminating 1,800 Jobs
After two years of fending off rival snack food companies with price cuts, coupons and costly promotions, Frito-Lay Inc. announced big changes yesterday to lower its cost of doing business.
The battles between market leader Frito-Lay, No. 2 Borden Inc. and Anheuser Busch's third-place Eagle Snacks Inc., have lowered the profits of all the major makers of potato and corn chips, pretzels and other salty snacks.
But the competition has been a boon to consumers, who have become less tolerant of price increases.


Drug Agency Questions Companies' Safety Data on Breast Implants
Although more than two million women in the United States have silicone breast implants, manufacturers have not produced data that prove their safety, Food and Drug Administration officials said today.
They said the agency had told the four American manufacturers of implants that unless further data were submitted, all the implants might have to come off the market.
Agency officials reviewing the manufacturers' data said the information they provided in response to an F.D.A. request earlier this year involved too few women and too few side effects, and had been collected over too short a time.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the pay- per-view broadcast of the Metropolitan Opera's 25th-anniversary gala on Sept. 23 misidentified the portions of two operas to be performed.
They are Act III of "Rigoletto" and Act III of "Otello."


Excerpts From Committee's Hearing on the Gates Nomination
Following are excerpts from today's hearings by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, with Mr.
Gates's opening statement and questions by Senators David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, and Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska.
The transcript was provided by Reuters and the Federal News Service.
OPENING STATEMENT BY MR.
GATES
Mr.
Chairman, members of the committee, it is a great honor to appear here before you as President Bush's nominee to be Director of Central Intelligence.
I want to thank him for his confidence in me and for the honor of this nomination.
I am humbled by it.
I welcome these confirmation hearings to address the many issues that I know you will raise.
Mr.
Chairman, here at the outset I want to thank you and the committee for the fair and professional treatment of my nomination.
I also want to thank Senators Dole, Kassebaum, Robb and Warner for their kind introductions.
I have been in public service for 25 years.
I arrived in Washington 25 years ago this summer with everything I owned in the back of a 1965 Mustang, and no money.
The Mustang is long gone, sold before it became a collector's item, and I still have no money.
But I am enriched by a wonderful and patient wife, and two great kids.
I believe I still have the idealism that I brought with me from Kansas a quarter century ago; a deep conviction in the greatness of this country, in the uniqueness and wonder of its constitution and in its mission as a force for good in the world.
My decision to commit my life to national service springs from these beliefs.
I also have still the values that I brought with me from Kansas: family, hard work, candor and truthfulness, integrity, obeying the law and a basic optimism about life.
During these 25 years I have worked for six presidents, Republicans and Democrats alike.
I served four of them in the National Security Council.
I've served eight directors of the C.I.A.
I have worked closely and harmoniously with this committee and its House of Representatives counterpart for more than 10 years as C.I.A.'s Deputy Director for Intelligence, chairman of the National Intelligence Council, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, Acting Director of Central Intelligence, and Deputy National Security Adviser.
I have appeared before this committee more than 50 times during that period, so we are not strangers to one another.
In short, I do not come before this committee as a new face, but rather, as a nominee with a long track record.
I anticipate that the committee will want to examine both that record as well as my view of the future course of C.I.A. and U.S. intelligence.
I think all of the opening statements point to that.
The committees, appropriately, have been looking at the future of U.S. intelligence, its structure and mission in the aftermath of the Cold War, and now most recently, after the revolution in the Soviet Union.
Who would have thought that just five years ago we would stand where we are today?
Certainly not the intelligence analyst sitting before you.
Talk about humbling experiences.
The old verities that have guided this country's national security policy for 45 years, and thus, its intelligence service, have disappeared in an historical instant.
Communism is dead or dying.
A number of longstanding regional conflicts are coming to an end.
The cold war is over.
The Communist Party lies mortally wounded in the Soviet Union, wounded by its own hand.
And the forces of real reform are at last ascendant in the Soviet Union.
Still, as ever, there are challenges, concerns and risks.
The collapse of the Soviet and Russian empire offers the promise of democracy and economic transformation, but it also contains the seeds of grave instability, chaos and civil war, in a country possessing nearly 30,000 nuclear warheads, the most powerful of which are still aimed at us.
We cannot yet divert our attention from the Soviet Union, but clearly our priorities and our concerns have changed.
Meanwhile, a growing number of nations have, or are developing, nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, together with the ballistic missile technologies to deliver them.
Some of our allies in that long cold war are now at times serious adversaries in that global marketplace.
Political instability in the third world spawns conflict, famine and chaos, challenging us politically, economically, sometimes militarily and always morally.
International narcotics cartels not only feed growing global demand, but increasingly have the capability to buy governments and rule countries.
Regional conflict and its terrorist stepchildren, as in the Middle East, remain a reality despite our best efforts.
I have been deeply engaged in dealing with all of these problems.
I have been by the President's side when we prevented a coup attempt in the Philippines, liberated Panama, defeated Iraq's aggression against Kuwait, saw the Berlin Wall go down, and led the effort to unify Germany and NATO, fostered the Polish roundtable agreement, completed the C.F.E. and START agreements, and played a role in the success of the democratic forces during the recent Soviet coup attempt.
The President and the Congress know that just as some threats have diminished, other dangers remain or have altered shape, just as new challenges and problems have emerged.
The death of Soviet Communism has vastly diminished the danger of global war, but the world remains a very rough neighborhood.
Our nation's leaders, at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue, have no wish to walk these streets blindfolded.
We approach the close of the most violent century in man's history.
Two world wars, a long and hostile peace punctuated by protracted, bloody regional wars, the destruction of ancient empires and the defeat of two inhuman ideologies -- communism and Nazism -- have set in motion vast political, social and economic forces long frozen by totalitarianism and its legacy.
The path to a new and brighter day is finally apparent but will require still American leadership, strength and vision; the willingness to act against those who would prey on the weak, and skillful navigation around the many obstacles that can thwart progress or send newly free but fragile democracies hurtling back into the darkness.
The role of intelligence is to help the President, his senior advisers and the Congress understand and deal with these changing realities.
The challenge, then, to C.I.A. and to U.S. intelligence is to adapt to this changing world, not just in places like the Soviet Union and Europe, but to the very idea of change, the idea that for years to come, change and uncertainty will dominate international life, that the unthinkable, and the not-even-thought-about will be commonplace.
For us in intelligence to adapt to such a changing world will require unprecedentedly close collaboration of the President and his advisers, the intelligence community and the Congress.
If confirmed, I look forward to a close partnership with this committee in this remarkably challenging and stimulating process.
Normally a nominee would be circumspect about specific ideas for change.
However, my nomination comes at a time when this committee is deeply engaged in looking at the future of U.S. intelligence, and has, as this morning's statements made apparent, considerable interest in my views about the future and what I would do, if confirmed, to help guide C.I.A. and its sister agencies toward the 21st century.
I believe Director Webster's emphasis on flexibility is central to being responsive in a time of radical change and unpredictability.
What follows are my ideas on where we ought to go from here.
First, this remarkable moment in history affords us a not-to-be-missed opportunity to reassess the role, mission, priorities and structure of American intelligence in the aftermath of the cold war.
This should not be done off the cuff.
If confirmed I will recommend that the President launch, with the direct involvement of his most senior security advisers, a major effort to determine the intelligence needs of the United States for the next decade or more, to the year 2005.
He should then in my view charge the D.C.I. to identify what the intelligence community must do to meet those needs.
The two intelligence committees should have the opportunity to participate even before these proposals come before the Congress.
At a time of revolutionary change abroad, and Governmentwide fiscal constraints at home, U.S. intelligence cannot remain fundamentally unaffected.
Accordingly, we, the executive branch and Congress, must reach agreement on mission and priorities.
Once these are determined we can then logically address structure and budget.
Admiral Bob Inman, as deputy D.C.I., managed a similar process for the intelligence buildup during the first half of the 1980's.
It is time to follow up that effort with an even bolder, much more far-reaching effort.
This effort ought to be completed by the end of the year, in time to influence the next budget cycle.
There are other problems and innovations that must be addressed as we change to cope with a changing and different world.
The intelligence budget should be considered by the President, his senior advisers and the Congress, within, but independently, of the defense budget.
We must dramatically expand our clandestine human intelligence collection effort.
At the same time, we must consider the implications for our covert action capabilities of a dramatic decline in Soviet aggressiveness and disruptive activities in the third world.
We must remedy the gap between 21st century collection systems, and a 19th century system for informing policy makers.
We publish too much intelligence of questionable relevance to policy makers.
Less and better should be the rule.
C.I.A.'s relationship to and support for the U.S. military must be approved.
The process by which the information needs of policy makers are translated into intelligence requirements must be strengthened.
The relationship between our national and tactical intelligence programs must be dramatically improved.
Finally, the intelligence community, and C.I.A. in particular, must build on the openness Director Webster has encouraged to develop better popular understanding and support for U.S. intelligence activities.
President Kennedy once said that C.I.A. successes remain a secret while its failures are trumpeted.
However, things have gotten out of hand when the most outrageous allegations against the agency are taken seriously, when the honor and integrity of thousands of patriotic public servants are suspect merely by virtue of where they work.
The C.I.A. and its people deserve better.
But changing perceptions first requires greater openness by the agency.
I can elaborate on these proposals I've just made, and others that I have in mind.
But my point is clear: C.I.A. and U.S. intelligence must change, and be seen to change, or confront irrelevance and growing sentiment for their dismantlement.
I look forward to tackling this challenge with you.
Contrary to popular perceptions of an adversary relationship, Congress has long been a strong supporter of a vital and effective U.S. intelligence service.
It was the Congressional intelligence committees that launched the rebuilding of U.S. intelligence capabilities in 1979, and their support helped sustain the rebuilding in following years.
This Congressional support not surprisingly is valued in the intelligence community.
But the community also recognizes and values the role of Congress in making intelligence accountable, and in insuring that it operates within the law, and in a manner consistent with American values.
Access to our assessments by Congress -- Republicans, Democrats, liberals, conservatives, moderates -- helps assure our objectivity and independence.
We know that many Americans are uneasy about C.I.A. and U.S. intelligence activities.
They understand the need for information, and even on occasion for covert action, but they are uncomfortable with secrecy.
And therein lies the value of Congressional oversight.
The reassurance to Americans that the laws are being obeyed and that there is accountability.
This then puts a special responsibility on intelligence agencies to be truthful, straightforward, candid, and forthcoming in dealings with Congress.
For more than 10 years, I have had a strong and positive relationship with this committee.
I understand and respect its role and that of its House counterpart as surrogates for both the rest of the Congress and the American people.
Consequently, a relationship of trust and confidence between the intelligence community and the two intelligence committees is of vital interest and importance.
Accordingly, I commit to you that should I be confirmed, whatever differences may develop from time to time between the intelligence committees and the executive branch generally, or C.I.A. in particular, I would resign rather than jeopardize that relationship of trust and confidence.
Mr.
Chairman, that completes my formally prepared statement.
Because of the great interest that this committee has and the centrality of Iran-contra to these proceedings, I wanted to add some additional personal thoughts on this subject at the end, that I wrote down last night.
I've just referred to a commitment about trust and confidence.
I don't make that commitment lightly.
It is a direct outgrowth of watching the constant crises, primarily over covert action, in C.I.A.-Congressional relations between 1981 and 1986, culminating in Iran-contra.
I suspect few people have reflected more than I have on the Iran-contra affair: what went wrong, why C.I.A. played by rules not of its own making and what might have been done to prevent or at least stop this tragic affair.
C.I.A. has already paid a fearful price and learned costly lessons.
But today, I want to speak about the misjudgments I made and the lessons I learned.
First, in retrospect, I should have taken more seriously after the 1st of October, 1986, the possibility of impropriety or even wrongdoing in the Government and pursued this possibility more aggressively.
I should have pressed the issue of a possible diversion more strenuously with Director Casey and with Admiral Poindexter.
I should have done more.
Instead, I contented myself with taking the information I had received to Casey and Poindexter, as well as to C.I.A.'s general counsel, and then did not follow up after returning from overseas.
Second, I should have been more skeptical about what I was told.
I should have asked more questions and I should have been less satisfied with the answers I received, especially from Director Casey.
Third, I should have pressed harder for reversing the provision in the January finding prohibiting informing the Congress.
At the same time, I believe that the actions I did take were well-intentioned and honest.
While differences naturally exist in recalling the details of conversations and meetings at a remove or a distance of months or sometimes even years, the record is clear that I opposed the Iran initiative, I urged notification of Congress, I acted to insure C.I.A.'s compliance with the law.
And when for the first time problems were brought to me, I informed Director Casey, consulted C.I.A.'s general counsel and followed the counsel's recommendations.
Even before the Iran initiative became public, I urged full public disclosure.
After it became public, I pressed for full disclosure to the Congress.
I insured full C.I.A. cooperation with multiple investigations and I began trying to rebuild that relationship of trust and confidence between C.I.A. and the Congress.
Clearly, if I could relive October 1986, perhaps part of November, I would do certain things differently and, I believe, better.
And indeed, my actions as Acting Director for more than five months and as Director Webster's deputy for nearly two years demonstrate that I learned the lessons of Iran-contra.
During that period, from December 15th, 1986, to spring of 1989, there was not a single crisis of confidence between C.I.A. and the Congress in stark contrast to the preceding six years.
Nor will there be such a crisis under my stewardship if I am confirmed.
You will not find a nominee for Director of Central Intelligence more aware of and sensitive to the lessons of that time or more understanding of the importance of a good faith relationship with the Congress.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  QUESTIONS BY SENATOR BOREN
Q.
When you look back on it, could you identify for us those areas where you think you should have been more skeptical and what additional questions do you think that you should have asked that you didn't ask?
A.
Mr.
Chairman, I think of two examples that I had in mind when I wrote that portion of those remarks.
The first was following the lunch on October 9th, 1986, which Director Casey had with Colonel North and which I joined.
I have testified before that at the very end of that lunch and at the end of a discussion of the Hasenfus aircraft  [ a cargo plane, shot down by the Nicaraguan rebels eight days earlier; Eugene Hausenfus, a civilian adventurer, survived and was captured ]  . . .
I double-checked with Colonel North just to try and cross every "t" and dot every "i" that he wasn't aware through his contacts with the private benefactors of any C.I.A. connection. . . .
At the very end of the luncheon as I was getting up to leave, Colonel North, as I've referred to before, a comment with respect to a cryptic remark about Swiss bank accounts and the contras.
I walked on out of the room and, a few minutes later, went back into Mr.
Casey's office and said, "You know, that just puzzled me and I wonder if there's something that we should be concerned about there, is there some problem or something we should pursue."
And Mr.
Casey basically said -- well, I didn't pick up on what he said, or I didn't catch it and -- "There's nothing to it; don't worry about it." And I let it go.
And in retrospect, that's the first instance where I believe if I had the opportunity to do it over again I would have pressed him harder and said, "Well, now, no, let's think about this,maybe there's a real problem here."
The second example is after the Director and I met with Admiral Poindexter and gave him Mr.
Allen's memorandum of 14, October, 1986. . . .
Mr.
Casey had advised him to have the White House counsel review the entire Iran initiative, make sure everything was O.K. -- much as I had asked our C.I.A. counsel to review it -- and also to think about making it public, that it ought to be made public.
And I should have, at that point, drawn Admiral Poindexter's attention to the specific reference in the Allen memorandum to the possibility that if Mr.
Ghorbanifar wasn't paid his money, one of the allegations he might make against the United States was that the money was going to other projects of the United States and the Government of Israel.
I did not push him on that.
. . .
Q.
Mr.
Kerr testified in late August of 1986 that Charlie Allen came to him with his concerns about a possible diversion, and he testified that Mr.
Kerr -- he, Mr.
Kerr, then discussed these concerns with you.
This could have been at least a month, he said, before Mr.
Allen brought his concerns to you on October 1, 1986.
Do you have any recollection of Mr.
Kerr's discussing the diversion with you prior to your meeting with Charlie Allen when he discussed it with you on October 1, 1986?
A.
No, sir, I do not.
I think that, in fact, Mr.
Allen has testified that when he briefed me on the 1st of October that I seemed to be surprised and even startled by the information that had been brought to me.
Now that's the extent of my personal recollection. . . .
I've never denied that Mr.
Kerr may well have broached this subject with me.
I've simply said that I have no recollection of it myself. . . .
I've testified several times that throughout the preceding year or so, we had heard rumors about funding, where the contras were getting their funding.
We had heard rumors about contributions or donations from foreign countries, from the private benefactors and so on.
. . .
Q.
Did you hear any rumor or did you become aware of any rumor prior to Mr.
Allen's conversation with you on October 1st about the diversion of arms sales to the contras?
A.
My memory of this from the very beginning is that the first I heard was from Mr.
Allen. . . .
Q. . . .
It now appears, however, that at least one other senior C.I.A. official, Alan Fiers, the head of the Central American Task Force, had direct knowledge of the diversion before October 1, 1986. . . .
He told Clair George  [ the Deputy Director for Operations ]  and the chief of the Latin American division by sometime late August 1986. . . .
Did the chief of the Latin American division during this period of time prior to October 1, 1986, or prior to the public disclosure of the diversion, did the chief of the Latin American division ever come to you and tell you about the diversion?
A. He did not.
. . .
Q. Did Mr. Clair George ever tell you about the diversion of funds to the contras?
A. He did not.
. . .
QUESTIONS BY SENATOR MURKOWSKI
Q.
Well, I'd like to address Mr.
Casey's management style as a Director of Central Intelligence, because I think it's appropriate. . . .
Can you explain for me just basically how the agency operated under the structure as dictated by the director, Mr.
Casey, as opposed to the organizational chart which clearly shows a structure that one would assume would be a normal reporting structure?
A. . . .
I think that the first thing in terms of Mr.
Casey's personal style is that this is a man who had begun his intelligence career as an O.S.S. officer in Europe.
It was a time when, needless to say, there was no oversight, and even management, I think historians would agree, was fairly slack.
He then made his career essentially as an operator -- as a lawyer operating on his own, and as an author.
In essence, he never worked -- or he did not work through much of his career in a bureaucratic structure, although he had several senior Government positions in the State Department and the S.E.C. . . .
Actually for the first several years, it was something of an adventure to work for him, because he would pick up the phone and punch a button without much concern for who was at the other end of the line and start shouting instructions. . . .
He also would fail to change the buttons when he'd call again.
So he'd call and then about 30 seconds later he'd call again and you'd say, "Yes?" and he'd say, "Who's this?" and you'd say, "Well, this is Bob, and you just talked to me." And he'd say, "Oh, I didn't want you" and then he'd hang up. . . .
I don't think he would have recognized the C.I.A. organization chart the first several years he was there, if a lot depended on it. . . .
I believe that when Mr.
Casey came to C.I.A. he came with the view that he in essence would involve himself very deeply in operational affairs.
I won't say that he intended to run the clandestine service because he wasn't organized enough to do that, but rather to involve himself very deeply in its affairs. . . .
Nowhere was this more true than on those issues that were a special passion for him, like Central America.
And where he would reach down into the organization and basically ignore all of the bureaucratic aspects. . . .


A Simplified Package for Novices
THE Microsoft Corporation, reaching out to novice computer users, introduced three new software products yesterday aimed at home computer users and those who work in small businesses and home offices.
They are Microsoft Works for Windows, Microsoft Money and Microsoft Publisher.
All are based on Microsoft's Windows 3.0 graphical operating system, which means that while the programs are intended for novices, the novices must have computers with enough memory and processing power to run Windows.
Windows must be purchased separately.


Charles H. King, 66; Conducted Seminars On Racial Attitudes
Charles H. King, a figure in the civil rights movement who conducted boot camp-style seminars to help both whites and blacks change their racial attitudes, died Saturday at his home in Atlanta.
He was 66 years old.
He died of liver cancer, said an employee of the funeral home engaged by his family.


CHRONICLE
It could hardly be a more challenging time to take the helm of a school of foreign affairs.
And JOHN GERARD RUGGIE, newly named dean of the Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs, acknowledged the other day that, like everyone else, scholars had been caught short by recent political upheaval in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
"You can imagine that it has been both exhilarating and difficult because things that seemed not feasible or imaginable a year ago are now almost daily events," he said.


Ayelet Eirron Is Wed
Ayelet Eirron and Uriel Palti were married yesterday by Rabbi Yochanan Frid at the Jerusalem Hyatt Hotel.
The bride, the daughter of Ika and Safir Eirron of Petah Tiqva, Israel, received a master's degree in history from Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
Her father is an engineer, and her mother is an administrator in the Israeli education ministry.
Mr.
Palti, the son of Hannah Palti of Jerusalem and the late George Palti, is an Israeli consul in New York.
He has a law degree from Hebrew University.
His mother is a retired diplomat.


CHRONICLE
Two decades ago, Procol Harum was at the pinnacle of the serious rock world, known for such pensive songs as "A Whiter Shade of Pale." Then, like so many groups of those heady days, the five men went their own ways, playing in concert together for the last time 21 years ago, making their last album 14 years ago.
Now they are about to return with a slew of new songs and four of the five original members: GARY BROOKER, MATTHEW FISHER, KEITH REID and ROBIN TROWER.
B.
J.
Wilson, the fifth member, died last year.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11
The U.N.
General Assembly opens its 46th annual session today with negotiators from major nations having agreed on a reform plan that would deprive the United States and other powers of the senior posts they have automatically claimed.
Page A1
Secretary of State Baker held talks with Prime Minister Shamir, trying to persuade him to postpone Israel's request for $10 billion in housing loan guarantees until after a peace conference starts.
But the two men failed to reach any understanding.
A1
The release of more hostages from Lebanon, which seemed imminent a few days ago, is embroiled in negotiations over logistical details of a deal, Western diplomats say.
A7
Hong Kong's election results sent a resoundlingly clear message to China and Britain: that voters want greater democracy as the British colony reverts to Chinese control in 1997.
A1
The Subic Bay Naval Station lease was rejected by the Philippine Senate, leaving the future of the huge American base in the hands of the Philippine courts and the nation's voters.
A8 U.S. eases stance of Subic Bay withdrawal A8
A military peacekeeping force sponsored by the European Community is being considered for deployment in Croatia with a view to bringing about a permanent cease-fire there.
A3
Yugoslav jets attack Croatian capital A3
Reporter's notebook: Moscow is no longer filled with the fervid pitch of revolution.
The excitement has given way to the humdrum problems of daily life and the uncertainty of the economic future.
A10
The disjointed Soviet republics agreed on the need for a common approach to food distribution and foreign aid in order to best survive the winter.
A10
Dissident is seized in Soviet Georgia A10
Mulroney acts to crush strike by government workers A6
Toronto Journal: A socialist at the barricades A4 National A12-19, B6
All charges against Oliver North were dropped by a Federal judge, bringing to an abrupt end the five-year prosecution of the former National Security Council aide that was the most celebrated legal battle of the Iran-contra affair.
A1
Friends say North won't fade away A19
Robert Gates's hearings opened.
Mr.
Gates presented himself to the Senate Intelligence Committee as both contrite supplicant and seasoned adviser to the President, a man who deserves the job as the nation's intelligence chief.
A1
Same scene and same nominee, but there is a difference A18
Gates seems to have little more to say on Iran-contra A18
Casey's voice heard through transcript A18
The Los Angeles County Sheriff and his department have come under attack for the shooting deaths of four civilians, including a mentally disturbed man, within one month.
A12
The hearing on Clarence Thomas ended with the Supreme Court nominee offering comments on the death penalty and what he said was his belief that the Court should not overturn its own precedents without strong reasons.
A14
Indiana court backs family in allowing daughter to die A15
Manuel Antonio Noriega's trial began with Federal prosecutors saying that they would prove that the deposed dictator gave his "permission, authorization and encouragement" to a scheme to transform Panama into a cocaine trafficking center.
A12
Crucial wing piece found after fatal crash A15
F.D.A. questions safety data on breast implants B6
U.S. warns Northrop to fix missile or program may die A12
C-17's first flight smoother than debate B6  Regional B1-5
The Allstate Insurance Company, the largest insurer in New Jersey, said that it would seek regulatory approval to stop writing virtually all types of coverage in the state.
The company blamed losses from its core auto-insurance operation.
A1
Nynex reached a mid-contract pact with its unions in an effort to avoid another strike like one in 1989, the industry's longest and most bitter since the breakup of A.T.&amp;T.
D1
Governor Weicker made threats to lay off more than 8,000 government workers, beginning Thursday, unless union leaders help come up with money needed to balance the budget passed just three weeks ago.
B1
Four people were killed and six were wounded when "bad blood" between two groups in a Queens cabaret exploded into a blazing gun battle that turned a joyous birthday party into a scene of carnage and terror, the police and witnesses said.
B1
The girl who was chained by her parents to an iron pipe in their apartment for two months to keep her away from drugs said that she loved her parents and understood why they disciplined her.
B1
Witness in bid-rigging case tells of threat to his wife B4
Dinkins rejects idea that order hits homeless B3
Funerals for the police officer and the firefighter who both recently died in the line of duty were held.
Because the burials took place within a few hours of each other, each service seemed all the more wrenching.
B3
Senator D'Amato was accused by Democrats of attacking Mayor Dinkins's handling of the disturbance in Crown Heights and other racial violence as an attempt to buoy the Senator's re-election drive.
B1
Bid to unseal Crown Heights testimony founders B4
Inquiry on Jeffries to resume as CUNY appeals a ruling B4
New Jersey judge tells teachers to end strike or lose jobs B2
Policy fights cited in school official's resignation B3
Jewish congregation finds home with Methodists B5  Business Digest D1 Science Times
The bluefin tuna, prized for sushi, in decline C1
Protein that wraps DNA is on-off switch for genes C1
Rethinking common wisdom on non-verbal cues C1
When cancer sends the immune system to the wrong battle C3
How to dispose of unwanted missiles C4
Women at risk of cancer face dilemma over estrogen C6 Arts/Entertainment
Menotti wins Spoleto Festival dispute C11
"Billy Bathgate" films a new ending C11
Music: Exploring the piano C11
Classical Music in Review C14
Word and Image: An unhandy handyman C11
"Afghanistan," a first novel C16 Fashion Page B7
Scaasi greets fall cheerfully
Sleek tailoring by John Anthony  Obituaries D21
Robert Irving, ballet conductor
Julie Bovasso, avant-garde theater figure  Sports B8-13
Baseball star Otis Nixon, the National League's leading base stealer and a primary reason the Atlanta Braves are in first place in the National League West, was suspended for 60 days after he tested positive for the use of cocaine.
A1
Baseball: Braves confident they'll pick up pieces B9
Bross can dunk, but can he pitch?  B10
Who's that hitting .331? Willie Randolph B11
Columns: Araton on Isiah Thomas B9
TV Sports B11
Football: Are the Giants getting paranoid?  B9  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A20
Mr. Bush is right on Israel
Oliver North beats the rap
Afghanistan, still bleeding
The general gets "incomplete"
Letters A20
A. M. Rosenthal: An autobiography A21
Russell Baker: After modern, what?  A21
Walter Laqueur: Punish the collaborators A21
Tim Hermach: The great tree robbery A21


Tolls Up, Trucks Take Back Roads
Mike Istuan, a driver for Wills Trucking, is seeing more of the country these days, but not by choice.
To avoid paying tolls on the Pennsylvania Turnpike, he spends two to three more hours in his cab, often over two-lane roads that can be a roller coaster ride over hill and dale.
Mr.
Istuan, who was taking a lunch break at the P &amp; M 76 Plaza, a truck stop here on Interstate 81 near Harrisburg, is among thousands of drivers of big trucks, vans and even passenger cars crowding onto free Interstates and smaller state roads.
As they do so, they are causing growing concerns about accidents, congestion and noise.


Cytogen Picks A President
The Cytogen Corporation, a biotechnology company based in Princeton, N.J., named Thomas J. McKearn president yesterday.
A co-founder of the company, Dr.
McKearn has been executive vice president.
Cytogen, with an emphasis on cancer, is developing products using technology to link diagnostic and therapeutic agents to monoclonal antibodies.
Dr.
McKearn, who is 42, succeeds George W. Ebright, who will continue as chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Ebright joined Cytogen two and a half years ago from SmithKline Beckman, where he was president and chief operating officer.


Q&amp;A
Biological Clock
Q.
Is there any way to tell how close a woman is to menopause?


Church Is Shared Home Of Jews and Methodists
At the Hebrew school at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun the other day, a teacher asked a class of 4-year-olds, "Where do Jews go on Yom Kippur?" One eager youngster shot up a hand and exclaimed, "To church!"
The child was actually speaking the truth.
When Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, arrives tonight at sundown, the members of B'nai Jeshurun will gather for services St.
Paul and St.
Andrew United Methodist Church on 86th Street and West End Avenue.
The church has opened its doors to the Jewish congregation while the synagogue's sanctuary, which is two blocks away on 88th Street, is closed for extensive repairs in the wake of the collapse of its ceiling.


File to Fax on the Road
You are on the road with your trusty modem-equipped laptop computer, visiting customers.
From a hotel in Chicago you phone ahead to confirm tomorrow's appointment in Detroit.
"Sure, we're on for 3 o'clock," Mr.
Big Account says.
"By the way, would you fax me the latest price list?"


G.E. Sets $1.8 Billion Charge For Rule on Retiree Benefits
The General Electric Company said yesterday that it would take a $1.8 billion non-cash, after-tax charge against its earnings for the first quarter of the year to comply with a new accounting rule concerning retirees' health benefits.
The charge to earnings, which works out to be about $2.07 a share for the quarter that ended on March 31, will turn a gain of $1.15 a share into a loss of 85 to 95 cents after the company's earnings are restated.
Still, G.E.'s shares rose $1.875 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange to close at $69.75.


Illinois Prices $210 Million Issue
Illinois priced $210 million in general obligation college savings bonds yesterday through First Chicago Capital Markets Inc., of Chicago.
The zero-coupon bonds range in price from $91.495, with a yield of 4.90 percent, for a 1993 maturity to $25.587, and a yield of 6.65 percent, for a 2012 maturity.
Moody's has rated the issue Aa1 and Standard &amp; Poor's has rated it AA.


Bush and Kohl Agree On Soviet Need for Aid
President Bush and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said today that the West must move quickly to provide humanitarian aid to the Soviet Union this winter, but did not offer any specific package of food and medical relief.
The two leaders, who met at the White House, differed slightly over how and when the West should begin to provide more ambitious economic aid to the Soviet Union.


New York Buries Two Killed in Line of Duty


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  El Senor's Late Run Gives Him the Victory  El Senor came from last in the four-horse field with a bold run in the stretch yesterday and won the $47,000 Requital Handicap on grass at Belmont by a neck.
Carrying high weight of 123 pounds and ridden by Herb McCauley, El Senor bested Husyan, who had a clear lead through the stretch.
Husyan, ridden by Mike Smith, was 1 3/4 lengths ahead of Devil's Fortune, with Jose Santos up.
Phantom Breeze trailed.
The victory was the third straight for El Senor and earned owner William W. Wright $28,200.
El Senor covered the 1 1/4 miles in 2:012/5 and returned $4.60 and $3.20 as the favorite. (AP)


Accounts
*
Century 21 Real Estate Canada Ltd., Vancouver, British Columbia, to Townsend &amp; O'Leary Inc., Laguna Hills, Calif., which specializes in franchise businesses.
The agency said the review for the $5 million account also included incumbent McCann-Erickson, Toronto, Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Minneapolis, and three Canadian agencies: Palmer Jarvis Advertising, Vancouver; McKim Advertising, Toronto, and Cossette, Montreal.


Little Brown Jug Sets Eliminations
Co-favorites Die Laughing and Precious Bunny landed in the second elimination for Thursday's $575,150 Little Brown Jug, the third of pacing's triple crown events.


Toronto Journal; A Socialist at the Barricades, All Very Canadian
A year after winning a flukey provincial election victory, the first socialist government Ontario has ever had is getting kicked by both right and left, which makes Premier Bob Rae think he may be just about on the right course.
No one was more surprised than the 43-year-old former labor lawyer and Rhodes scholar when the returns came in on Sept. 6, 1990, showing the ruling Liberals blowing a 20-point lead in the polls and losing 57 seats in the legislature.


Bid to Unseal Crown Heights Testimony Founders
Efforts to have the secret minutes of a grand jury investigation into the death of 7-year-old Gavin Cato in Crown Heights released were stalled yesterday when a judge said he was not yet convinced of the idea's merits because few witnesses had agreed to waive their right to secrecy.
The judge, Theodore Jones of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, said that more than 75 percent of the grand jury witnesses contacted by the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, were opposed to having the minutes released.
For that reason, the judge said, as well as concern for the safety of the witnesses, he could not yet order the secret testimony released.


The Talk Of Hollywood; With 'Kevin's Gate' and 'Billygate,' Filmdom's Love of Gossip Blooms
Cameras were rolling today on Riverside Drive in New York City on "Billy Bathgate" as the Walt Disney Company films a new ending for its adaptation of the E. L. Doctorow novel about a poor Bronx teen-ager who catches the eye of the Prohibition-era gangster Dutch Shultz.
The film, starring Dustin Hoffman, was scheduled to be released around July 4, but was delayed amid rumors of unhappiness and temper tantrums by Disney executives, a difficult star and a story line that withered.
The movie, which may cost as much as $40 million, is now scheduled to be released on Nov. 1, and few people outside of Disney have seen it, except for Robert Benton, the director, Tom Stoppard, the screenwriter, and several others.


Giants Get a Sinking Feeling That Everyone's Out to Get Them
The problem with the Giants may be too many Super Bowl games.
Because the Giants won Super Bowl XXV in January, they feel that every opponent now considers its game against the Giants as its personal Super Bowl.
A week ago, the Los Angeles Rams seemed to take that attitude and upset the Giants, 19-13.
On Sunday, the Chicago Bears, with equal inspiration, upset the Giants, 20-17.


Books of The Times; Dreams of Afghans and Adventures
Afghanistan By Alex Ullmann 312 pages. Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.
In Alex Ullmann's engaging first novel, Afghanistan is less a geographical place than a metaphor for the youthful hero's yearning for adventure, his desire to leave behind the mundane domestic complications of his life and explore the dangerous corners of the real world beyond New York City.


Friends Say North Won't Fade Away
Oliver North is a man who likes to talk -- sometimes he is paid as much as $25,000 to do so -- but he was unusually close-mouthed today when asked about his plans.
"I hope to take my kids to lunch," he curtly told inquiring reporters as he left the Federal courthouse here after the Iran-contra charges against him were dropped.


Quotation of Day
"This terminates the case." -- Judge Gerhard A. Gessell, dropping all charges against Oliver L. North.  [ A1:6 ]


Appetite for Sushi Threatens Giant Tuna
MAN and boy, Bill Camp has been sallying out into the Atlantic for a quarter of a century in one of angling's great quests: the chase for the bluefin tuna, one of the world's most magnificent vertebrates.
The bluefin is a fish to which superlatives cling.
Growing to 1,500 pounds and 14 feet, it is the biggest bony fish in the world and quite possibly the strongest.
It is certainly one of the fastest, both as sprinter and marathoner.
By revving up its warm-blooded metabolism, it can make short dashes of 50 miles an hour.
And it can cross 5,000 miles of open sea, migrating across an entire ocean, in 50 days.
All in all, marine scientists say, the bluefin is a marvel of evolutionary adaptation.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 17


Los Angeles's Sheriff Also Under Fire
As Los Angeles tries to overhaul its Police Department in the aftermath of the videotaped beating in March of a black motorist, the county Sheriff's Department is coming under sharp attack for shooting to death four civilians within one month.
The killings, including that of a mentally disturbed man who was reported to have been shot nine times in the back, have also focused attention on other abuses, including brutality and the skimming of drug money and allegations of a credit card scam.


Classical Music in Review
Korean Symphony of New York Alice Tully Hall
So diligent are the celebrators of Mozart's bicentennial at Lincoln Center that the four rarities at Sunday night's concert by the Korean Symphony of New York turn out to be -- this season at least -- not so rare at all.
A check of the calendar shows that by the end of the Mozart year, the Concertone for Two Violins (K. 196), the Divertimento in D (K. 136), the Adagio in E (K. 261) and the Rondo (K. 373) (the last two for violin and orchestra) will have showed up at other concerts as well, not just the all-Mozart affair here at Alice Tully Hall.


European Force Is Proposed for Croatia
Alarmed by the increase in fighting in Yugoslavia, Western European countries moved closer today to dispatching a military peacekeeping force with a view to securing a permanent cease-fire in Croatia.
The Netherlands, which currently holds the presidency of the European Community, proposed today that Western European countries consider deploying a "lightly armed" force in Yugoslavia because an international team of 200 civilian observers had so far been unable to end the fighting.


Did Reagan Team Meddle in Hostage Crisis?; Mysterious Middleman
To the Editor:
In "Spoiling the 'October Surprise' " (Op-Ed, Aug. 28), Manucher Ghorbanifar does his best to dispel the suspicions raised by Gary Sick, a National Security Agency aide in the Carter Administration, of a secret deal in 1980 between the Reagan-Bush team and Iranian officials to delay release of 52 United States Embassy hostages until after the November election (Op-Ed, April 15).


Yugoslav Jets Attack Croatian Capital
Yugoslav Air Force jets attacked and damaged a television transmitter just outside Zagreb today in the first air attack on Croatia's capital since fighting was touched off more than two months ago.
Soon after air raid sirens wailed all over the city this evening, Government officials said the transmitter, to the north of the city, had been attacked by air force MIG fighters.
The jets fired six rockets that damaged emergency generators near the transmitter tower, without interrupting television broadcasts throughout Croatia.


Non-Verbal Cues Are Easy to Misinterpret
"IF his lips are silent, he chatters with his fingertips; betrayal oozes out of him at every pore," Freud wrote, commenting on the clues to character that can be read in movements and gestures.
Recent studies are lending scientific precision to Freud's observation, pinpointing which patterns of movements during a conversation reveal what personality traits.
But they are also confirming something that Freud did not observe: people's confidence in their ability to read character through such cues very often exceeds their actual skill, particularly in some crucial situations.


Punish the Collaborators
Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin have made it known that there won't be a witch hunt.
The ringleaders arrested following the coup will be charged under four paragraphs of the Soviet criminal code.
As for the others, God will be their judge, both leaders have said.
It is a noble sentiment, but can the advocates of freedom in Russia afford it?
A great many people were involved in the political preparations for the coup, openly calling for the overthrow of the democratic order.
Their identities are well-known, and some have been demoted, but most continue their activities as before.


Crash Inspectors Find Missing Part
Federal investigators looking into the plane crash that killed 14 people last week in Texas found a crucial piece of the plane on Sunday and said they had confirmed that it was not correctly screwed into place by mechanics.
The plane, a Continental Express commuter, came apart in midair on Sept. 11 and burned as it fell more than 11,000 feet, crashing about 75 miles from its destination at Houston.


World Bank Management Shift Is Seen
The new president of the World Bank, Lewis T. Preston, is beginning to assert his control over the organization by imposing a new system of senior management used in American corporations, World Bank officials and economic-development experts said today.
Mr.
Preston is said to be replacing the bank's three senior vice presidents with a three-member office of the president.
The bank's vice presidents -- currently 14, soon to be 17 -- will report directly to the president's office.
Under the current system, each vice president reports to one of the senior vice presidents.
The World Bank declined to comment.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Bird Medical Technologies Inc., Palm Springs, Calif., a manufacturer of respiratory-care equipment, named Patrick E. Thomas chief financial officer, succeeding Thor W. Konwin, who remains executive vice president. *
Centex Corp., Dallas, a construction company, named Timothy R. Eller president and chief executive of its home building division, Centex Real Estate Corp./Centex Homes.


Orion Debt Late
The Orion Pictures Corporation said it would not pay about $13 million in interest on debt due today.
The Hollywood studio, in severe financial difficulty, is trying to renegotiate the terms of its debt with bondholders.
In the meantime, Orion has not paid interest on debt.
The company said today's payment would not be made "in view of the subordination provisions in such notes restricting payment of interest."


Classical Music in Review
Music From Summerfest 92d Street Y
What strange beasts have been made to grow out of the back ends of keyboards!
Music From Summerfest filled the stage of the 92d Street Y with them on Saturday night: piano, fortepiano, harpsichord, celeste, accordion, even synthesized allusions to the keyboard by Michael Starobin.


2 Temple U. Students Are Reported Raped
Two female Temple University students reported they were raped in the last four days, one of them in a gang attack at a fraternity house, the Philadelphia police and university officials say.
Two suspects in the fraternity incident were arrested Friday and released on $15,000 bail.
Michael DeRita, 23 years old, and Raymond Evers, 22, were charged with rape, indecent assault and unlawful restraint in the incident Thursday with a sophomore at the Alpha Phi Delta fraternity house.


Montana's '91 Debut May Be Delayed
They have lost twice in three weeks and their critics have begun to wonder if the mystique is gone, but that is not the worst thing that has happened to the San Francisco 49ers.
This is: Joe Montana says he probably won't return until the middle of next month, and when he does it will likely be as the backup quarterback to Steve Young.
Montana, whose sore right elbow has forced him to miss the team's first three games, made his remarks Sunday before the 49ers were handed a 17-14 defeat by the Minnesota Vikings at the Metrodome.
But Coach George Seifert said today that he was not aware of any change in the target date for Montana's return.


A Suspect Bleeds to Death After Burglarizing Apartment
A 36-year-old burglary suspect who cut his arm while breaking into an East Side apartment bled to death last night as he smoked crack in another apartment, the police said.
The suspect, Edward Mack, of 407 East 77th Street, was found slumped on the floor in a bedroom at 506 East 84th Street at 8:30 P.M., surrounded by drug paraphernalia and bleeding heavily from a severed artery in his forearm.


Business and Health; Insurers Seeking Faster Appraisals
IN an unusual joint approach, the nation's health insurers are seeking to subsidize Government appraisals of the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of expensive new medical devices and procedures.
They are offerng $1 million a year to double the size of the tiny Federal Office of Health Technology Assessment, which has only six professional staff members.
The insurers want a quicker evaluation by the Government of controversial technology like positron emission tomography scans and bone marrow transplants for breast cancer patients after high-dose chemotherapy.
The health technology office consults with the Food and Drug Administration, which passes on the safety of medical devices but not on procedures like surgery, and the National Institutes of Health, which sponsors basic scientific research.


Robert Goldsand, 80, Pianist and Teacher
The pianist and teacher Robert Goldsand died yesterday at a nursing home in Danbury, Conn.
He was 80 years old.
A family friend said the cause of death was diabetes; Mr.
Goldsand had also been suffering from Alzheimer's disease.


Randolph Is Proving His Points, All .331 of Them
Willie Randolph never really thought that well-reasoned baseball people really felt he was finished at age 36.
So the veteran second baseman just chalked up the unnerving silence that greeted his free agency last winter as another monetary game that management and players have made their favorite off-season sport.
"Most clubs' general managers knew I could still play," Randolph said.
"I figured someone would call sooner or later."


Spoleto Festival Resolves Its Dispute; Menotti Is Winner
Gian Carlo Menotti, the 80-year-old founder and artistic director of the Spoleto Festival U.S.A., has won his 17-month battle with the festival's board.
At a tense and sometimes fractious three-and-a-half-hour board meeting yesterday at the Drake Hotel in Manhattan, 10 of the board's 46 members resigned, and 9 others either decided not to stand for re-election or were not nominated.
Among those who resigned were the festival's chairman, Ross A. Markwardt, and its president, Edgar F. Daniels, the two officers whose resignations Mr.
Menotti demanded in a them-or-me showdown this May.
Nigel Redden, the general manager, whose resignation was also demanded by Mr.
Menotti, left his post last month but is staying on as a consultant.


Soviet Star Finally Gets His MTV
On Day Two of a fact-finding week with the Rangers, Aleksei Kovalev today showed his future teammates just how fast he can skate.
The Rangers, in turn, showed the right wing from the Soviet Union how great MTV looks on a big screen in the locker room.
Both sides came away impressed.


ITT Appoints Leader For Its Automotive Unit
The ITT Corporation has hired Timothy D. Leuliette to be president and chief executive officer of ITT Automotive, its Auburn Hills, Mich., division that is growing in part because of increasing demand for its anti-lock brake systems.
He succeeds Hubertus von Gruenberg, who resigned in July to become chairman of Continental Tire.


I.O.C. Expected to Scrutinize Helmick's Business Dealings
Robert Helmick, the president of the United States Olympic Committee, left for Berlin yesterday for what once seemed just a routine meeting of the International Olympic Committee executive board.
But Helmick's recent acknowledgements that he had served as a paid consultant to sports groups eager to expand their ties to the Olympics has raised enough questions within the I.O.C. that the issue is expected to be discussed, at least in an informal manner, when the meeting begins today.


Braves' Star Fails Drug Test, Clouding Hopes for Pennant
Otis Nixon, the major leagues' leading base stealer and a primary reason the Atlanta Braves are in first place in the National League West, was suspended for 60 days yesterday after he tested positive for the use of cocaine.
The baseball commissioner's office said that Nixon would not be eligible for the playoffs if the Braves win the division championship.
Commissioner Fay Vincent levied the suspension, his office said, because Nixon, the Braves' left fielder, violated the commissioner's drug policy and provisions of an aftercare program stemming from a 1987 drug arrest.
The announcement did not say what Nixon's violation was, but a major league official said he had tested positive for cocaine.
Nixon, who had been arrested in connection with cocaine possession while he was in the minor leagues, has undergone frequent drug testing since then under baseball's aftercare program, which can also require counseling.
He was nearly suspended two months ago after a contested positive test, another major league official said. 3 Weeks Left in Season
But during a hearing before Deputy Commissioner Steve Greenberg, the official said, union lawyers argued that the test results were marginal and didn't fit with the hundreds of times he had previously been tested with no positive results.
Coming with only three weeks left in the season, the suspension could have a severe impact on the Braves, who are in a tight race with the Los Angeles Dodgers and are trying to join the Minnesota Twins of the American League West as the first teams to leap from last place to first since division play began in 1969.
Although many professional athletes have been suspended for substance abuse, Nixon's suspension is one of the few that could have an effect on a championship.
On the eve of Super Bowl XXIII two years ago, running back Stanley Wilson of the Cincinnati Bengals was suspended for life by the National Football League on the morning of the game for drug use.
Major league baseball's owners and the players' union had a joint drug program in the early 1980's, but the owners terminated it in October 1985.
Since then, the commissioners have carried out their own policy, which is subject to challenge by the union.
First-time offenders are allowed to seek treatment without formal disciplinary action, and a second-time offender is suspended for 60 days.
There are no set penalties for further suspensions.
As the Braves' leadoff batter, the 32-year-old Nixon leads the league in stolen bases with 72 and is hitting .297 after having been above .300 much of the season.
He helps manufacture runs with his speed, often beating out bunts and infield grounders, then stealing second and sometimes third, and he is an outstanding fielder.
"You hate like anything to lose a guy like Otis," John Schuerholz, the Braves' general manager, said by telephone from San Francisco, where the Braves played the Giants last night.
"But there's nothing we can do about that. What we have to try to do is respond like we did when we lost Sid Bream and David Justice for a five-week period. We played real well in their absence. Hopefully they'll respond in the same way." 'He Was Very Quiet'
In Nixon's place, the Braves primarily will use Lonnie Smith, a veteran of post-season games, who has a .280 batting average.
Smith can neither steal bases nor play defense like Nixon.
They also have a rookie, Keith Mitchell, who has hit .357 in 32 games.
Schuerholz said that when he informed Nixon of the suspension, "he was very quiet; he didn't say much at all." Did he seem surprised?
"I can't accurately read his emotions," the general manager said.
"He didn't respond much at all."
Schuerholz said that Nixon was on the way back to Atlanta.
He added that the players he saw were "sad and disappointed" at the news of Nixon's suspension.
Besides possibly hampering the Braves' playoff effort, Nixon most likely has severely hurt himself with his suspension.
First, he will lose $67,500 of his $585,000 salary for missing the final 21 days of this season.
Then he will lose a significant amount of salary when he sits out the first 39 days of the 1992 season.
If the Braves play post-season games, those days will not be deducted from Nixon's 60-day suspension.
Successful Challenges by Union
In addition, and perhaps most damaging of all, Nixon, who began his professional career with the Yankees' organization in 1979, is having by far the best season of his major league career and he can be a free agent after the season.
He would be in position to secure a lucrative multiyear contract, but now teams may not be as interested in him.
Some previous drug suspensions have been successfully challenged by the union through baseball's grievance procedure, but there was no immediate indication that such a challenge would be forthcoming.
"Any player who is disciplined can file a grievance, asserting there is no just cause for the suspension or for the magnitude of the discipline," Donald Fehr, the Players Association executive director, said.
"Whether that's appropriate to do in this case or if it's something Otis would want, we don't know right now. We'll have to talk to him and his agent."
After being arrested in 1987 when he was playing for Cleveland's minor league team in Buffalo, Nixon pleaded guilty to a reduced charge and underwent a 30-day drug rehabilitation program.
Since then, he has been tested frequently, two or three times a week, both with the Montreal Expos, for whom he played for three seasons, and with the Braves this season.
When he appeared to test positive in July, it was the first time since the 1987 arrest that he had come under suspicion.
Considering the union's argument that the test results were marginal and Nixon's clean record through hundreds of tests, the major league official said, the commissioner's office gave Nixon the benefit of the doubt and took no action.
But when a Sept. 7 test was found to be positive, a second, confirming test was conducted.
The commissioner's office learned yesterday that the second test was also positive, and Vincent took immediate action.
Nixon did not show up for the Braves' game last Tuesday.
Schuerholz said the player told him that he had had family problems having to do with child custody.
Schuerholz said he did not know if the family problems and the aftercare violation were related.
The last player to be suspended for testing positive for drug use was Rick Leach.
An outfielder with the San Francisco Giants, Leach was suspended last August for 60 days.
It was the second substance-abuse incident involving Leach.
The previous year, when he played for the Texas Rangers, he couldn't be located while the Rangers were in New York.
When he was located, he was found to have a substance-abuse problem.
The Yankees have two players, Steve Howe and Pascual Perez, who have served suspensions for substance abuse.


Dollar Ends the Day Lower As Gold Posts Modest Rise
The dollar closed lower yesterday as traders, discouraged by the continuing weakness in the economy, soured on the currency.
Gold prices advanced modestly.
Analysts said that nothing new had developed to influence trading, so investors sold the dollar on expectations that the weakened economy would push interest rates lower.


Times Raising Price To 50 on Sept. 30
The New York Times will raise the suggested newsstand price of its weekday issue to 50 cents, from 40 cents, within 75 miles of New York City and on all of Long Island starting Monday, Sept. 30.
The increase was announced yesterday by Lance R. Primis, president of the newspaper, who said increased costs made it necessary.


Ex-Spymaster Requests Asylum
The former head of the East German secret service, Markus Wolf, turned himself in to the authorities here on Saturday and applied for political asylum, officials said today.
The 68-year-old Mr.
Wolf had been sought by the Federal prosecutor in Germany for his activities during 30 years as the East German spymaster.
He had fled to Moscow from East Berlin shortly before German reunification last October.


2 Funerals: Day of Pain And Anger
New York City said a final goodbye yesterday to two public servants killed in the line of duty last week: Police Officer Hector Fontanez, who was shot to death in the Bronx, and Firefighter Kevin Kane, who died from burns suffered in a fire in Brooklyn.
Police and Fire Department funerals are always filled with larger-than life symbolism and ritual.
But the burial of the two men within a few hours of each other yesterday made each service all the more wrenching.


It's a Lot Easier Making a List of Who Isn't No. 1
So, who's No. 1 in horse racing now?
Not Strike the Gold, who won the Kentucky Derby in May but then lost five straight races, including the Woodward Stakes at Belmont Park on Sunday.


A Change for Ogilvy On Northwest Airlines
Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York, is still working for Northwest Airlines, though its original assignment from the airline will not be part of its tasks.
Northwest had planned for Ogilvy, one of four agencies hired this summer on the airline's account, to handle advertising for the Trump Shuttle.
Northwest was to have signed an agreement to manage the shuttle's operations, but on Friday, the negotiations fell apart.


Customers Will Be Covered, State Says
It could be as long as five years before policyholders feel the effects of an Allstate withdrawal from New Jersey, state officials and Allstate Insurance Company executives agreed last night.
State officials said they would not allow Allstate to halt its operations until the company made certain its customers had other coverage.


Service for Marietta Tree
A memorial service for Marietta Tree, a civic leader in New York and a representative at the United Nations, will be held on Oct. 4 at 11 A.M. at St.
Thomas Church, at 53d Street and Fifth Avenue.
She died on Aug. 15 at the age of 74.


Classical Music in Review
Festival of Indian Music and Dance  Alice Tully Hall
The Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, or Institute of Indian Culture, was founded in Bombay in 1938 and has had an American branch since 1981.
In the United States the organization offers performances, poetry readings, language and philosophy courses, lectures and publications.
This season it is celebrating its 10th anniversary with a Festival of Indian Music and Dance.


After Breast Cancer, Women Face Dilemma Over Estrogen Therapy
At first glance, Sally Berg looks like a perfect candidate for estrogen replacement therapy.
She entered menopause early.
She is very thin, so she risks bone loss through osteoporosis.
And though her father lived to the age of 65, he had a massive heart attack at 38.
So Ms.
Berg is just the kind of woman researchers believe would be helped by the hormone's bone-saving and heart-saving properties.


Baker Sees Shamir, but Deadlock Over Loan Guarantees Continues
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d tried today to persuade the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, to postpone Israel's request for $10 billion in housing loan guarantees until after a peace conference starts, but in three hours of talks the two men failed to reach any understanding.
Mr.
Baker and Mr.
Shamir agreed to meet again on Tuesday morning.
Neither Israeli nor American diplomats would disclose any details of their meeting.
"They haven't resolved the issue, but I can tell you everyone is really trying," a Bush Administration official said.


J. C. Penney Plans To Issue Notes
The J. C. Penney Company, the big retailer, said yesterday that it had filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission a $500 million, series A, medium-term program so that it could issue notes from time to time and in various amounts.
The company plans to use the money for general corporate purposes, which might include repayment of debt.
The First Boston Corporation, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and Morgan Stanley &amp; Company are the sales agents.
So far, no ratings have been given the notes.


Treasury Issues Move Up in Price
Prices of Treasury securities moved a bit higher in light trading yesterday, but some credit market participants said the chances for further improvement from now until the end of the month appear slim.
Between now and the beginning of October, the market must absorb new offerings of one-year bills and two-year and five-year notes, in addition to the weekly auctions of three-month and six-month bills.
And the tendency among many money managers is to lighten portfolios as the end of a quarter approaches, they said.
Finally, coming economic data are not likely to provide any further incentive to buy securities, the traders said.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.62
5.25
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.19
5.16
7.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.21
5.20
7.30
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.41
7.43
8.74
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.92
7.93
9.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.00
10.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.93
6.93
7.66
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Market Place; Hidden Benefits For Northrop?
IT is called the B-2 Stealth bomber, but the Air Force acknowledged last week that the new bat-winged plane could not elude radar as well as promised.
Leading members of Congress immediately cast doubt on whether the $65 billion program could survive such a shocking disclosure, which is bad news for the B-2's builder, the Northrop Corporation.
Or is it?
Investors thought the news was bad, sending Northrop's stock down nerly 20 percent in three trading days.
The shares lost $2.50 each on Thursday, $1.50 on Friday and 87.5 cents yesterday, closing at $22 on the New York Stock Exchange.


The Changes Keep Coming Over at B.S.B.
COMPLETING the reorganization of its international operations into three regional groups, Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide Inc. is changing its top management for the rapidly growing Asia-Pacific market.
The appointments add new faces to the long-running guessing game as to who might someday succeed Carl Spielvogel as chairman and chief executive.
But the game still has time to run before a winner is declared.


Policy Fights Cited in School Official's Resignation
The head of New York City's School Construction Authority resigned his $145,000-a-year job after a series of management and policy disagreements with Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and another trustee of the agency, officials said yesterday.
The friction apparently boiled over on Thursday when the construction chief, Charles E. Williams, was told by Mr.
Fernandez and the other trustee, Meyer S. Frucher, that a committee would be established to review the agency's management structure.
At the meeting on Thursday, Mr.
Fernandez and Mr.
Frucher also refused to accept a revised budget of about $5.5 million that Mr.
Williams had submitted to operate the agency for the current fiscal year, which began on July 1.


C-17's First Flight Smoother Than Debate
More than a year behind schedule, the Air Force's C-17 transport plane flew for the first time on Sunday, making an uneventful two-hour 20-minute flight from Long Beach to Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.
The plane, which is manufactured by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation at its plant in Long Beach, is the first of 120 C-17's the Air Force wants to buy, at a total cost of $35 billion.
The Air Force said the plane will greatly help its ability to transport tanks, helicopters, supplies and troops to battle zones.


Careers; New Niche: Manager of Health Costs
A NEW specialty is developing for middle managers, according to Carole R. Schwartz, a vice president of the management recruiting firm of A. T. Kearney Inc.
"I think there will be a growing need for a specialist called a cost-containment manager," she said."The trend is beginning now."


Review/Television; Women Tell Their Stories Of Killing to Escape Abuse
Network news divisions seem to be going in for a sort of upscale tabloidism, which presents sex and violence under a veil of righteousness.
The resulting programs raise the question of whether the exploitive material is redeemed by the worthy message.
It can be a close call, as in tonight's special edition of "20/20," at 10 on Channel 7.
"Pushed to the Edge" is filled with women's graphic accounts of beatings and rapes, not a particularly daring subject for television these days but deserving of attention.
The strongest section, reported by Lynn Sherr, brings to the screen several women who are now serving long sentences at the California Institution for Women at Frontera for killing their husbands or partners.


A New Jersey Judge Tells Teachers to End Strike or Lose Jobs
A New Jersey judge told striking teachers in this small Bergen County community today that they would lose their jobs if they did not return to their classrooms by Friday.
The judge, Kevin M. O'Halloran of State Superior Court, also prohibited the school board from rehiring the teachers and barred the teachers and their sympathizers from any further strike-related picketing "anywhere and at any time."


Study Sees Lax Bank Regulation
A report released today by Congressional auditors criticizes Federal regulators for what it calls their lax supervision of the Bank of New England before it failed.
The report, issued by the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, raises new questions for Robert L. Clarke, the Comptroller of the Currency and the bank's chief regulator, who faces confirmation hearings on a second term later this month.


Mets Know Bross Can Dunk. Question Is: Can He Pitch?
It was more trial by fiasco than fire.
Terry Bross, in his second appearance for Williamsport, had entered a 16-2 game in the ninth inning, and, after relief more comic than anything else, left it with the score 26-2.
"Ten runs in one inning," said Bross, the right-handed reliever who was performing for the Class AA affiliate of the Mets.
"I walked everybody in sight, gave up a grand slam. I figured I couldn't throw much worse."


DISSIDENT IS SEIZED IN SOVIET GEORGIA
The Georgian Government authorities arrested the leader of the non-parliamentary opposition tonight, an aide said, after thousands of people demonstrated in the streets against the popularly elected authoritarian President of the Caucasus republic.
President Zviad Gamsakhurdia, who has declared Georgia independent of the Soviet Union, ordered a Moscow-bound plane carrying Georgi Chanturia, head of the National Democratic Party, to return to the airport in Tbilisi, where the police drove him and two aides away, according to one of his assistants.


Witness in Bid-Rigging Case Tells Of Mob Threat to His Wife's Life
An admitted Mafia captain who survived an assassination attempt testified today that he became a prosecution witness only after receiving a message threatening the life of his wife.
The witness, Peter Chiodo, completed his fourth and final day of testimony in the racketeering trial of nine men charged with a Mafia scheme involving rigged bids and labor payoffs in the window-installation industry.


Redskins Enjoying View From the Top
"Hail to the Redskins" had a new meaning Monday morning.
For the first time since their Super Bowl season in 1987, the Redskins are perched alone atop the National Conference East.
That translates into trouble for the rest of the division.


Close Loss Leaves The Jets Confused
Give Bruce Coslet a call if you have any good hangover cures?
The Jets' coach is still trying to figure out why after almost everything he planned for Buffalo on Sunday worked, the Bills left Giants Stadium with a sobering 23-20 victory and the Jets were left with a headache.


Threat of Early Frost Lifts Prices of Soybeans Sharply
Forecasts for freezing temperatures in the upper Midwest by Thursday lifted soybean futures prices sharply yesterday, but meteorologists were hardly unanimous in predicting an early frost.
Soybeans for September delivery settled 10 cents higher at $6.02 a bushel, the highest settlement price for a near-term soybean contract since Aug. 5.


Inquiry on Jeffries to Resume As CUNY Appeals a Ruling
The City University of New York will appeal a Federal court decision that found the university had no legal right to investigate or discipline a professor whose scholarship has been criticized as racially charged, university officials said yesterday.
The university's decision, concerning a City College philosophy professor, Dr.
Michael Levin, also affects City College's inquiry into Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., another professor who has been accused of making racially charged and offensive remarks.
Less than two hours after CUNY announced that it would appeal the court decision on Dr.
Levin, the president of City College said that the college would resume its inquiry into whether Dr.
Jeffries should continue as chairman of the college's black studies department.


Marathon Imposter Foiled by a Mustache
A marathoner can expect to lose at least six pounds during a race.
But a mustache?
That was the tipoff in Brussels Sunday after the Algerian runner ABBES TEHAMI finished first without a mustache.
Someone identified as Abbes Tehami had started the 26-mile-385-yard race with a mustache.
Actually, the fellow who started was Tehami's coach, BENSALEM HAMIANI.
But after seven and a half miles, Hamiami veered off into the woods and passed the bib with No. 62 on to his pupil.


Our Towns
Every fall as the evenings grow cooler, the eerie spectacle is repeated.
From a branch high in the trees of the Great Swamp Outdoor Education Center, it is truly a strange sight.
Nearly three dozen two-legged creatures enter the woods wearing insect repellent.
As if driven by a primal urge, they tiptoe single file through the brush in the dark of the autumn night, breaking sticks, crunching leaves and otherwise noisily announcing their awkward presence.
Every few minutes they stop.
They say, "Shhh." They wait for the Newark-bound jet to whine over.
And then they play a tape of different owls calling.
At the slightest sound in the woods, the eyes of these creatures suddenly light up.
Their powerful beams of light pierce the darkness, moving from branch to branch.
Soon, their eyes close and they move on, crunching more leaves and sticks and muttering, "Shhh."


Unusual Labor Pact For Nynex
The Nynex Corporation announced yesterday that it had reached an unusual mid-contract accord with its unions in an effort to avoid another strike like one in 1989, the industry's longest and most bitter since the breakup of A.T.&amp; T.
In the new labor accord, the first of its kind in the telecommunications industry, Nynex is giving pay increases of 13 percent over the next three years.
That compares with a 9.2 percent wage rise in the 1989 three-year contract and 10.3 percent in a 1986 agreement.


Why Didn't Subway Motorman Set Off 'Dead Man' Control?; Performance Testing
To the Editor:
"From the Subway Smoke: Questions" (editorial, Aug. 29), on the New York City subway disaster, is disappointing.
While calling for random drug testing of workers in sensitive positions, you mention that "there may be more effective ways to assure safety" through performance testing.
Performance testing (which has workers take a brief electronic hand-eye coordination test immediately before starting a shift) is neither new nor untested.
It was developed decades ago by the United States military, and has repeatedly proved effective in work settings.


Dow's News 'Ticker' to Be Silenced
For most of its 95 years, the Dow Jones News Service -- best known as "the ticker" -- filled the newsrooms and trading floors where it delivered its daily stream of financial information with a loud, rhythmic clack-clack-clack of keys striking paper.
The sound of the ticker has long since evolved into the blurred clatter of the high-speed printer, but even that soft drone will be silenced after Jan. 1 when Dow Jones replaces the few remaining ticker machines and completes the conversion to all-electronic delivery of the news service.


New Methods Sought To Dispose of Rockets With No Harm to Earth
FOR half a century the wizards of military rocketry have vied to build bigger, better and more deadly missiles armed with warheads of terrifying power.
Now they are racing to find innovative ways to tear the missiles apart or divert them to other uses.
The sprawling new enterprise of destruction and conversion has been born of East-West arms control and police actions undertaken by the United Nations in Iraq.
All told, it involves thousands of missiles.
The scope and complexity of the job are challenging the creativity of scientists, engineers and government officials around the world.
The Wake of the Coup
Moreover, the recent failure of the Kremlin coup and the subsequent purge of Soviet hard-liners has increased calls around the world for a redoubling in the pace of nuclear disarmament, which, if realized, would swell the ranks of discarded armaments.


Why Didn't Subway Motorman Set Off 'Dead Man' Control?
To the Editor:
I have been puzzled to see no mention of the "dead man" control in coverage of New York City's Aug. 28 subway crash.
Separate and apart from the throttle, by which the motorman controls the speed of the train, the dead-man control is a safety device upon which the driver must exert steady force, usually by foot, at all times while driving the train.
Should this force be interrupted by the motorman's falling asleep, suffering a heart attack or becoming a holdup victim, the dead-man control is activated -- regardless of the setting of the throttle -- and power is immediately cut while, I believe, the brakes are also applied.
I have been under the impression that this control -- for obvious reasons vital in the case of trains operated by only one engineer or motorman -- was incorporated into all modern subway and surface trains.
Why did it fail to operate in the case of the ill-fated No. 4 train when the motorman, by his own admission, nodded off at the controls?
STEVEN PARADIS  New York, Sept. 4, 1991


Clio Awards Owner Said to Sign Sale Pact
Friday the 13th may have been the appropriate day for an agreement to have been signed to sell the company that owns the scandal-plagued Clio Awards.
Since May, when two award ceremonies were disrupted and canceled amid unpaid bills, there have been widespread reports of buyers interested in the private firm.
Yesterday, Ruth L. Ratny, the owner of Screen magazine in Chicago, said Bill Evans, the Clio owner, signed a letter of intent on Friday to sell the company.


Reviews/Fashion; Dramatic Tailoring For Day and Night
The jacket is sleekly tailored and ends at knuckle level; the slender skirt is just a few inches longer.
This is the basic suit look John Anthony recommends to his couture clients for daytime wear.
It was a key shape in his fall show at the Americas Society in New York last week and in his salon at 60 East 66th Street.
Austere and precise, the long jacket is softened by a flare or a full, rounded curve as it descends below the trim waist.
The look works well on tall or short women.


King Calls Cayton 'Satan in Disguise'
While DON KING, the promoter for MIKE TYSON, was vigorously defending the former heavyweight champion's character last week, he also used the occasion to strike again at the fighter's estranged manager, BILL CAYTON.
In Indianapolis, where Tyson was indicted on four criminal counts, including rape, and in Las Vegas, Nev., where the fighter was starting to train for his November title bout with EVANDER HOLYFIELD, King was back to calling Cayton the sort of names he did in 1988, when Tyson first sought to withdraw from his contract with Cayton.
"When I first told you Cayton was Satan in disguise," King said, "you looked on me with incredulity. But 'Friday the 13th' and 'Dead Again' have nothing on Cayton. He's an evil man and very pompous. He's Satan Cayton."


Oliver North Beats the Rap
Oliver North, quarterback of the Iran-contra scandal, has won dismissal of his criminal convictions because the prosecution can't prove he had a perfect trial, utterly free of error.
He pronounces himself "totally exonerated."
That's a wild overstatement.
It's as though Ernesto Miranda had claimed that the Supreme Court gave him a character reference when it threw out his famous confession for crimes in Arizona because the police had not read him his rights.


Gates Admits to 'Misjudgments,' But Says He Is Fit to Lead C.I.A.
Given a rare second chance to become Director of Central Intelligence, Robert M. Gates opened Senate confirmation hearings today by presenting himself as both contrite supplicant and seasoned Presidential adviser, a man who deserves the job as the nation's intelligence chief.
In an effort to defuse still-explosive questions about his role in the Iran-contra affair, which sank his nomination to the same post in 1987, Mr.
Gates said he had made a number of mistakes in not pursuing the possibility of impropriety or wrongdoing in the Government and would now be more aggressive in trying to prevent any similar activities.  [ Excerpts, page A16. ]
"I want to speak about the misjudgments that I made and the lessons I learned," Mr.
Gates, the deputy national security adviser, told the Senate Intelligence Committee, reading from handwritten notes that he said he drafted Sunday night.
"I should have done more." Over and over, when committee members asked him why he had not done more in specific instances, he said simply that he should have done more.
Speaking under oath in a controlled tone, he added: "I should have been more skeptical of what I was told. I should have asked more questions and I should have been less satisfied with the answers I received, especially from Director Casey."  Accused of 'Willful Ignorance'
But he assured the committee members that they would not find a nominee "more aware of and sensitive to the lessons of that time or more understanding of the importance of a good-faith relationship with the Congress."
During the summer and fall of 1986, as the Iran-contra affair was still unfolding in secret, Mr.
Gates served as Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, and William J. Casey was the Director.
Mr.
Gates said four years ago that he had not pursued information about the affair, in part because Mr.
Casey had assured him nothing improper was going on.
Despite Mr.
Gates's comments today, Democratic members of the committee wasted no time in pressing him about when he first learned about the secret sale of arms to Iran and the diversion of the profits to the Nicaraguan rebels, and why he had failed to pursue the information he had.
Mr.
Gates maintained, as he did in his 1987 confirmation hearings, that he was aware of only fragmentary information about the affair until it was publicly disclosed in late November 1986.
"You were absolutely surrounded by the truth," Senator Howard Metzenbaum said.
"The question is, how could you possibly not know? As No. 2 man at the agency, such willful ignorance is inexcusable." The Ohio Democrat noted that the nominee had said in response to 33 written questions from the committee that he could not recall events related to the Iran-contra affair.
"I hope your memory improves during the course of these hearings," Mr.
Metzenbaum said.
Casey on Spot as Well
As Mr.
Gates's appearance extended into the evening, it was difficult to tell whether he was gaining or losing ground with the committee, which appeared inclined but far from committed to approving his nomination when the hearings began.
Of the 15 panel members, those who seemed most skeptical were Senators Metzenbaum, Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona, and Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey.
From the outset the hearings were as much a trial of Mr.
Casey as they were an examination of Mr.
Gates, with Senator David L. Boren, the Oklahoma Democrat who heads the Senate Select Intelligence Committee, starting off with dozens of queries about the minutiae of Iran-contra.
For the first time, the 47-year-old Mr.
Gates, who in his February 1987 testimony opened his prepared remarks with a paean of praise for Mr.
Casey, today put some distance between himself and his former boss, mentor and protector.
"However close we may have been professionally," Mr.
Gates said of Mr.
Casey, who died of a brain tumor in May 1987, "there was really, despite some of the things that have been written, a certain distance in a personal relationship. Mr. Casey was almost 30 years older than I was at the time, a different generation." Gates's Plan for Agency
A number of committee members stressed that they would use this week's hearings to explore questions about the future of the C.I.A. and whether Mr.
Gates is the right man to guide the agency into an era when cold war intelligence activities are outdated.
In his prepared testimony, Mr.
Gates offered a brief outline of what he would do if confirmed.
He said that he would recommend that President Bush begin a major effort to determine the intelligence needs of the country for the next decade, would substantially expand the number of experts who gather intelligence and work to improve the relevance of intelligence to policymakers, and the relationship between the C.I.A. and the military.
Mr.
Gates, apparently suggesting he would alter some C.I.A. operations, told the committee, "We must consider the implications for our covert action capabilities of a dramatic decline in Soviet aggressiveness and disruptive activities in the third world."
But today's hearings were dominated by the past.
At a news conference in the Rose Garden this afternoon, President Bush expressed irritation with the way the Iran-contra scandal has dogged his Administration.
"I wish the damned thing had never happened," the President said when asked if he, like Mr.
Gates, wished he had done more to learn the details of the scandal. 'A Lot of Hindsight'
But he declined to comment specifically on Mr.
Gates's testimony today, saying he had not yet read it.
"From any summary of what's been said, I have no feeling that his chances have been diminished and, indeed, my support for him will not waver," Mr.
Bush said.
"But I suppose what he's saying, if that's it, is that with a lot of hindsight and a lot of things that have come to the surface since, maybe he wished he had done things differently. I guess we all might fit into that description."
In his 1987 Senate testimony, Mr.
Gates said that "nobody ever accused me of being slow," and his presentation today showed an extraordinary deference to the committee and the process of Congressional oversight on intelligence matters.
He vowed to build a relationship of "trust and confidence" with Congress if he is confirmed, and to resign from the job of Director rather than jeopardize that relationship because of differences with the executive branch or the C.I.A.
In 1987, by contrast, when Mr.
Gates was pressed repeatedly by committee members about what he would do if the President prevented him from reporting to Congress, he said only that he would "contemplate resignation."
But Mr.
Gates's continued assertions in written answers to the committee that he had only vague information about the Iran-contra affair led some Democrats on the panel to question his candor.
Senator Bradley offered the most relentless critique of Mr.
Gates, accusing the nominee of "lapses of judgment." The committee will have to decide, he said, whether they were "isolated mistakes or part of a pattern in which Mr. Gates tailored intelligence to suit policymakers or his own biases, failed to prevent, protest or at least warn of improperly authorized activities or even suppressed damaging information."  A More Personal Tone
As one example, Mr.
Bradley said that the Iran-contra affair began with "an error of judgment," namely what he called "a badly flawed estimate" in 1985 of Iranian vulnerability by the National Intelligence Council, the most senior body of intelligence analysts, which Mr.
Gates headed.
Unlike in his 1987 testimony, Mr.
Gates today infused his answers with an emotional and personal tone.
He said he was "humbled" by the honor of the nomination and described himself as a loyal public servant who came to Washington 25 years ago with all of his possessions: "a 1965 Mustang and no money."
He also sought to defuse criticism about his pessimistic views of the Soviet Union since the coming to power of Mikhail S. Gorbachev in the spring of 1985, and his failure to predict the collapse of the Soviet Union.
"Who would have thought just five years ago we would stand where we are today -- certainly not the intelligence analyst sitting before you today," Mr.
Gates said.
"Talk about humbling experiences."
But the senators repeatedly returned to questions and allegations about Mr.
Gates's knowledge of the Iran-contra affair.
Mr.
Gates said that he had "no recollection" of a conversation in late August 1986 with Richard Kerr, the current Acting Director of Central Intelligence who was one of Mr.
Gates's immediate subordinates, in which Mr.
Kerr says he told his boss of the affair.
"I've never denied Mr. Kerr may have broached this subject with me," Mr.
Gates said.
"I've simply said that I have no recollection of it myself."
When asked about a sworn statement by Mr.
Kerr's top assistant, John Helgerson, that Mr.
Kerr also told him about his conversation with Mr.
Gates, the nominee conceded, "I would regard Mr. Helgerson's recollection as adding weight to the fact that Mr. Kerr did in fact come to me."
He was also asked about allegations that the Reagan Presidential campaign in 1980 tried to delay the release of 52 American hostages held in Teheran until after the November election.
He said he had no knowledge of or involvement in such a plan.


Corrections
A chart on Sept. 2 headed "The Baltic States" misstated the ethnic breakdown of Estonia.
It is 61.5 percent Estonian, 30.3 percent Russian and 8.2 percent other.


INSIDE
Thomas's Last Day
Clarence Thomas ended his testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, but after five days, many of his views were elusive.
Page A14.
Search for Yugoslav Peace
West European nations, frustrated bytheir inability to enforce a Yugoslav cease-fire, moved closer to sending a peacekeeping force.
Page A3.
Nynex in Early Union Pact
Seeking to avoid another bitter strike, Nynex reached an unusual mid-contract accord calling for 13 percent raises over three years.
Page D1.


On My Mind; An Autobiography
In daily word and deed, every President writes his autobiography as a statesman.
President Bush is producing a strange and troubling one, damaging to himself and his place in history.
The nasty fight he started with Israel is one chapter in that autobiography.


Thomas Ends Testimony but Senators Grumble Over Elusive Views
Judge Clarence Thomas completed his appearance before the Senate Judiciary Committee today, offering comments on the death penalty and what he said was his belief that the Supreme Court should not overturn its own precedents without strong reasons.
But after five days of full and often contentious questioning, Judge Thomas's views remain elusive on most issues, even those on which he answered at greatest length.
Several Democrats on the committee complained today, as they had on the first day, that Judge Thomas was being purposely vague and even disavowing his extensive record to win confirmation.


Democracy Backers In Hong Kong Win Election Landslide
Results from the first direct legislative elections ever held here sent a resoundingly clear message to China and Britain today that Hong Kong's people want greater democracy as this British colony reverts to Chinese control in 1997.
Liberal pro-democracy candidates won 16 of the 18 seats contested on Sunday, according to the results announced today.


Patterns
Portents for the Fall
While retailers have been busy holding their fall fashion parties, store executives are also tracking the fall best sellers, if any.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts tentatively priced $500.9 million in general obligation refunding bonds through First Boston to yield 7.10 percent for maturities due in 2011, for example, among four issues.
Moody's gave a rating of BAA and Standard &amp; Poor's, BBB, but some maturities are insured by Ambac and hence rated AAA by both services.


Did Reagan Team Meddle in Hostage Crisis?
To the Editor:
Manucher Ghorbanifar declares in "Spoiling the 'October Surprise' " (Op-Ed, Aug. 28) that the 1980 Reagan campaign managers were not guilty of plotting a delay in the Carter Administration's planned October release of 52 United States hostages in Teheran, which could have influenced the election.
His arguments sound strange indeed to American ears.


10 Soviet Republics Agree To Coordinate Food Supply
The disjointed republics of the Soviet Union agreed today on the need for a common approach to food distribution and foreign aid in order to best survive the winter.
The State Council, the 11-day-old transitional national government that includes 10 republic leaders, agreed at a Kremlin meeting to shape a plan for food supply and exchange, according to Ivan S. Silayev, chairman of the economic management committee.


Chess
Those rare young players destined to reach the grandmaster rank or maybe even the world championship level almost invariably show their strength first in tactical virtuosity.
They love to live dangerously, sacrificing pieces, plotting exciting combinations, pulling mating attacks out of a hat.
Their change to positional chess comes later, with maturity.
But there are a few mavericks that do not fit the pattern.
The most famous is Anatoly Karpov, world champion from 1975 to 1985.
As a youngster, he played as though he were his own grandfather, bypassing the Sturm und Drang period altogether.


Canada Takes Its Cup by Sweeping U.S.
Despite its best showing ever at this level of play, the United States lost to Canada tonight in the championship game of the Canada Cup tournament.
Canada won, 4-2, to complete a sweep in the two-of-three-game final round between two national teams made up mostly of National Hockey League All-Stars.


Rabbis Prepare for Yom Kippur in Church


Lilly Chief to Retire; Successor Is Named
Eli Lilly and Company announced yesterday that Richard D. Wood would retire as chief executive, president and chairman of the company's executive committee on Oct. 31.
Vaughn D. Bryson, an executive vice president and longtime employee of the big Indianapolis-based pharmaceutical company, will succeed Mr.
Wood in the three posts on Nov. 1.
Mr.
Wood, who will be 65 years old next month, will continue as chairman of Lilly's board of directors and as a member of the executive committee.


U.N. MAY DEPRIVE THE MAJOR POWERS OF ITS TOP POSTS
As the United Nations General Assembly prepares to open its 46th annual session Tuesday, negotiators from 22 nations have agreed on a plan that would deprive the United States and other powers of the senior posts they have automatically claimed.
The plan, worked out by 22 industrial and developing countries, including the United States and the other permanent Security Council members, is intended to streamline the unwieldy United Nations Secretariat and increase the power of the new Secretary General to be chosen next month.


HOSTAGES' RELEASE BOGGED IN DETAILS
The release of more Western hostages from Lebanon, which seemed imminent a few days ago has become embroiled in complicated negotiations surrounding the logistical details of an exchange, Western diplomats say.
"Our understanding is that we are in the preliminary stages of the negotiations to determine the logistical arrangements for any trade," a high-ranking Western diplomat in Damascus said.


Opening Its Case, U.S. Calls Noriega 'Small Man'
Deriding Manuel Antonio Noriega as nothing more than "a small man in a general's uniform," Federal prosecutors said today that they would prove that the deposed Panamanian dictator gave his "permission, authorization and encouragement" to a scheme to transform his nation into an international cocaine trafficking and manufacturing center.
In his opening statement, the lead prosecutor, Michael P. Sullivan, said General Noriega used his position to give the cocaine ring centered in Medellin, Colombia, a free hand to operate in Panama.
In return, he said, the general sought both to enrich himself and to strengthen his political power.


Telecom's Stock Falters
The stock of United Telecommunications Inc., which owns U S Sprint, fell yesterday because of a Federal report saying the Government should cut the amount it pays Sprint and A.T.&amp;T. for phone service.
United Telecom shares were off $1.125 each, to $23.625, recovering from a low of $22.625.
About 2.3 million shares were traded.


President of FMC Gets Chairman, Chief Posts
The FMC Corporation, the big Chicago-based maker of chemicals, machinery and military systems, said yesterday that it had named Robert N. Burt chairman and chief executive, effective Nov. 1.
Mr.
Burt, 53 years old, who has been president of FMC since March 1990, succeeds Robert H. Malott, who is stepping down as chairman because he is about to reach the company's retirement age of 65.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Mr.
Burt said rebuilding FMC's balance sheet would be one of his main goals.


Julie Bovasso, a Dramatist, 61; Active in Avant-Garde Theater
Julie Bovasso, an actress and playwright in the avant-garde theater Off Broadway and Off Off Broadway, died Saturday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Ms. Bovasso died of cancer, said her literary agent, Helen Harvey.


Democrats Call D'Amato's Criticism of Dinkins a Ploy
In a chorus of criticism that quickly turned into a political free-for-all, Democrats here and in New York today accused Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of attacking Mayor David N. Dinkins's handling of the disturbance in Crown Heights and other racial violence in an attempt to buoy the Senator's re-election drive.
"It's an unfortunate effort to divide New York to get a block of votes," said Representative Edolphus Towns, a Bedford-Stuvyesant Democrat who is chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus and the Council of Black Elected Democrats in New York.
"The timing could not be worse."


By Design; Fishnet Hose
One sure sign of being in step with the new fall style is to wear black fishnet hose.
The problem is finding them.
This racy bit of 1960's redux has taken off like a thoroughbred out of the starting gate.
Most stores have already been cleaned out.
Yet all is not lost.
Bergdorf Goodman, which sold 1,200 pairs in a week, once again has in stock a DKNY style that costs $10.50 a pair.
This is one of the more comfortable versions; the mesh pattern is laid over a sheer, colorless, stocking-knit base.
This is helpful at the end of the day, when fishnet can make the soles of the feet feel like they have been walking on a charcoal grill.


Doehring's Drug Suspension Is Upheld
JIM DOEHRING, who was the United States shot-put champion of 1990, will remain under suspension until December 1992 for steroid use.
A drug appeals board of The Athletic Congress upheld a two-year suspension Doehring received following a test last December.
It was part of T.A.C.'s random, out-of-competition testing program.


Calvin Klein Posters Of New Print Campaign
The provocative new print advertising campaign for Calvin Klein Jeans, shot by the fashion photographer Bruce Weber, is branching out into another method to reach consumers: posters.
In tiny type at the bottom of some of the print ads, which were introduced in a much-talked-about, 116-page supplement to the October issue of Vanity Fair magazine, there is an offer for poster-size reprints.
Three 24-inch-by-36-inch posters, at $15 each, are being offered, including one of a showering man who is nude but for a pair of strategically placed jeans.


Dinkins Rejects Idea That Order Hits Homeless
Again finding himself balancing the needs of the homeless against the larger issues of public safety, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday rejected charges by advocates for the homeless that a recent directive on securing city buildings was aimed at homeless people.
The directive ordered city agency heads to secure their buildings and to review them for fire hazards.
It followed two recent fires -- one at the Staten Island Ferry Terminal and the other in an abandoned building in Brooklyn -- in which homeless people were implicated.


Big Airlines Join T.W.A. in Cutting Fares
The Big Three airlines -- American, United and Delta -- wasted little time yesterday matching T.W.A.'s $198 round-trip coast-to-coast air fare, which was announced in newspaper advertisements in the morning.
By afternoon, the three carriers announced similar fares, although each added a wrinkle or two of its own.
While subject to a number of restrictions, including availability, T.W.A.'s fare is much lower than anything currently available.
It is, for example, $140 less than American's current lowest-priced New York-to-San Francisco round trip, and far below American's $756, unrestricted, fully refundable one-way fare between those two points.


Cypriots Can Live Together in Peace; Mass Graves
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 19 report on Cyprus in a subtle way is unfair to the Turkish Cypriots.
As a person who has lived among them for six months as an exchange student in Famagusta, I can tell you that there is no Turkish Cypriot who feels that the 1974 rescue operation by Turkey was an "invasion." The Turkish Cypriots each year celebrate July 20 as a day of liberation and deliverance from Greek oppression.
How right they are in doing so!
In the short period during which I stayed in Northern Cyprus, I saw at least three mass graves of Turkish Cypriots, who had been massacred by the Greeks in the district of Famagusta alone.
I have been told that several others exist in other parts of the country and in Southern Cyprus, where the Greek Cypriot Administration would not allow any United Nations investigation to be conducted.
The suffering that I encountered among Turkish Cypriots and their fear of returning to Greek oppression can be seen in their faces.
I, too, celebrate their liberation.
It is such tragedies as these and the relentless drive of Greek Cypriots for union with Greece that have divided Cyprus.
The Greek Cypriots have only themselves to blame for the present division.
Shedding crocodile tears and playing on the sympathies of others will not bring peace to Cyprus.
Most definitely, a serious effort will be needed on the part of the Greek Cypriots if they ever hope to gain the confidence of the Turkish Cypriots.
JENINEP.
SAVEAU  New York, Sept. 2, 1991


Corrections
A headline in some editions yesterday with an article about fighting in the Yugoslav republic of Croatia referred incorrectly to action by the Yugoslav military.
Its forces flew low over Zagreb, the Croatian capital, but did not strike the city.
Later developments are reported on this page.


Critics Say Florio Fell Short on Insurance
Gov.
Jim Florio sold himself to New Jersey's voters in 1989 as a foe of insurance companies, blaming them for the state's high auto insurance premiums and specifically mocking the "good hands" symbol used by Allstate in its advertising.
But many critics say the changes he promised as his first order of business have fallen short and they denounce as a shell game the cuts in premiums for some policy holders that resulted from the insurance law passed last year.


Mating Sounds of Fish
CERTAIN fish communicate while mating through a range of low-frequency sounds, such as pulses and squeal-like noises, a recent study has found.
While it has long been known that fish produce noises, the recent findings, reported by Dr.
Phillip S. Lobel, a biologist at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, offer some of the first evidence of a direct link between the sounds and specific behavior.
Researchers hope the findings will help explain how the fishes' environment affects spawning, Dr.
Lobel said.


THE GATES HEARINGS: Reporter's Notebook; Scene 1, Take 2: C.I.A. Nominee Rewrites Opening Monologue for Encore
The scene today was circa February 1987.
There again was Robert M. Gates, wearing one of his usual starched white shirts, calmly telling 15 Senators why he wanted to be the nation's intelligence chief.
While Mr.
Gates's appearance stirred a strong sense of deja vu, his comments were markedly different from those of four years ago when his first try to be Director of Central Intelligence disintegrated amid accusations of his possible links to the then-unfolding Iran-contra affair.


Charlton Is Suspended, but He Appeals
NORM CHARLTON one of the Cincinnati Reds' once-notorious Nasty Boys, was suspended for seven days and fined for deliberately hitting the Dodgers' MIKE SCIOSCIA with a pitch -- and then saying he might even come after him again.
The suspension, imposed by BILL WHITE, the National League president, was effective yesterday, but Charlton appealed, thereby making him eligible to pitch pending a hearing.


American Plan Clouds Future of New Jets
The decision by American Airlines late last week to cut spending and to consider upgrading its DC-10's instead of buying some new planes is raising questions about the viability of newer models like the Boeing 777 and Airbus A330 and A340.
American, the nation's largest carrier, had earlier been expected to order new models by the end of the year.
But Robert W. Baker, the airline's vice president of operations, said in an interview that if American decided to revamp its fleet of DC-10's under a proposal recently presented by the plane's maker, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, it would have a less immediate need for airplanes like the 777 and A330 and A340.


Rare Disorder Reveals Interplay of Cancers And Body's Defenses
WHEN the 50-year-old woman first went to see Dr.
John E. Greenlee, she could hardly speak an intelligible word, and her jaw did not stay still: it jerked open and shut and from side to side, clacking and chattering like a puppet's mouth gone amok.
Her eyes rolled round and round in their sockets, unable to focus on anything, and the movement of her limbs was wildly uncoordinated.
If she reached for anything, her hand either swung way past the object or knocked it over clumsily.


A Second Rival For Intel Chip
Chips and Technologies Inc., a maker of computer chips and circuit boards, will soon become the second company to produce microprocessors compatible with the Intel Corporation's 386-series chips, industry executives said today.
Earlier this year, Advanced Micro Devices Inc. introduced the first clones of the 386, breaking Intel's monopoly on the chip that is the brains of most I.B.M.- compatible personal computers.
A spokesman for Chips would neither confirm nor deny reports of 386-based products, but said that the company, which is based in San Jose, Calif., would have an important announcement on Oct. 1.


CHRONICLE
Day after day during the Persian Gulf War, Gen.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF dominated news conferences and war coverage.
Now his familiar face will be seen on the screen again on Dec. 7, talking about another war.
The general, who retired from military duty on Aug. 31, will serve as co-anchor with CHARLES KURALT on a CBS News two-hour special commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
Although he has been in semiseclusion near Tampa, Fla., writing his memoirs, he responded immediately to a proposal that he narrate the program, according to DAVID CORVO, CBS News vice president for public affairs programming.


Canseco to Look Into Trade Possibilities
JOSE CANSECO is unhappy with the way he is being treated by the Oakland fans and says he has asked his agent to look into trade possibilities after the season.
Canseco, who has 41 homers and 111 runs batted in, signed a five-year extension with Oakland last season for $23.5 million.
"I'm treated better by the fans on the road than the fans at home," Canseco said in an interview on ESPN yesterday.


Mulroney Acts to Crush Strike by Federal Workers
Brian Mulroney, the embattled Conservative Prime Minister, introduced legislation today to crush a week-old strike of federal civil servants that has cut grain shipments, snarled air travel, slowed essential imports and curbed Canada's industrial output.
The action, which is being fought by labor and its parliamentary allies, steps up a confrontation that union leaders say they hope will lead to the ouster of Mr.
Mulroney, who has plummeted in opinion polls to the lowest rating of any national leader in the last half century.


Review/Television; Sitcom Premise: The TV Handyman Who Isn't
Ever since the enormously successful 1984 debut of "The Cosby Show," a television season cannot go by without still another stand-up comic trying to develop his or her standard act into a prime-time sitcom.
This year it's Tim Allen, who has used his comedy specials on cable ("Men Are Pigs" on Showtime was one) to expound wryly on, among other things, the virtues of power tools.
Enter at 8:30 this evening the new ABC series "Home Improvement," in which Mr.
Allen plays Tim Taylor, professionally the host of a cable show called "Tool Time" and at home a repair klutz with a tendency to destroy appliances.
ABC is high on this show, placing it in a most desirable time slot between established top-rated shows: "Full House" at 8 and "Roseanne" at 9.
The network carefully notes in its ads that one of the creators of "Home Improvement" is Matt Williams, who was credited with doing the same for "Roseanne." Not mentioned: Mr.
Williams was rather ungracefully dumped from "Roseanne" at the end of its first season, and to this day, producer and star would prefer not even to be in the same city.
Past credits are not always illuminating.


Opponents Seek to Curb Banking Changes
The leading Congressional opponents to legislation that would sweep away the Depresssion-era regulations that govern the nation's banking industry had their chance today to try to preserve the status quo.
The opposition is centered in the House Energy and Commerce Committee, and one of its subcommittees today approved amendments that would retain prohibitions against industrial concerns acquiring banks and would severely restrict the ability of banks to enter the securities business.


DNA's Wrapping Holds Key to Genes at Work
IF stretched to its full length, a single molecule of human DNA would extend more than three feet, the height of the average nursery school child.
But when squeezed and coiled and crammed into its rightful place in the bosom of the cell, the molecule of life measures about a millionth of an inch across.
The extraordinary feat of packing long, viscous ribbons of genetic material into a spot too tiny to qualify even as a Manhattan closet is performed largely by histones, a family of five proteins that hug the DNA and condense it down to size.
Yet as considerable as this compaction job may be, many scientists have long dismissed the histone proteins as dull structural elements, little more than the biochemical equivalent of nuts, bolts and bungee cords to keep the all-important genetic molecule in its proper dimensions.


Julie Bovasso, a Dramatist, 61; Active in Avant-Garde Theater
Julie Bovasso, an actress and playwright in the avant-garde theater Off Broadway and Off Off Broadway, died Saturday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Ms. Bovasso died of cancer, said her literary agent, Helen Harvey.


Weicker Says 8,000 Layoffs Are Necessary
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. threatened today to lay off more than 8,000 government workers, beginning Thursday, unless union leaders help come up with money needed to balance the budget passed just three weeks ago.
It was unclear after Hartford's season of budget brinkmanship how much today's announcement was intended for its effect on labor talks in which the state is seeking more than $300 million in wage and benefit reductions.
Governor Weicker, who disclosed the layoff plans through his aides, announced 2,600 layoffs earlier this year that were rescinded when the unions accepted concessions, a package of givebacks that union leaders no longer recognize.


BRIEFS
*
First Constitution Bank, a subsidiary of First Constitution Financial Corp., New Haven, will acquire $97 million in insured deposits from four Connecticut branches of ComFed Savings Bank from the Resolution Trust Corp.
Northeast Savings F.A., a subsidiary of Northeast Federal Corp., Hartford, will acquire $210 million of insured deposits from eight branches of ComFed Savings. *
Iriss Co., a joint venture of Raytheon Co., Lexington, Mass., and General Dynamics Corp., St.
Louis, has won a $138.7 million contract to develop an improved infrared seeker for two Navy tactical missiles.


Schwarzkopf Collaborator Is Named
After considering scores of inquiries from hopeful authors and eager literary agents, Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf has chosen a collaborator for his autobiography who has experience in the specialized field of co-writing a first-person account of the life of a powerful, famous and opinionated figure.
General Schwarzkopf, who commanded the allied forces in the Persian Gulf war, announced yesterday that his collaborator was Peter Petre, who was co-author with Thomas J. Watson Jr. of the best-selling memoir "Father, Son &amp; Co." published last year by Bantam Books.
Mr.
Watson was formerly chief executive officer of I.B.M.
His book with Mr.
Petre drew particular praise for its unusual frankness about Mr.
Watson's often difficult relationship with his father and brother.


Subic Bay Pact Moves to New Arenas
After hours of impassioned, even tearful debate in the Philippine Senate over sovereignty, national pride and the role of the United States in the life of its former colony, the Senate vote today to reject a new American lease on the Subic Bay Naval Station leaves the future of the huge base in the hands of the Philippine courts and voters.
The courts will be asked to determine the constitutionality of a proposal by President Corazon C. Aquino for a referendum on the base, the largest American military installation in Southeast Asia.


Late Rally Gives Dow A 29.52 Lift
A late rally pushed blue-chip stocks higher yesterday, but the move did not spread to smaller issues, which were generally lower for the day.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which was up about 10 points an hour from the close, ended up gaining 29.52, to 3,015.21, more than erasing Friday's 22-point decline.


Braves Lose Two: First Nixon, Then the Game
Left without their catalyst, the Atlanta Braves promised tonight that they would proceed with the same resolve that pushed them into first place in the National League West.
But after losing Otis Nixon, the Braves went out and lost a game, partly because Lonnie Smith, who replaced Nixon in left field, lost his footing.
Smith, regarded as a defensive liability throughout his career, slipped on the outfield grass as he chased a fly ball off the bat of pinch-hitter Terry Kennedy in the fifth inning.
It allowed two runs to score in the San Francisco Giants' 8-5 victory over Atlanta at Candlestick Park.


To Thine Viewers Affiliates Be True
Baseball has turned CBS into the Job of network sports.
Satan is working extra innings, testing its resolve.
The evidence: CBS airs too few games, enraging the "Game of the Week" purists.
CBS lost a ton of money in the post-season last year because the series were too short, meaning too few advertising spots were sold.
It didn't hire Vin Scully.
It doesn't have a regular pre-game show.


4 Slain and 6 Injured in Queens Bar Shootout
Four people were killed and six others were wounded early yesterday morning when an argument in a Queens cabaret exploded into a blazing gun battle that turned a joyous birthday party into a scene of carnage and terror, the police and witnesses said.
Two of those slain were men involved in the shooting, the police said, and two were women -- both mothers of 4-year-old children -- who were innocent bystanders.


Hanson to Buy Beazer In $609 Million Deal
Hanson P.L.C., the largest industrial conglomerate in Britain, said yesterday that it would buy Beazer P.L.C., the British construction group with vast holdings in the United States, for $2.14 a share, or $609 million.
Beazer said it had recommended that shareholders accept the bid, which requires shareholder and regulatory approvals.


Electricity and Cancer
Preliminary findings from a study of men exposed to electromagnetic fields suggest that they have slightly higher rates of breast cancer.
No theory adequately explains exactly why electromagnetic fields may increase the risk of cancer.
Some scientists suggest the fields promote tumors or cause cells to proliferate.


Sitting Still, Not Exercise, Gives Us Pain
To the Editor:
Jane Brody's Personal Health column on preventing and remedying muscular aches and pains (Aug. 28) gives the impression that strenuous activity and overuse are the main culprits in muscle pain and spasm.
But from my experience as a massage therapist -- with a clientele ranging from world-class athletes to the chronically disabled -- I have learned that underuse contributes to significant muscle pain, spasm and, if they are untreated, disability.


Bridge
In major pair championships all the players play the same deals.
Modern organizers tend to use the same deals in distinct events that are being played in parallel, a fact that made possible a considerable coincidence on the diagramed deal.
It was played on July 5 at the Mid-Atlantic Regional Championships in Bethesda, Md., and it aided two different winning partnerships.
Laura Brill and Rick Goldstein, both of White Plains, winners of the Mixed Pairs, followed the same sophisticated bidding sequence to four hearts as did Lynn Deas of Schenectady, N.Y., and Judy Shulman of Delmar, N.Y., winners of the Women's Pairs.
And Goldstein and Shulman then followed similar routes to bring home a difficult contract.


Largest Insurer in New Jersey, Allstate, Seeks to End Coverage
The Allstate Insurance Company, the largest insurer in New Jersey, said yesterday that it would seek regulatory approval to stop writing virtually all types of coverage in the state.
Blaming years of losses from its core auto-insurance operation, Allstate said its withdrawal would affect insurance covering more than 400,000 New Jersey cars, about 250,000 residences, a number of small and mid-sized businesses and tens of thousands of boats, mobile homes and recreational vehicles.
It would also mean a loss of 1,400 jobs in the state.


Observer; After Modern, What?
You thought modern was bad enough.
Those paintings, oy vay!
And you couldn't even say, didn't dare to say, "My kid in kindergarten can do that," because you knew they were really top-drawer art, and you were stupid, stupid, stupid for trying to find pictures of something real -- you know,
real
-- hidden in them.
You didn't want to be unmodern.
That made you old, one of the worst things you can be, culturewise or any other wise, at least in America: old.
Made you old-fashioned too, the next worst thing to being old.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Allstate is seeking to leave New Jersey.
It said it would try to get regulatory approval to stop writing virtually all types of coverage in the state.
Blaming years of losses from its core auto-insurance operation, Allstate said its withdrawal would affect insurance covering more than 400,000 cars and 250,000 homes.  [ Page A1. ]  It could be as long as five years before policy holders feel the effects of an Allstate withdrawal from New Jersey.  [ D8. ]  Gov.
Florio sold himself to New Jersey's voters as a foe of insurers, but many critics say the changes he promised have fallen short.  [ D8. ]
Nynex said it had reached an unusual mid-contract accord with its unions in an effort to avoid another strike like one in 1989.
Nynex is giving pay raises of 13 percent over three years.  [ D1. ]
Frito-Lay announced big changes to lower its cost of doing business, after two years of fending off snack-food rivals.  [ D1. ]
General Electric said it would take a $1.8 billion non-cash, after-tax charge against earnings to comply with a new accounting rule covering retiree health benefits.
The charge will turn a first-quarter gain into a loss, but G.E.'s stock rose.  [ D1. ]
Paul Mozer, the trader at the center of the Salomon scandal, has approached the Government about the possibility of negotiating a deal, Wall Street lawyers said.  [ D2. ]
A Campeau agreement will turn Olympia &amp; York, its largest creditor, into its largest shareholder.  [ D4. ]
American, United and Delta wasted little time matching T.W.A.'s $198 roundtrip coast-to-coast airfare.  [ D5. ]
American Airlines' decision to cut spending and to consider upgrading its DC-10's is raising questions about the viability of newer Boeing and Airbus models. (D5. ]
Hanson said it would buy Beazer for $609 million.  [ D4. ]
The Air Force issued a stern warning to Northrop to fix problems plaguing the development of a new "Stealth" missile.  [ A12. ] The Economy
A G.A.O. report criticizes Federal regulators for what it calls their lax supervision of the Bank of New England before it failed.
The report raises new questions for Robert L. Clarke, the comptroller, who faces confirmation hearings later this month.  [ D1. ]
Opponents of the changes proposed for the banking industry began their campaign to soften the legislation in progress.  [ D7. ]
Businesses allowed their inventories to drop 0.3 percent in July, to the lowest level in two years, the Government said.  [ D9. ]
Thousands of truck drivers are crowding onto smaller state roads in Pennsylvania and New Jersey to avoid soaring turnpike tolls, causing concerns about accidents and congestion.  [ D1. ] International
The World Bank's new president, Lewis T. Preston, is reportedly beginning to assert his control by imposing a new system of senior management used in American corporations.  [ D7. ] Markets
A late rally pushed blue-chip stocks higher, but the move did not spread to smaller issues.
The Dow rose 29.52, to 3,015.21.  [ D10. ]  Prices of Treasury securities moved a bit higher.  [ D16. ]
Soybean futures prices rose sharply on forecasts for freezing temperatures in the upper Midwest.  [ D17. ]  The dollar fell.  [ D17. ] Today's Columns
The nation's health insurers are seeking to subsidize Government appraisals of the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of expensive new medical devices and procedures.
Milt Freudenheim: Business and Health.  [ D2. ]
Bad news for the Stealth bomber is bad news for Northrop.
Or is it?
Market Place.  [ D10. ]
Backer Spielvogel Bates is changing its top management for the Asia-Pacific market.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D19. ]


On His Iran-Contra Role, Gates Takes Familiar Tack
The Senate Intelligence Committee last month asked Robert M. Gates to write the definitive version of his role in the Iran-contra affair, sending him a thick list of questions about his most minute recollections of the event.
His response in a thick typewritten reply, and in hours of oral testimony today, suggests he has little more to say on the matter.
In 54 pages of typed replies to the committee's questions, Mr.
Gates, the nominee for the nation's chief intelligence post, again and again said he had no memory of conversations about the scandal that other Government officials have said they conducted with him, and no recollection of memoranda about the affair that others have said they sent him.


Reviews/Fashion; Scaasi Greets Fall With Good Cheer
"It's not a time for gimmicks," Arnold Scaasi says.
"Not when you're spending thousands for a dress."
Maybe so.
But even a stagnant economy is not going to make this most exuberant designer turn out somber, dull clothes.


Corrections
The Metro Matters column yesterday misstated the number of votes that were assigned to borough presidents on the defunct New York City Board of Estimate in some copies.
Each borough president had one vote, not two.


Andre Baruch, 83, Famous Radio Voice
Andre Baruch, a radio and television announcer whose career spanned almost 60 years, died on Sunday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 83 years old.
He died of natural causes, said his son, Wayne Baruch.


Afghanistan, Still Bleeding
In another post-cold-war milestone, Moscow and Washington have now agreed to stop arming their clients in Afghanistan's civil war.
Though its troops were withdrawn in 1989, the Soviet Union has continued to lavish $400 million a month in aid on the Kabul regime.
Ending it will remove a stubborn irritant from Soviet-American relations; but lamentably, it offers no assurance of an early end to a ruinous conflict.
The history of this war is written in tears.
Ignoring imperial Britain's experience in the 19th century, Moscow sought in 1979 to prevent the collapse of a Communist regime and forcibly to subdue a martial people.
For Afghanistan, the cost has been a million dead and five million uprooted.
The unwinnable war demoralized the Red Army, froze hopes for arms control and provoked economic sanctions and the angry Western boycott of the 1980 Moscow Olympics.


U.S. Warns Northrop to Fix Missile or Program May Die
The Air Force issued a stern warning to the Northrop Corporation today to fix problems plaguing the development of a new radar-evading "stealth" missile, raising the possibility that the $15 billion program could be scuttled if the company cannot soon improve it.
Pentagon officials said in interviews that the Air Force had sent Northrop a letter, which is the first formal step used by the Pentagon when it determines that a program faces problems serious enough that they could potentially lead to a cancellation of the contract.


Spiraling Welfare Roll Dominates Dinkins's Report Card
Issuing the first full-year report card on his administration yesterday, Mayor David N. Dinkins painted a dark picture of New York City's growing social problems and service burdens, dominated by a welfare roll that is climbing to nearly 1 million people for the first time in 15 years.
The Mayor's Management Report, an annual survey that has been issued since the fiscal crisis of the mid-1970's, found dirtier streets, more homeless families in temporary housing and more children in foster care, spiraling demand for social services for AIDS cases, a drop in the portion of the city's garbage that is recycled and a swelling jail population.
No 'Cooking' of Indicators
But that is not the worst of it.
The report covered only the fiscal year that ended June 30 and does not reflect the latest round of service cuts in the $28.5 billion budget adopted in July.
For example, those cuts are projected to leave half the city's 59 sanitation districts rated less than 50 percent clean, up from 12 districts now.


Yodeling to Happiness in a Swiss Resort
IT began as a strange falsetto warble used by Alpine cowherds to call from pasture to meadow.
It rose up over the mountains and across the oceans, finding homes in places as remote as Appalachia, where it became a staple ingredient of American country music.
But to experience the pure yodel, one must still go to the source, the Alps.
Nearly 4,000 yodelers, dressed in regional peasant costumes, gathered in this Swiss mountain resort one weekend in July for a three-day yodeling competition.


Versus Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Varitronics Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Reactor Set to Resume Operation
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission is preparing to allow the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation to reopen its Nine Mile Point 2 reactor, which was shut down on Aug. 13 when an electrical failure blacked out part of the control room.
The commission says it is satisfied with the steps taken by the company to reduce the possibility of such failures in the future and may announce this week when the plant can reopen.


Judge Delays Toxic Dump Town Wants
A state judge today told an upstate New York community that had volunteered to become home to a nuclear waste dump that it could not do so -- at least until it conducted more environmental studies.
The decision guaranteed a fresh round of turmoil in the saga of West Valley.
The 2,100 residents there engaged in an agonizing debate this year over whether to accept the dump for low-level radioactive waste in return for a $4.2 million package of benefits like scholarship funds, new town buildings and road improvements that were offered by a consortium of waste generators.


Powerful Hormone to Be Tested In War to Prevent Breast Cancer
FOR some time, a few doctors have quietly been offering a few frightened women a powerful drug they hope will prevent breast cancer.
Now the National Cancer Institute is poised to begin an enormous study to see if the treatment works.
The drug is tamoxifen, a synthetic hormone that blocks the action of the female hormone estrogen in the breast, depriving many cancers of the fuel that feeds them.
In the study, 16,000 women will be randomly assigned to take tamoxifen or a dummy pill for five years.
If the five-year study shows that the hormone prevents cancer, millions of women will probably be advised to take it for the rest of their lives.


'New' Mazda Has 5 Cars Up Its Sleeve
TO call something "new" is by no means the height of advertising innovation, but Mazda hopes it has found an effective new use for that venerable word.
To herald its most ambitious new-model program since it began selling vehicles in the United States two decades ago, Mazda Motor of America Inc. is introducing a slightly off-center advertising campaign that will be communicated to consumers in a variety of innovative ways.


Bridge
The opening up of Eastern Europe in the past five years has had a useful byproduct for bridge players: It is now possible to travel to that area, enjoy the sights, and meet local enthusiasts at the card table.
The pioneer in this field is Reijo Salminen of Bellingham, Wash., who has already taken two groups to Estonia and a third to Czechoslovakia.
He is already planning a tour to Budapest next year, in spite of the fact that his expedition to Czechoslovakia in April was not well supported: Nebulous fears about the gulf war had caused numerous cancellations.
But his tournament in Prague was successful, with participants from eight countries.


Thousand Trails Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Review/Pop; An Old-Fashioned Hip-Twitching Rock Concert
For his first public performance in three and a half years, John Mellencamp, who usually plays arenas, booked Carnegie Hall.
The concert was announced at noon on Monday and sold out by its start that evening.
It was an old-fashioned rock concert of three-chord songs, twanging guitars and mostly unchoreographed hip-twitching; there wasn't even a video crew around to turn the show into a video clip.
And Mr.
Mellencamp, the Indiana rocker who used to call himself John Cougar and then John Cougar Mellencamp, still acted like his old boyish self, smiling and sweating up his tuxedo shirt.
The show looked like a workout by a cocksure rocker, bolstered by riffs and a beat that the Rolling Stones wouldn't disown.
Mr.
Mellencamp has built a populist image as the consummate regular guy, the small-town rocker who takes his knocks and comes up grinning.
But behind his band's swaggering guitar lines, there's a paradox; since the mid-1980's, more and more of his songs have been about dead ends and his despair over everything from the state of the small farmer to war in the Middle East.
He's part Alfalfa (from "Little Rascals"), part Cassandra.


A City's Determination To Rewrite History Puts Its Classrooms in Chaos
The easy part for the city of Oakland was saying "No" to the social studies textbooks and the vision of multicultural education ordained by the state of California.
Now comes the harrowing task: To rewrite history and do it quickly so that the district's 40,000 elementary and junior high school students do not fall behind while their elders bicker.


Central Co-Operative Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


First American Health Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sitting, Stretching And Heavy Lifting -- Dos and Don'ts
ON the job, it is possible to reduce your risk of back injury with attention factors like equipment and proper body mechanics.
*
If your job involves a lot of sitting, chair height and design are crucial to the health of your back.
The seat at its highest point should be about two inches shorter than the distance between the crease at the back of your knees and the floor.
If that is not possible, rest your feet on a rung or place a box underneath so knees are higher than hips.


Minven Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stevens Making No Plans to Report to the Devils
The day after their team captain, Kirk Muller, walked out of training camp over a contract dispute, more trouble started to brew for the Devils.
The attorney for Scott Stevens, the prize defenseman the Devils were awarded as compensation from St.
Louis for losing Brendan Shanahan, said yesterday that Stevens had no intention of reporting to the team.


Foreign Affairs; One Red Cent
Senator Sam Nunn's Armed Services Committee and the Senate cut perhaps $100 million from the Administration's military budget request of $290.8 billion.
Representative Les Aspin's Armed Services Committee and the House did about as much to protect that budget the fiscal year beginning next month.


Pavarotti Won't Appear In AIDS Benefit Gala
Because of scheduling conflicts, Luciano Pavarotti will not appear in the Music and Remembrance Gala at Carnegie Hall on Oct. 10, as was originally announced, the concert's presenting organization, Affiliate Artists, said yesterday.
The concert, a benefit for Affiliate Artists and the American Foundation for AIDS Research, is billed as a celebration of musical partnerships, focusing on the role of the accompanist.


Zino Francescatti Is Dead at 89; Violinist Renowned for Lyricism
Zino Francescatti, the French violin virtuoso, died yesterday at his home in La Ciotat, France.
He was 89 years old.
He had been in failing health, a family friend said.


Economic Scene; Warmer Globe, Greener Pastures?
LOOKING forward to a winter beach vacation on balmy Cape Cod?
There may not be scheduled flights from La Guardia Airport -- the runways are so often flooded at high tide.
But the highways are reliable, now that the Rhode Island dikes have been reinforced and bridges all raised by five feet.
This vision of the future may seem unthinkable.
While it is widely understood that the accumulation of "greenhouse" gases in the atmosphere could dramatically change weather patterns over the next century and raise the level of the oceans, it is also widely assumed that governments can and must check global warming.


TCBY Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Market Place; Investors Playing Nintendo Need Agility to Win Profits
A steady hand and quick reactions are needed to master the latest Super Mario game, which is included with the new, more powerful Nintendo machine that went on sale last month.
It takes an equally agile stock picker to profit by investing in the software companies that make Nintendo games and the retailers that sell them.


Sports of The Times; Another Way to Lose A Pennant
Back in the old days, probably more than one pennant was lost because somebody started showing up late for work, his hands shaking, his mind wandering.
But booze was accepted, and nobody talked about its impact on the standings.
Hangovers were a badge of honor, and still are, if you listen to people brag about what they drank the night before.
Baseball races always seemed to be influenced by straightforward things like wild pitches and errors, busted pinkies and sore arms, home runs in the dark and strangers in the night.


Communications &amp; Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reviews/Film; Using a Son to Trap a Gay Congressman
There aren't enough therapists in the world to sort out the father-son problems in "Undertow," much less sort out the plot of this painfully solemn, visibly low-budget film.
Mel is a convict who will be released if he goes along with an F.B.I. scheme.
All he has to do is find a young man willing to be videotaped having sex with Congressman Gary, who happens to be gay and launders drug money in his spare time.
The Government will take care of the blackmail.
Though Mel seems like a pretty normal guy, he decides to use his son, Sam, as the sex bait.
The deal will help get the corrupt kid back on the police force.
Sam isn't even homosexual, but how can he turn down the old man?
Maybe this story would have worked better as satire or as tragedy.
But "Undertow" gropes toward some fuzzy connection between Government corruption and the characters' willingness to sell out.


'Murphy Brown' Leads CBS To Record Night Ratings
Led by a special episode of "Murphy Brown," the CBS Monday night lineup of programs scored record high ratings in the first night of the new television season.
The four CBS comedies, "Evening Shade," "Major Dad," "Murphy Brown" and "Designing Women," all had their highest ratings ever, with an average for the network of a 21.4 rating and 34 share. (Each rating point represensts 921,000 homes; the share is the percentage of sets in use viewing a program).
The ratings were the highest for CBS on a Monday since Nov. 2, 1987.


Investor Is Selected to Fill Top Post at Todd Shipyards
The Todd Shipyards Corporation said yesterday that Burton Borman, the Los Angeles investor who has long sought control of the shipbuilding company, had been elected its chairman and chief executive.
It also said that Hans K. Schaefer, a longtime company executive, had been named president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Borman, 63, is head of the Borman Group, which has 5.1 percent of the stock in Todd Shipyards and began a proxy battle for control of the Seattle-based company two months ago.
He replaces David W. Wallace, who was chairman for four years before resigning on Monday.
Todd Shipyards emerged from bankruptcy proceedings in December and has since been struggling to come up with financing.


Senator Criticizes Bush and Cheney Over Problems With Stealth Bomber
The political battle over the Stealth bomber heated up today when a Senate Democrat who has been a leading supporter of the warplane criticized President Bush and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney for what he called their failure to give it sufficient backing now that it is under renewed fire.
That criticism, leveled in an interview by Senator Jim Exon, heightened his earlier expressions of displeasure with the Administration's handling of events since the Air Force told Congressional leaders last week that one of three B-2's now in testing had failed a trial of its ability to elude radar.


Pan Atlantic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Magazine Job Shifts
A round of musical chairs hit the magazine publishing industry late yesterday.
Lawrence C. Burstein resigned as publisher of Elle magazine to become publisher of Conde Nast's Self magazine.
Mr.
Burstein, who came to Elle in January, was formerly associate publisher of New York magazine.
He will replace Marianne Howatson, who will take another corporate job within Conde Nast.


Yuba Westgold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Precision Drilling reports earnings for Year to April 30


DSP Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New President and Chief Is Chosen at Handgards
There has been a changing of the guard at Handgards, a privately held maker of plastic gloves and other sanitary protection products.
After nearly 17 years as president and chief executive of the company, Scotson Webbe has given those titles to Douglas P. Marquis, who was recruited from the Genpak Corporation of Glens Falls, N.Y.
Mr.
Marquis was general manager of Genpak's Mammoth Containers division, where he oversaw the manufacturing of a broad line of industrial and dairy industry plastic containers, when he was approached "out of the blue" by Handgards.
"I am just delighted by the opportunity," he said.
"My challenge will be to have the continued controlled growth within the strong balance sheets that I have inherited."


60-Minute Gourmet
MANY people associate ham with the southern United States, where some of the best-cured meat is found, but it was actually the French, or more precisely the Gauls, who first developed the pork-curing process.
The Gauls were major breeders of pigs, and they used virtually every part of the animal for food.
They first salted the legs and then let them smoke for two days over special woods.
They then rubbed the legs with oil and vinegar and hung them to dry, preserving them.
According to Larousse Gastronomique, the culinary encyclopedia, the Gauls usually ate ham at the beginning of a meal to whet the appetite, or at the end to induce thirst.


Federated-Allied Posts Loss
Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation, reported a combined second-quarter net loss yesterday that was greater than the loss for the same period last year, but company officials said they were pleased by the improvement in the company's cash flow.
For the second quarter, Federated lost $108.5 million on sales of $964.7 million, compared with a loss of $80 million on sales of $984 million for the comparable period last year.


Eastmaque Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rate-Cut Tonic: Good, Not Great
Lower interest rates are supposed to revive the recovery, but many people wonder whether they will.
The Federal Reserve Board's tonic, they fret, cannot fill up empty office towers, clean up bank loan portfolios or alter the need for America's service sector to ax costs and jobs.
Besides, if three earlier rate cuts have not done the trick, why should this one?
But business economists say that interest rates have come down substantially and that business stands to be the biggest beneficiary.
In fact, the past interest-rate cuts account in part for the recovery in sales and output since last spring.


Rome Journal; Italy's Painful Plight: Huddled Masses at Its Door
Strolling at a lakeside resort near Rome the other day, the young married couple seemed to blend with many others taking an afternoon promenade on the sunstruck esplanade at summer's end.
But they carried a secret: they were Albanians, working in Italy unlawfully.
He is a concert musician by profession, she an engineer.
They said they had slipped into Italy on two-month tourist visas nine months ago and simply stayed and worked in ways that did not require contact with the immigration authorities, as thousands of other Albanians have tried, and usually failed, to do.


In Beijing, an 18th-Century Novel Is Celebrated With a Feast
IT was quite a scene.
In the graceful, many-tiered pagodas set among the waterfalls and goldfish ponds of Zhongshan Park near Tiananmen Square, more than 300 diners set upon such niceties as stewed and seasoned mock-bear pads, pearl-in-the-bosom-of-an-aged-clam and black-dragon sea cucumber, eating to the muted strains of traditional Chinese music.
This was no ordinary banquet.
On the second night of China's first international food conference, held here in July, the menu, the music, even the restaurant itself had been created as a sort of living, breathing paean to what could be China's most famous novel, "The Dream of the Red Mansion."


Breakdown Shows Tenuous Links in System
The breakdown of A.T&amp; T.'s long-distance telephone service into and out of Manhattan rekindles concerns about how dependent today's telephone networks remain on a few pieces of equipment.
In recent years, A.T.&amp; T. and other telephone companies have gone to great lengths to emphasize the backup capacity and the redundancy of their networks.
In theory, difficulties at one location are supposed to be almost invisible to telephone customers, because today's telephone networks use advanced computer systems to redirect traffic the moment problems crop up in one location.


Silicon Graphics Library
Silicon Graphics Inc., a leading maker of computer work stations, said today that it would make its IRIS Graphics Library available for general licensing.
A set of software descriptions of geometric shapes, shadings and textures, the Graphics Library was used to create the cyborg in the movie "Terminator 2" and is commonly used to model aircraft, automobiles and new drug compounds in three-dimensional computer representations.


Gold Rises $2.10 in a Rally Of Precious Metals Prices
Precious metal futures prices rallied yesterday amid expectations for lower interest rates and signs that the tide of Soviet metal sales was ebbing.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for delivery in October rose $2.10, to $347.30 a troy ounce; December silver rose 6 cents, to $4.11 a troy ounce.


American Building Maintenance reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Future Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
The Fed fined Ghaith Pharaon $37 million for concealing B.C.C.I.'s acquisition of Independence Bank in 1985.
Regulators also moved to freeze Pharaon's assets amid indications that he was selling off his U.S. holdings.  [ Page A1. ]  The new management of Independence Bank has filed a lawsuit contending that it was secretly acquired by B.C.C.I., using Pharaon as a front man.  [ D4. ]


Investigation Faults Security at Meadowlands
After a five-month investigation into security at the Meadowlands Sports Complex, a special Bergen County grand jury has documented 20 cases in which guards beat or otherwise abused patrons between 1987 and 1990.
In a 46-page report issued today by the County Prosecutor, John H. Fahy, the grand jury accused the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, the state agency that operates the Meadowlands, of exercising poor administrative control over the guard force during the three years.
The grand jury was convened last December after reports that guards had beaten fans at rock concerts.


Nike Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New Study on Allstate Puts Onus on Company
The Allstate Insurance Company, which announced on Monday that it would seek to pull out of New Jersey, may have reported large overall losses in the state, mainly in auto insurance.
But new data provided by Allstate to state regulators suggest that the culprit may not be premiums that are too low, as the company contends, but an inability on Allstate's part to hold down claims in a state with the nation's highest auto theft rate.
The data also point to business overhead that is too expensive.
For its part, Allstate says the information does not capture the costs the company is incurring in bailing out New Jersey's bankrupt Joint Underwriting Association, a state-run insurance company for motorists with questionable driving records.


Thermal Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Granite Co-Operative Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mexico, Admitting Torture, Says It Has Charged 12
In the second report this month to sharply criticize the human rights situation in Mexico, Amnesty International said yesterday that torture by law enforcement agents remained commonplace there.
The charges received a striking official response: The country's Attorney General all but praised the reports and said criminal charges were filed against a dozen Federal police agents implicated in several highly publicized cases of torture and murder.


In Allstate Offices, the Questions Fly
The day after the Allstate Insurance Company filed a plan with New Jersey officials to pull out of the state, Teresa Robbins went to her agent here with some questions and a sense of deja vu.
She said she had been forced to change insurers when she moved to New Jersey from New York City four years ago after her company, Geico, told her it had stopped writing auto policies in New Jersey.


U.S. TIES ISRAELI AID REQUEST TO FREEZE ON SETTLEMENTS AFTER TALKS END IN IMPASSE
Israel and the United States failed today to reach a compromise on the explosive loan guarantee issue.
Within hours after the talks ended the Bush Administration signaled that it would refuse to provide the requested help unless Israel agreed to a freeze on future settlements in the occupied territories.
After Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d finished his second day of meetings in Jerusalem with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, reporters on Mr.
Baker's flight to Cairo were summoned for an unusually blunt briefing.
They were told explicitly for the first time what has been implicit in the Administration's position all along: that it will not give the Israelis the $10 billion five-year loan guarantee for housing for Soviet immigrants without an Israeli agreement to halt future settlements in the occupied West Bank, Golan Heights and Gaza strip.


Quiksilver Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


The Unnecessary Tests Medicare Encourages; For a National Program
To the Editor:
Thank you for your editorial "The Best Home for Older Adults." While most of the elderly want to continue living in their own homes, Federal policy does not reflect this.
You are right to state: "Federal aid has traditionally dealt with aging as a health problem; the quality of life has been dealt with only in passing."


Base Ten Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Excerpts From Hearing on Thomas's Nomination
Following are excerpts from the transcript of today's session of the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court with statements by Prof.
Drew S. Days 3d of the Yale Law School, Prof.
Christopher Edley Jr. of Harvard Law School, Prof.
Charles Lawrence of Stanford Law School, Sister Mary Virgilius Reidy, formerly St.
Benedict's School, which Judge Thomas attended, in Savannah, Ga.; Dean Guido Calabresi of Yale Law School, and Prof.
Patricia A. King of Georgetown University Law Center.
The transcript was provided by Reuters and the Federal News Service.
STATEMENT BY PROFESSOR DAYS
I think it has been very difficult . . .  for many people to come to grips with how they would respond to the nomination of Clarence Thomas.
And I certainly include myself in that category.
It has not been easy coming to a determination.


Soviet Lawyers Plan Coup Plotters' Defense
The five lawyers for five of the men accused of organizing the unsuccessful hard-line coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev last month think they may have one small advantage over the 97 prosecutors working on the other side.
That is the Soviet law on treason, the charge on which the accused men are being investigated.
It says treason is an act to weaken the independence, territorial integrity, security or military potential of the Soviet Union, the very things the plotters said they were trying to prevent when they briefly took power on Aug. 19.


Bosio Blanks Yankees, Minus the Effort
Steve Sax singled on the first pitch of the game and the Yankee fans who were dreaming of rallies and runs should have left right there.
Pack up the kids and beat the traffic because that was just about all the offense the Yankees were to muster against Chris Bosio on this muggy night.
Sax's single to center in the first and Torey Lovullo's single to right in the ninth.
That was it.
Bosio threw 79 other pitches for the Brewers and the Yankees did not belt any for hits.
Two hits was their quota for the evening as the Brewers rolled to a 2-0 victory behind Bosio at Yankee Stadium and sent New York to its 11th loss in the last 12 games.
Oh-So Dreary
"Same crud, different verse," said Manager Stump Merrill.


Provigo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 10


White House Should Stay With Lead Cleanup
To the Editor:
The failure of the Bush Administration to invest in our children's health is brought home by withdrawal of support for a Federal leadership role in preventing lead poisoning (news article, Aug. 24).
This reversal of Federal support for lead poisoning prevention came after pressure from the National Association of Realtors, who predict that lead clean-up would raise housing prices $5,000 to $10,000.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the first flight of the new Air Force C-17 transport plane misstated the day the flight took place.
It was Sunday.


States Open Inquiries on Salomon Licenses
The securities regulators in 33 states, including California and New York, and the District of Columbia, announced yesterday that they had begun an inquiry into whether Salomon Brothers, the giant brokerage firm, should retain its licenses to do business in their states.
Salomon Brothers disclosed on Aug. 9 that its government securities desk had submitted phony bids at a number of Treasury auctions in an attempt to push its stake in those securities above the 35 percent limits established by the Treasury.
Since then, the firm has become the target of broad Federal investigations.


Quotations of the Day
"This is one of the most interesting public health trials going on right now. I can't emphasize enough how important it is." -- Dr.
I.
Craig Henderson,
a breast cancer researcher in Boston, describing a new study of 16,000 women.
"We think it's a perversion of women's health." -- Dr.
Adriane Fugh-Berman, a general practitioner in Washington who opposes the study.  [ C11:4. ]


Xeta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Collagen to Pay Legal Fees
The Collagen Corporation, responding to anxiety caused by the Food and Drug Administration's decision to conduct a review of its injectable collagen product, said it would compensate physicians for damages and legal fees arising from any jury trials over allegations that a patient's autoimmune disease had been caused by the product.
Injectable collagen is a purified protein derived from cowhides that is used to smooth facial wrinkles and scars.


Express Cash International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Pacer Technology reports earnings for Year to June 30


Food Notes
Down on the Farm
In this season's new cookbooks, farm country nostalgia is in rich supply.
And one of the most authentic of the lot is "Neighboring On the Air, Cooking with KMA Radio Homemakers" by Evelyn Birkby (University of Iowa Press, $14.95.)


Simtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Personal Health
Erase most of what you thought you knew about back problems and how to keep them from interfering with your job.
The prevention and treatment of the nation's most expensive and debilitating occupational health problem is undergoing a radical transformation.
Studies have uncovered often surprising facts about the causes of job-related back problems.
The studies have also shown little or no justification for prolonged bedrest and most other time-honored approaches to therapy.
The philosophy now is to get people back on their feet within a day or two and teach them how to strengthen and use, but not abuse, their muscles and joints.


Continental Homes Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dispute Arises Over Rights for Copying DNA
Imagine a copier that could start with a business card or a wedding invitation and, one hour from now, deliver 10 billion copies -- enough for nearly everyone on the planet to get two.
Imagine further that the copier would go on to pile up a trillion copies, give or take a few billion, unless someone stepped in to stop it.
Such stunning productivity from an office machine would be a nightmare, but it is exactly what polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, does in a laboratory flask with more positive results.
PCR allows researchers to rapidly duplicate snippets of DNA, the paired strands of genes that contain the chemical code governing the form and behavior of all living things.
Duplication makes large enough quantities of a piece of genetic material for researchers to identify it cheaply and manipulate it.
"It's an extraordinarily powerful tool for fashioning new genes and control elements for genes, and for studying them," said Dr.
Barry I. Eisenstein, a researcher at the University of Michigan Medical School.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9
Israel and the U.S. didn't resolve the housing loan guarantee issue, and the Bush Administration signaled that it would refuse to provide the requested help unless Israel agreed to a freeze on future settlements in the occupied territories.
Page A1


Atlanta Journal; Chopping Away at 'Losersville' Sign
At his Rosh Hashanah service last week at Emory University, William Rothschild, a part-time rabbi and full-time bankruptcy lawyer, spoke about the unprecedented changes in world events indicating the Messianic Age could be at hand.
The dissolution of the Soviet empire?
No, he said, empires have risen and fallen throughout history.
The miraculous return of Ethiopian Jews to Israel?
No, Israel has resettled Jews in the past.
The answer, of course, was the Atlanta Braves.


Bionaire Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Coleman and Owens Refuse to Aid Inquiry
Two prominent former Syracuse basketball players, including DERRICK COLEMAN of the Nets, have refused to cooperate with a university investigation into charges of widespread rules infractions by the school's basketball program, a Syracuse newspaper reported yesterday.


Old Film Mirrors New Immigrant Life
The huddled mass of 300 students who saw the silent film classic, "The Immigrant," may not have understood English, but they understood Charlie Chaplin and they recognized the anguish of arriving without money and friends in a strange country.
In a museum auditorium on Monday, students from Liberty High School in lower Manhattan, the Board of Education's cadet school for immigrants, laughed at situations like those that had hurt them or made them feel ashamed: the confusion of not understanding what people were saying, the impotence of not being able to afford the pleasures most Americans take for granted.


Public &amp; Private; Rebels Without a Clue
At the beginning of each new season, fashion designers provide a great service for the women of America.
They make them laugh.
They do not rely simply on their prices.
Each season they supplement sticker shock with some new concept that is sure to amuse anyone leading a reality-based life.
Several years ago they made evening dresses with big puffy skirts that rose below your chin like taffeta goiters when you sat down, and this spring a few of them had a bad attack of fuchsia and chartreuse, apparently unaware that women do not want to look like toucans.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 13
Sept. 6
Sept. 14
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.0
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
213.2
212.9
217.0
Distillate stocks
132.9
130.1
133.3
Crude imports, daily
5.6
6.0
6.0
Product imports, daily
1.6
2.0
2.2
Crude stocks
336.0
342.3
369.8
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
90.0
91.1
94.0
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


MHI Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Scangraphics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


How to Slow Bicyclists On Brooklyn Bridge
To the Editor:
Along with thousands of others, I walk across the Brooklyn Bridge almost every day.
The pedestrian walkway is a major tourist attraction.
The pathway is divided by a white line so that one side is a bicycle lane and the other is for pedestrians.
However, the signs indicating which side is which are few.
Also, many people (often with small children) can't read the signs or simply don't understand the symbols on the pathway.
Walkers are thus frequently in the bicycle lane.


Highland Superstores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


TV Guide Campaign To Lift Newsstand Sales
TV Guide has hired an advertising agency to bolster its over-the-counter sales.
The weekly magazine yesterday named Chiat/Day/Mojo, Los Angeles and New York, to handle a $20 million consumer-circulation-building account.
The other finalist was BBDO New York.


Champions Sports Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


USA Waste Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rheometrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Far West Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Powerful Hormone to Be Tested In War to Prevent Breast Cancer
FOR some time, a few doctors have quietly been offering a few frightened women a powerful drug they hope will prevent breast cancer.
Now the National Cancer Institute is poised to begin an enormous study to see if the treatment works.
The drug is tamoxifen, a synthetic hormone that blocks the action of the female hormone estrogen in the breast, depriving many cancers of the fuel that feeds them.
In the study, 16,000 women will be randomly assigned to take tamoxifen or a dummy pill for five years.
If the five-year study shows that the hormone prevents cancer, millions of women will probably be advised to take it for the rest of their lives.


Ramtek reports earnings for Year to June 30


FCMI Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Visual Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


House Votes Bill to Extend Jobless Pay by Margin That Would Defeat Veto
The House passed legislation today to provide extra unemployment benefits for three million people who have been out of work at least half a year.
The bill, which is similar to one President Bush killed in August, was passed by an apparently veto-proof vote of 283 to 125.
The President was able to block the August bill without vetoing it.
The measure passed today was written in a way that would force him to cast a veto if he wants to stop it.


Director of U.S.O.C. Target of Accusation
The leadership of the United States Skiing Federation yesterday accused the executive director of the United States Olympic Committee of offering additional money in grants in exchange for $3,000 worth of lift tickets and ski equipment for personal use.
The accusation against Harvey Schiller, who has been the U.S.O.C. executive director since last year, was contained in a three-page letter from the federation officers distributed to members of the Olympic committee's executive board, a panel of 22 that includes the U.S.O.C. officers and sets most of the organization's policies.


Bringing the Dead Sea Scrolls to Light; In Occupied Qumran
To the Editor:
"Computer Breaks Monopoly on Study of Dead Sea Scrolls" (front page, Sept. 5) states, "The scrolls, first discovered in 1947 in a cave in present-day Israel, contain the oldest known copies of the Old Testament, other biblical writings, ancient literature and poetry." You misstate the legal status of the land where the caves are.
Qumran, site of the caves, lies some 30 miles east of Jerusalem in the occupied West Bank.
Under international law, Israel is a belligerent occupant of this territory: it is not part of Israel.
SALAH H. AYYAD New York, Sept. 6, 1991


The Unnecessary Tests Medicare Encourages; Homebound Elderly
To the Editor:
It is encouraging to me, an 81-year-old woman, as it must be to most of the old, whose greatest fear is the ultimate stay in a nursing home, to see articles like "Time to Rethink the Nursing Home" (Op-Ed, Aug. 18), on the advantages of home care over nursing home care.
Let me describe a successful remedy.


Autrex reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


First Provident Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Moscow Vignette


CHRONICLE
MSTISLAV ROSTROPOVICH, the Russian cellist and conductor, and his wife, GALINA VISHNEVSKAYA, have announced plans to establish a foundation whose sole goal will be to build a "modern, fully equipped children's hospital in Moscow. "


Review/Dance; Chaos Yields to Harmony With an International Cast
"Finn's Shed" looked unfinished.
The parts in this new dance that Jennifer Monson presented on Sunday night at Performance Space 122 never combined to form a satisfying whole.
Ms.
Monson was at her choreographic best in two duets.
In one, she danced with Jennifer Lacey; in the other, with John Jasperse.
Both were rough-and-tumble encounters in which the performers threw themselves at each other with reckless abandon yet managed to avoid catastrophe.
As they dashed across the space, plunged to the floor and leaped both over and onto each other, Ms.
Monson, Ms.
Lacey and Mr.
Jasperse seemed like ornery, tough-minded and strong-willed eccentrics who nevertheless managed to cooperate when the occasion demanded.


Angry Review of Jets-Bills Continues as Coslet Answers Levy
Two days after the Jets' 23-20 cliffhanger loss to the Buffalo Bills, the teams' coaches, Marv Levy and Bruce Coslet, were still aiming verbal salvos at each other from long distance.
On Monday, reports out of Buffalo quoted Levy as accusing the Jets of having players fake injuries in the second half to get some breathing time against the Bills' fast-break, no-huddle offense and saying the ploy backfired because it allowed his team to rest and cost the Jets the upset.


Seaman Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


AMRE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Youngsters Learn About Immigration From a Master: Chaplin


American Business Computers reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bradley Goes One-on-One With Gates
When he stepped out of the hearing room today after grilling the nominee to become Director of Central Intelligence, Senator Bill Bradley was trailed by a flood of reporters taking down his every word.
As the self-appointed chief interrogator at the confirmation hearings of Robert M. Gates, the New Jersey Democrat has embarked on an uphill battle to convince his wavering colleagues that the nomination should be derailed.


Baltic Countries Are Admitted to U.N. Assembly
The presidents of the three newly independent Baltic countries came to the United Nations today to witness their countries' admission to the General Assembly.
One of them, President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania, also dropped in at evening Yom Kippur services at the Park East Synagogue on East 67th Street in Manhattan, a gesture seemingly aimed at mending fences with the American Jewish community after the uproar over Lithuania's decision to exonerate thousands of people convicted by Soviet tribunals of Nazi war crimes.


Thomas Is Unsuitable, 4 Academics Say
Four prominent black law professors today urged the Senate Judiciary Committee to reject President Bush's nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, saying he is unworthy to succeed Justice Thurgood Marshall.
Prof.
Charles Lawrence of Stanford Law School noted that Judge Thomas made a point in his five days of answering questions before the committee to express admiration for Justice Marshall, the only black Justice in the Court's history.
"Yet Justice Marshall chose the path of leadership within his own community of legal advocacy on behalf of those who were least powerful, a constant challenge to the institutions and politicians who exploited race and poverty," the professor said.


Money Market Accounts And C.D.'s Decline Again
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts dropped further in the week ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a North Palm Beach, Fla., publication that focuses on interest rates.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, like many in the credit markets, had expected the Federal Reserve to lower the discount rate, as it did last week, to 5 from 5 1/2 percent, leading to a cut also in the prime rate by banks around the country.
The prime rate is used as a benchmark for setting rates on many consumer and business loans.


Iranian Calls Delays on Hostages Temporary
A senior Iranian official has said that delays in releasing additional Western hostages in Lebanon are temporary and that Lebanese kidnappers "have no choice but to reciprocate" for Israel's release of more than 50 Arab detainees last week.
Mahmoud Vaezy, the Deputy Foreign Minister for Iranian relations with Europe and the Americas, said in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation on Monday night that he remained optimistic that a "final conclusion" to the hostage crisis was within the grasp of nations cooperating with a United Nations mediation effort.


Circuit Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, Chicago, the coordinating organization for Blue Cross and Blue Shield health plans, named Thomas Kinser to the new position of executive vice president and chief operating officer. *
R.
R.
Donnelley &amp; Sons Co., Chicago, a printing concern, appointed Rhonda S. MacQueen senior vice president of U.S. manufacturing in its financial printing services group, while remaining director of its New York financial printing division.


Mark IV reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Security National Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Met-Coil Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Democrats Press C.I.A. Nominee On Giving Iraq Secrets About Iran
Democrats on the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence opened a new offensive against Robert M. Gates today, not only pressing him about his still-murky role in the Iran-contra affair but also raising other potentially troubling areas that will be examined more fully behind closed doors.
Senator Bill Bradley, the New Jersey Democrat who has led the attack at the hearings on Mr.
Gates's nomination to be Director of Central Intelligence, suggested in intense questioning that Mr.
Gates might have violated the law as Deputy Director in 1986 by authorizing covert activities to help Iraq in its war with Iran.
Accused of Misusing Position
The Senator also accused Mr.
Gates of bending intelligence analyses to fit policies of the Administration of President Ronald Reagan and misusing his position as an intelligence official to support programs like the space-based missile defense system in his numerous speeches and writings.  [ Excerpts from the hearings, page A12. ]


Trust Issue Priced By Union Pacific
The Union Pacific Corporation yesterday priced $56.5 million of equipment-trust certificates through the First Boston Corporation to yield from 5.65 percent for issues maturing in 1992 to 8.15 percent for those maturing in 2006.
The certificates, issued to cover the purchase of railroad cars, are collateralized by 50 of Union Pacific's diesel locomotives, which cost $70.6 million.


Prab Robots Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Turnstiles Don't Turn As Mets Earn a Split
Shea Stadium, which hasn't been electric for weeks, was sadly surreal yesterday afternoon, a structure empty of noise that could have been mistaken for a hulking, oversized airplane hangar at the outskirts of La Guardia Airport.
As a result, while the Mets and the Montreal Expos swung bats and fired fastballs, the late evening's greatest games were those played out in the mind: players trying to treat a doubleheader seriously in front of a crowd that was a joke, the 4,355 fans trying to digest their good fortune at seats close to the field, the front office trying to endure the rude reminder of the desperate days of the early 1980s.


To Our Readers
Because of a power outage at an American Telephone and Telegraph switching station that affected the computers that receive and transmit financial market data over telephone lines at The Associated Press, the tables covering prices of stocks on the Nasdaq National List and Nasdaq Supplemental List were not available yesterday.


Officials Deny That Nixon Was Treated Leniently
Otis Nixon's lengthy record of negative drug tests, his work in the community in Montreal and his persuasive presentation at a hearing convinced the commissioner's office that no disciplinary action was warranted last month, the deputy commissioner said yesterday.
Steve Greenberg, the deputy who conducted the hearing, said that baseball officials were not treating the Braves' outfielder leniently, in effect excusing him for cocaine use, after he tested positive late in July.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Adolph Coors Co., Golden, Colo., announced plans for a network of 28 warehouses across the county to help smooth distribution of its beers. *
Hartmarx Corp., Chicago, facing another quarter of multimillion-dollar losses, said it would close up to 36 more of its retail clothing stores.
The closings will bring the total to 75 in the last year.


Transact International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Thor Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Transarc Software
The Transarc Corporation, a Pittsburgh software developer, yesterday introduced an on-line transaction-processing software program intended to let users of Unix-based computers develop the types of commercial programs used extensively by banks and airlines.
The program, called Encina, is designed initially for systems made by I.B.M., Hewlett-Packard and Stratus Computers.
It permits users to distribute commercial computing functions over a wide geographic area.
Unix is a popular software operating system for various makes of computers.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Dan and I and his friend Mark drove down to Hazlet the other night to see the last movie at the last drive-in in New Jersey.
But we arrived after 8 and the police turned us away.
Sold out.


Poor Pilot Judgment Blamed For Crash That Killed Heinz
Federal safety officials today attributed the midair collision that killed Senator John Heinz of Pennsylvania and six others in April to poor judgment by the pilots of the two aircraft involved.
The pilot of the chartered plane that was carrying Senator Heinz to Philadelphia International Airport should never have let a passing helicopter fly nearby in an attempt to check for a possible malfunction of the plane's nose wheel, the National Transportation Safety Board concluded in its final report on the accident.
And the helicopter pilot should never have tried such a dangerous maneuver over a crowded residential area, the board said.


New York Admits Failure Of Homeless-Family Effort
A year after announcing a program to stem the flow of families entering shelters for the homeless, New York City officials said yesterday that they had failed in their efforts and predicted that 6,000 families will be living in the shelters by next June, breaking the 1987 record set during the Koch Administration.
In addition, city officials said they could not meet the Sept. 30 deadlines set by municipal law and by a court order to get hundreds of families out of commercial hotels and barracks-style shelters.
Nor could they guarantee that they could meet an additional deadline of next June 30 to close other shelters, the officials told a City Council advisory commission.


About New York
As if being poured from a bottle, the human flood gushed out.
There were men with attache cases, women carrying three bags, a tired looking chap in a red "I'm Exciting!" T-shirt, a dapper fellow in a straw hat who walked with a gait that made you think this was a morning he had somewhere to go.
There were cigarettes, crumpled newspapers, bloodshot eyes, expressions determined and blank.
There were lovers who seemed deeply regretful that a precious night had forever evaporated in the morning haze.


Survey Endorses Bout
By a 4 to 3 margin, Americans say MIKE TYSON'S title fight against heavyweight champion EVANDER HOLYFIELD should not be postponed because of the rape charge that was filed against Tyson last week, according to a survey.
The survey of 1,792 people was conducted from Sept. 11, two days after Tyson's indictment in Indianapolis, through Sunday, by the ICR Survey Research Group, which said it had a statistical margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.


Lord &amp; Taylor Celebrates Youth
LORD &amp; TAYLOR aimed its fall fashion party precisely at its younger customers.
It chose as its beneficiary the junior committee of the Kips Bay Boys' and Girls' Club, whose members are mostly 25 to 35 years old.
The guest of honor was Marc Jacobs, who is 28 and was a significant presence on Seventh Avenue even before he began designing the Perry Ellis collection three years ago.
Admission to the party at the store was set at $25 to appeal to younger budgets, and a lot of clothes in the $200 to $300 range were presented.


Lawmakers in the Ukraine Resist Economic Unity Plan
The plan to create a new economic union from the shambles of the Soviet nation ran into trouble today in the Parliament of the Ukraine, a republic critical for the proposal's success.
Leonid M. Kravchuk, the chairman of the Parliament and the republic's former Communist Party leader, sought initial approval from the lawmakers in Kiev for the economic compact but was rebuffed in a wave of angry protest.


American Design Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


T/SF Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; Reconciliation of a Grieving Couple by a Wise Boy
The world's best-looking shrimp fisherman and its sexiest stay-at-home country wife can be found in "Paradise," a decorative American remake of the popular 1987 French film "Le Grand Chemin." Don Johnson and Melanie Griffith, playing a married couple who have grown bitter and estranged after a family tragedy, are only a part of this film's larger prettiness.
There are birds; there are animals; there is swelling, sensitive music to accompany any twinge of emotion.
The screenplay is equally atmospheric, filled with lines like: "Would you pick some blueberries for me? There's a trellis right by the garage."
The terrible loss that has befallen Ben Reed (Mr. Johnson) and his wife, Lily (Ms. Griffith), is set forth in similarly picturesque terms when Lily appears in her attic wearing a long white nightgown, clasping a child's jacket and looking plaintively toward the heavens.
It is thus revealed that Ben and Lily have lost their young son, which makes "Paradise" a lot more wrenching than the sweet, slow-paced screenplay by Mary Agnes Donoghue (who also directed) would otherwise allow it to be.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the prison sentence of Stanley M. Friedman, the former Bronx Democratic leader, misstated the administration in which he served as a deputy mayor.
He served under Mayor Abraham D. Beame.


Saudi Elected by the U.N. Assembly
Helped by his country's victory in the Persian Gulf war, Saudi Arabia's United Nations representative, Samir Shihabi, surprised many today by easily winning election to the largely ceremonial post of President of the 46th General Assembly.
More predictable on the Assembly's opening day were the votes formally admitting North and South Korea, the three newly independent Baltic republics, the Marshall Islands and Micronesia, raising United Nations membership to 166.


Nu-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Television; Making AIDS a Reality With a Teen-Age Drama
Catching up with a disaster that has been stalking the world for a decade, television is paying more attention to AIDS these days, far more than box-office movies.
As schools and public-health officials across the country increasingly realize, teen-agers are a high-risk group.
There is a deadly virus at large.
It does not discriminate about whom it will infect.
Awareness and precautions are crucial.
This is the message of "In the Shadow of Love: A Teen AIDS Story," an unusual collaborative project involving PBS and ABC.
The film will be shown on Channel 13 tonight at 8 and tomorrow at 4 P.M. as an "ABC Afterschool Special." Underlining the message's seriousness, the film is being promoted in English and Spanish public-service announcements by Surgeon General Antonia Novello.
The fictional story focuses on two students at Paul Revere High School in a small city.
Katie Dunn (Jennifer Dundas), anchor for the school's television news team, is spirited and ambitious.
Lisa Diaz (Lisa Vidal), returning to school after having dropped out, is street-smart and wary.
Planning a journalism project, Katie considers doing a television essay about students in the 90's.
Lisa, who has just discovered that her gay younger brother has tested HIV-positive, suggests a report on youngsters with AIDS, all types of teen-agers who happen to be infected.


Topics of The Times; Frequent Freebie Fliers
In a refreshing vote for ethics, the Senate recently joined the House in barring members from accepting speaking fees from tobacco interests, military contractors and others with a stake in legislation.
Yet both chambers still permit these same private interests to pay for members' travel.
Travel freebies are a way of life on Capitol Hill.
A new study by the watchdog group Public Citizen finds that in 1989 and 1990, private groups underwrote 3,984 trips by House members.
Some were sponsored by nonprofit organizations.
But two-thirds of the trips, including many to fancy resorts, were paid for by corporations and trade associations with a keen interest in legislation.
Of the 197 trips sponsored by defense contractors, for example, 145 went to members of committees with jurisdiction over defense business.


In China, Capitalism Inches On
With the hard-line rhetoric blaring from the central Government these days, it may seem from abroad that China has abandoned liberalization in any form.
But while the pace of economic change certainly has slowed significantly since the mid-1980's, in the last two years necessity has prompted leaders at all levels to take small but important steps toward a market system.
"There is reform, but it's regionalized," said a Chinese business executive.
"It's coming from the bottom up. It's the local governments that are implementing reform, and they'll do as much as they can get away with."


Doner Wins Accounts In U.S. and Overseas
W.
B.
Doner &amp; Company, Baltimore and Southfield, Mich., had news yesterday on both the international and domestic fronts, which was reported by Herbert D. Fried, chairman and chief executive, on a visit to New York.
Overseas, the agency has been awarded an account with billings that Mr.
Fried estimated at $:10 million to $:15 million ($17 million to $26 million) from Clarke Foods P.L.C.
That company is headed by a former client, Henry D. Clarke Jr., previously of the Clabir Corporation, maker of Klondike ice cream bars.
Creative work will come from Baltimore, Mr.
Fried added, with other services from Doner's London office.


American Tech Ceramics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


UAL Acquiring Air Wisconsin
The UAL Corporation, parent of rapidly expanding United Airlines, said yesterday it would take over the commuter carrier Air Wis Services Inc. in a stock swap and cash deal worth about $72 million.
Chicago-based UAL said it had signed an agreement to acquire Air Wis, parent of Air Wisconsin, which flies under the name of United Express.
The commuter carrier flies to 33 medium-sized cities in 14 states, and primarily serves hubs at Chicago's O'Hare International and Washington's Dulles International airports.


McCormick &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Circuit City Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


THE GATES HEARINGS: New-Era Espionage; More Spies and Less Costly Hardware Are at Heart of Gates's Plan for C.I.A.
Robert M. Gates this week committed himself to refashion American espionage for a new era, including some changes, like a steep increase in human, as opposed to electronic, spying, that would reverse decades-old trends.
But he stopped well short of endorsing the kind of wholesale overhaul and cuts in the $30 billion-a-year spy bureaucracy that growing numbers of critics are demanding now that the Soviet military threat has eased.


Alubec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Gates Hearings; Excerpts From Senate Hearing on Nominee to Head the C.I.A.
Following are excerpts from today's hearings by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, with questions by Senators Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio; John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri; Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, and Warren B. Rudman, Republican of New Hampshire.
The transcript was provided by the Federal News Service.
QUESTIONS By SENATOR METZENBAUM
Q.
I think I'd like to summarize where I think we stand so far.
My questions last night were probing inconsistencies between what you said to Congressional committees at various times regarding Iran-contra and what was actually happening in your shop.  . . .
Frankly, Mr.
Gates, one of the most difficult challenges that I'm finding in connection with your confirmation relates to the fact that so much was happening at the C.I.A. and around the C.I.A., and you have pretty much indicated that you didn't know. . . .
I was also concerned by your answer as to how you would have handled a direct question in 1986 regarding whether there were undisclosed covert action findings.


Perez Has Compassion for Nixon's Predicament
Pascual Perez has been where Otis Nixon finds himself today, unless proved otherwise, having tragically tripped up attempting to deal with the white lines that have nothing to do with baseball and everything to do with cocaine.
That is why Perez sat quietly at Yankee Stadium Monday, a queasy feeling in the pit of his stomach, a terrible ache in his heart.
He had just learned that his friend, the Atlanta Braves' outfielder, had just been suspended for 60 days by Commissioner Fay Vincent for violating the terms of an earlier rehabilitation program and baseball's drug policy.


Shopco Laurel Centre L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Court Upholds LTV on Pensions
A Federal appeals court upheld a ruling by a lower court that the LTV Corporation is not required to continue contributing to a pension fund for retirees of three mining subsidiaries that have been shut down for several years.
The three mining operations are the BCNR Mining Corporation and the Nemacolin Mines Corporation, both of Pennsylvania, and the Tuscaloosa Energy Corporation of Kentucky.
The operations, which produced coal for the coke ovens of the LTV Steel Company, have been closed for at least five years.


Canada Cuts Its Forces in Europe 80%
With a reduced military threat from the Soviet Union, Canada's National Defense Department today announced one of the deepest percentage cuts in military forces in Europe of any of the 16 members of the Western military alliance.
Defense Minister Marcel Masse said that by 1995, Canada will close its two bases in Germany -- at Lahr and Baden-Sollingen in the southwestern corner of that country -- and cut the number of its soldiers and fliers in Europe by more than 80 percent, from 6,600 to 1,100.


Communication Cable Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Maxwell to Donate $10 Million to Polytechnic U.
Robert Maxwell, the wealthy British publisher who never went to college, will start his first meeting tomorrow as chairman of the board of trustees of the Polytechnic University of New York by announcing his gift of $10 million to the Brooklyn institution.
The gift is the largest in the 137-year history of the private institution, which nearly closed in the early 1970's because of severe financial troubles.
When he was elected chairman in July, Mr.
Maxwell pledged the $10 million gift.
The donation is part of a $200 million fund-raising drive.


Dart Group Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Capital of Croatia Under Attack As Yugoslav Accord Breaking Down; Europe's Response Wary
Fearful of being drawn into the Yugoslav conflict, European Community Governments today responded cautiously to a Dutch proposal that a European military peacekeeping force be sent to guarantee a cease-fire in the civil war in Croatia.
While a mediator for the 12-nation community, Lord Carrington of Britain, persuaded the warring groups to sign a new cease-fire today, the Netherlands, the current community president, said a multinational peace force was still essential because many previous agreements have collapsed.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Purchased the contracts of Eric Wedge, catcher, and Wayne Housie, outfielder, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Moved Tim Naehring, shortstop, and Mike Miller, pitcher, from the 21- to the 60-day disabled list.


Fairchild Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Olympic Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Documents Said to Show Endowment Bowed to Pressure
Government documents released yesterday show that the National Endowment for the Arts yielded to political pressure last year in overturning grant recommendations for four sexually explicit performance artists, said spokesmen for a coalition of civil rights groups that obtained the documents.
The documents, previously confidential, were released as part of a lawsuit filed in Federal District Court in Los Angeles challenging the endowment's denial of grants to the solo performers Karen Finley, John Fleck, Holly Hughes and Tim Miller.


Collapse of North Case: One More Dead End on the Iran-Contra Trail
Nearly five years ago, Lawrence E. Walsh assembled a team of lawyers for an investigation of the Iran-contra affair that many of them thought might lead to the Oval Office of Ronald Reagan's White House.
But Monday's dismissal of all charges against Oliver L. North, the central figure in the affair, illuminated just how far short of that goal Mr.
Walsh has fallen.
It remains unclear what role, if any, was played by the most senior officials in the Reagan Administration.
Mr.
Reagan himself has testified, but inconclusively.
And his Vice President, George Bush, has never fully explained his actions, insisting that he reluctantly went along with the Iran arms sales but knew almost nothing about the efforts by Mr.
North, a former National Security Council aide, to arm the Nicaraguan rebels after Congress cut off military aid in 1984.


Red Sox Win, but Lose Greenwell


Zfax Image Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


PCC Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Crested Corp. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Raising the Voltage to Let In the Light
The idea has been intriguing enough to attract millions of dollars in investment in the last quarter-century, but Robert Saxe cannot seem to get his "smart" window technology out of the laboratory.
The Long Island inventor is among those who have searched for a way to make windows -- and related products like sunglasses -- into electrically operated "light valves," in which the amount of light passing through is controlled by how much voltage is applied.
Mr.
Saxe's basic idea has been to suspend various needlelike particles in liquids between glass panels coated with electrical conductive materials.
The particles are scattered randomly when no voltage is applied, blocking light.
When voltage is applied, they align themselves with the electric field, allowing more light to pass through.


Dow Slips 2.02 to Close At 3,013.19
Stock prices inched lower yesterday as many investors took to the sidelines to await corporate earnings results, more economic news and the expirations of many stock options and index futures later in the week.
The Dow Jones industrial average was down 2.02 points, to 3,013.19, after a 29-point gain on Monday.


Killearn Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Some Changes in Soviet Asia, But the Style Is Still the Same
Vladimir Dubrovsky, a giant bear of a Russian, crossed his arms over his chest and shook his head.
"You see," he said, gesturing at pedestrians hurrying by, "nobody is smiling. Nobody smiles anymore."


The Night Guns 'n' Roses' 'Illusions' Became Real
Monday was a good night to be a teen-age heavy-metal fan in New York City.
At midnight 1,500 people, most of them young, white and male, were lined up outside Tower Records in Greenwich Village.
That was the bewitching hour when the two long-awaited new albums by Guns 'n' Roses, "Use Your Illusions I" and "Use Your Illusions II," went on sale across the country.


INSIDE
Preventing Breast Cancer
The first major study to see if a drug can prevent breast cancer, not just halt its progress, is about to begin.
Health, page C11.
Iraq vs. the Security Council
Facing the prospect of armed units on its territory to escort inspectors, Iraq seems to be yielding in a dispute with the United Nations.
Page A3.
Benefits Bill Advances
By a margin able to sustain a Presidential veto, the House passed a bill extending jobless benefits for people out of work for 26 weeks.
Page A14.
Pressure on the Endowment
Civil rights groups said they have documents showing that the National Endowment for the Arts yielded to pressure in denying grants.
Page C13.


Sharpton Tries to Serve Summons In Israel but Doesn't Find His Man
The Rev.
Al Sharpton, on a journey that he described as a stopover in hell, came to Israel today to serve a legal summons on a young Hasidic Jew who was a central figure in the racial violence in Crown Heights last month.
Mr.
Sharpton did not find his man, but then he did not have much time.
He wound up staying in the country for only about three hours, dropping off his legal papers at the United States Embassy in Tel Aviv before flying off to Frankfurt.


HONECKER IS FOCUS AT TRIAL IN BERLIN
Berlin's attention is focused on the trial of four former East German border guards accused of murder, but most of the debate is over a man who is not at the dock.
As the trial entered its third week on Monday, one of the defense lawyers rose to protest the absence of Erich Honecker, who was the longtime Communist leader of what used to be East Germany.
He asserted that Mr.
Honecker, and not the four young border guards, should be on trial for murder.


Mexican Bank Curb May Ease
Mexico is likely to ease restrictions on foreign ownership of banks under a privatization plan that began in February, a senior Mexican official said Monday.
Guillermo Ortiz, the Under Secretary for Finance and Public Credit, said, however, that no formal decision had yet been taken on easing the restrictions.
He said that easing the bank law was part of the negotiations of a free-trade treaty with the United States and Canada.


In Guatemala, Army Terror Is Still Policy
To the Editor:
I cannot fathom why you find the issues fueling armed conflict in Guatemala "unfathomable" in "Ideology Fades, Battle Lines Sharpen" (The Week in Review, Sept. 8).
You speculate that racism, religious conflict or "sheer aggression for personal power" lie behind Central America's oldest guerrilla war.


California Beach Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


T.G. Bright &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Roadmaster Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


IAF Biochem International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Thor Resources reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Waxman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Computer Glitch Sends Newark School Into Chaos
When Central High School's 1,000 students and 90 teachers showed up for the start of the school year on Sept. 5, many found themselves in a computer-generated game that was part musical chairs and part hide-and-seek.
About half of the students had no schedules for classes or had schedules with holes in them.
Some classrooms had no teachers, while others had four teachers instead of one.
Many students spent much of last week in the school auditorium conferring with guidance counselers who were trying to correct the scores of mistakes in their classroom assignments.
Attendance Improves
Today, the number of students still reporting to the auditorium was down to a trickle and Carl L. Gregory, the high school principal, said that the school year's bumpy start was over.
"We're making sure every student has a schedule and is in class," he said.


The Pop Life
No Country Cousin
Country music is widely viewed as an isolated branch of the music business, with offices in Nashville instead of New York or Los Angeles, separate charts in Billboard and a publicity system that ignores most mainstream publications.
The separation has always made country music seem, from the outside, a poor relation of mainstream popular music.


Notes and Bonds Edge Upward
Comments by Federal Reserve Board officials were the focal points of trading in the Treasury securities market yesterday, where prices of notes and bonds managed to eke out small gains at the close of a generally sluggish session.
Remarks by Wayne Angell, Fed governor, helped to depress prices early in the session.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.62
6.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.19
5.19
7.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.23
5.21
7.29
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.39
7.41
8.74
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.91
7.92
9.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.98
9.00
10.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.93
6.93
7.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Warehouse Club Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Score Board reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bringing the Dead Sea Scrolls to Light
To the Editor:
As someone who has been engaged for 20 years in deciphering, recollating, reconstructing and reinterpreting ancient legal texts, some of which precede the Dead Sea Scrolls by centuries, I can sympathize with the proprietary interest scholars feel toward the fruits of a lifetime's work.
I can even appreciate the hesitancy and reluctance to publish findings prematurely, for the fruits of our labor bear upon significant issues in the history of ideas, often requiring major revisions of conventional wisdom and commonly held notions about the origins of our civilization.


United Tote Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Accounts
*
Apple Computer Inc. to Leo Burnett Singapore, after a review that also included Ball Partnership and McCann-Erickson, both in Singapore.
Burnett also handles Apple's advertising in Taiwan and Norway.


A Beast of a White Has a Sensitive Side
SAVAGE, wild, untamed, brutally aggressive.
Sounds like the trailer for a biker movie, doesn't it?
No, just a few of the terms used in recent months to describe wines made from the sauvignon blanc grape.
Does any wine really deserve to be called brutally aggressive?
Probably not.
After all, "extra dry" champagne is rather sweet; "giant" olives are not the biggest on the market.


Pharmchem Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Entronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Los Angeles priced $150 million in Department of Water and Power electric-plant revenue bonds through Dillon, Read &amp; Co. to yield from 5.60 percent for issues maturing in 1997, 6.625 percent for those due in 2014 and 6.734 percent for those due in 2031.
The issue was rated AA by both Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Ohio Higher Education Capital Facilities priced $115 million in revenue bonds through Prudential Securities to yield from 4.60 percent for a 1992 maturity to 6.50 percent for issues due in 2006.
Most of the bonds were rated A by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P. Some due in 1998 through 2006, however, are insured and have been rated AAA.
*
Mecklenburg County, N.C., priced $68.5 million in public-improvement general-obligation bonds through First Union Securities, Charlotte, N.C., to yield from 4.55 percent for a 1993 maturity to 5.95 percent for a 2003 maturity.
The bonds were rated AAA by both Moody's and S.&amp; P. RATINGS *
Texas' $800 million in tax-anticipation notes series 1991 to be sold today have been rated MIG-1 by Moody's. *
Hertz Corp.'s senior unsecured debt-rating has been raised to BBB+ from BBB by S.&amp; P.


Qudra Logic Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; In Tokyo, A Queen Of Crime In Drag
Kinji Fukasaku's 1968 Japanese film, "Black Lizard," can be more easily described than categorized, more easily seen than believed, and rather more easily enjoyed than common sense should allow.
Even then it's a mystery.
It opens today at Film Forum 1 and may well equal the success there of "Paris Is Burning."


Bridgford Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


British Court to Review 1974 Bombing Case
The British Court of Appeal was asked today to review the case of a woman jailed since 1974 for a bombing that killed 12 people aboard a military bus, because discredited forensic evidence may have been used to convict her.
The decision by Government officials to seek the review marked the latest setback to prosecutors involved in a series of cases over the last two decades involving Irish Republican Army bombings, in which several convictions have already been overturned because evidence used by prosecutors was found to be tainted or falsified.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Graham Upsets Shriver
Debbie Graham, serving 11 aces, upset her sixth-seeded American compatriot, Pam Shriver, 7-5, 6-4, yesterday in the first round of the Nichirei International Ladies Championships tournament in Tokyo.
Shriver became the second seeded player to lose in the first round.
Japan's women's singles champion, Kimiko Date, seeded eighth, was eliminated Monday.
The hard-hitting Graham, who is ranked 54th in the world, overwhelmed Shriver, No. 29, with booming services in an 85-minute match. (AP)


Real Estate; Projects Rise In Atlanta's Cultural Area
THREE major projects are under construction in Midtown, the name given to Atlanta's cultural district, and a fourth that was recently announced will be one of the largest mixed-use developments ever built here.
The projects are transforming Midtown from an area of museums and theaters into a center for some of the city's major office and residential towers.


Choice Emerges to Head Savings Rescue
Albert V. Casey, a former chairman of American Airlines and the First Republic Bank of Dallas, has emerged as the leading candidate to head the bailout of the nation's savings and loans, Administration officials and a senior regulator said today.
"He is the leading candidate, yes," L. William Seidman, the chairman of the Resolution Trust Corporation and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and a member of the search committee, said in an interview this afternoon.
"I think it would be a very good appointment."


Braves Swept Out of First As Dodgers Take the Lead
The race moved one day closer to a finish in the National League West, but now the Atlanta Braves, who just two days ago led the division by a game and a half, will have to come from behind.
In wind and fog and cold of Candlestick Park, the Braves were beaten tonight by the San Francisco Giants, 3-2, and fell a half game behind the Los Angeles Dodgers, who defeated the Cincinnati Reds, 5-3, at Dodger Stadium.
The Dodgers will play host to the Braves in a three-game series in Los Angeles this weekend.


Jaclyn Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Cray Research Names Executive as President
Cray Research Inc. has named John F. Carlson, the company's chief financial officer, as president.
Mr.
Carlson, who joined the supercomputer maker in 1976, takes his new title from John A. Rollwagen, the company's chairman.
Mr.
Rollwagen, who will remain as chairman, became president in July 1990, when Marcelo Gumucio resigned.
Cray Research, which split into two companies in 1989 when its founder, Seymour R. Cray, left to start the Cray Computer Company, is the biggest supercomputer maker in the United States.
The company has been struggling with sluggish growth and rapidly changing technology in recent years.
And to meet increasing challenges from Japanese competitors, Cray Research announced this year that it planned to develop a computer driven by hundreds of thousands of processor chips.
Cray Research hopes the machines, called massively parallel computers, can compete with several start-up scientific computer companies like Masspar, Ncube, Intel Scientific and Thinking Machines Inc.


Olympic Invitations to Go Out to N.B.A.
The 1992 United States Olympics men's basketball team will begin taking shape Saturday.
But the entire 12-man roster is still months away from being completed.
When the selection committee announces its first invitees on Saturday, as many as 10 National Basketball Association players are expected to be named to the team.


Belichick Doesn't Judge the Giants by 1-2 Mark
Bill Belichick had no preconceived notions when he left his job as Giants defensive coordinator shortly after the team won Super Bowl XXV to coach a moribund Cleveland team that scratched out 3 victories in 16 games in 1990.
So, there was no way he would have thought that the Browns would have accomplished two-thirds of what they did all last season in the first three games of this season.


F.D.A. Plans to Take the Fantasy Out of Food Labels
Dr.
David A. Kessler went grocery shopping with his children not long ago and nearly got stung.
The bottle of juice they wanted said "100 percent." In very large type.
Immediately underneath was the word "natural." Just the ticket, an all-juice drink.
Dr.
Kessler was ready to buy it.
Until he spied the much smaller type that said, "10 percent juice." He put the bottle back.
It's not nice to fool Dr.
Kessler, who is the Commissioner of the Federal Food and Drug Administration.
Like Mother Nature, he can do something about it.


American Greetings reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


TSC Shannock Corp. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Bond Defaults Show Decline
Moody's Investors Service Inc., the rating agency, said yesterday that the number of companies defaulting on their bonds was the lowest in 27 months during August, when three companies missed making payments.
During each of the first seven months of the year, an average of 10 issuers a month defaulted on their bonds because of bad economic times.


South African Clashes Claim More Lives


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 18


Toromont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cup's Over, So Where's the Party?
Contrary to recent commercial trends, none of the Canada Cup players concluded the championship round of the tournament by declaring that they were going to an amusement park.
After Canada finished its two-game sweep of the United States with a 4-2 victory at Copps Coliseum Monday night, most of the player packed their skates and headed home for a brief rest.
They will take the rest of the week off before reporting to their National Hockey League clubs next week to prepare for the regular season, which begins on Oct. 3.


SCS/Compute Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Alimentation Couche-Tard reports earnings for Qtr to July 21


General Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25


Books of The Times; Insulting Without Libel In a Satirical Novel
The Final Addiction By Richard Condon 296 pages. St. Martin's Press. $19.95.
There's nobody else quite like Richard Condon writing satirical novels today.
The singular Condon genre combines American politics, scoundrels in various corners of the world, linguistic shenanigans, cholesterol-loaded meals, cold warriors in intelligence agencies, legalized thievery in Washington and put-downs of the high and mighty everywhere.
As the comedian Mort Sahl used to say in his nightclub act at the Hungry I in San Francisco, "Is there anyone here I haven't offended?"


Fries Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Uni-Select reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Giants Back Craig
One day after he returned to work, San Francisco Giants Manager Roger Craig met with his employers and said he was told that he could come back next season and, apparently, for as long as he wanted.
"They said they wanted me to come back," Craig said today after a session with the club's owner, Bob Lurie, and General Manager Al Rosen.
"They laid it out flat. They said that we'd started together and that we could stay together. Nothing was said about an extension, but they told me that I could stay as long as I liked."


Washington Real Estate Investment Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Theater; Reviving Personal Scandal As an Art
As a personal achievement in private life, scandal is no longer attainable in this country; the word is still used about some aberrations in public life, but even there the meaning has worn so thin most people cannot perceive it.
Too bad.
The sense of scandal was a wonderful vehicle for comedy, as "Esperando la Carroza" ("Waiting for the Hearse") by the Uruguayan playwright Jacobo Langsner reminds one.
Mr.
Langsner's farcical romp, playing at the Repertorio Espanol's Gramercy Park Theater, traps all of its conniving characters in one form of personal scandal or other to expose their greed, hypocrisy, mendacity, lust and mere sloth.
What makes the pretensions of these people so funny is the firm conviction of every character that even a whisper about the slightest lapse from rigid morality will create a scandal in a family, then among neighbors and finally in the whole world.


Novelist and Historian Win $20,000 Prizes
The Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas Llosa and the historian John Lukacs are the winners of the 1991 Ingersoll Prizes.
The awards, which each carry a cash prize of $20,000, are given by the Ingersoll Foundation to recognize authors whose works "affirm the moral principles of Western civilization," the foundation says.
Mr.
Vargas Llosa, whose most recent work is "A Writer's Reality," a collection of essays published in 1990, ran for President of Peru in 1989.
Mr.
Lukacs is a professor of history at Chestnut Hill College in Philadelphia.
His latest book, "The Duel: Hitler vs. Churchill, 10 May-31 July 1940," was published this year.


Environmental Power Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On the Runway: Democrats
For weeks now, the best word to describe Democratic Presidential candidates for 1992 was "former." One dropout followed another: Nunn, McGovern, Gephardt, Gore, Rockefeller.
And the absence of a campaign impelled this page to try provoking discussion of issues with a series of editorials, "Pinch-Hitting for the Democrats." Suddenly, the field of eager candidates looks like the flight line at La Guardia at rush hour.
Former Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts was for four months the sole candidate.
Then Gov.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia launched his campaign last Friday; Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa took off Sunday; and revving their engines on the taxiway are Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and former Gov.
Jerry Brown of California, among others.


Risks in New Jersey; Allstate Decision to Pull Out of State Points Up the Insurance Perils There
The Allstate Insurance Company, New Jersey's biggest automobile insurer, says it is pulling out of the state because overregulation makes profitable business impossible; the Governor and his aides say the state is being blackmailed for higher rates.
But while Allstate holds center stage this week, with players on both sides using its balance sheet to support their arguments, it is not the only insurance company to tangle with New Jersey.
And some studies suggest that a major part of the long-running insurance drama here is the nature of New Jersey itself, demographic factors that make it arguably the worst state in the nation in which to drive and insure a car.


Dollar Continues to Slide; Mark Dominates Trading
The dollar continued its slide against many currencies yesterday, losing ground to currencies backed by higher interest rates.
Analysts said the German mark dominated foreign exchange trading.
Ronald Holzer, a vice president with Harris Trust and Company in Chicago, said demand for the mark increased as investors poured money into German investments that pay higher yields.


Hong Kong Speaks
On Sunday, Hong Kong's people finally got a chance to vote on their political future.
Their message was clear.
The overwhelming majority of candidates elected to the colony's Legislative Council favor more rapid expansion of democracy and more spirited resistance to intimidation from the Chinese Communist regime.
The new representatives have limited powers.
But Britain, which is still responsible for the colony through 1997, will be morally obligated to heed the voters' preferences.
Hong Kong has never been a democracy.
British gunboats forced the Chinese Emperor to hand it over a century and a half ago to punish him for moving against Britain's profitable opium trade.
Britain has now agreed to hand back Hong Kong to the Emperor's Communist heirs.


Official Says Real Cost Of Bailout Isn't Shown
The Government's senior auditor, Charles A. Bowsher, said today that a new prediction that the savings and loan bailout could be costlier and longer than officially recognized suggested that the Administration may be putting off its true costs until after the Presidential election next year.
"What the Administration is asking for is enough working capital and loss funds to get through the election and into 1993," Mr.
Bowsher, the Comptroller General, said in an interview during a break in an appearance before the House Banking Committee's Financial Institutions Supervision, Regulation and Insurance Subcommittee.
"It's not at all clear that it will be enough."


Rangers' Russian Visitor Impresses His U.S. Team
The National Hockey League debut of Aleksei Kovalev tonight was a teen-age potpourri: An assist.
A rookie penalty.
Some ducking in the corners, to avoid hard checks.
Inspired stick-handling, with distinct flair and touch around the net.
"Usually, I am nervous for my first game," Kovalev, the Rangers' first-round draft pick, said through an interpreter after he played in his first professional contest.
"But this time, there were no butterflies. I will play better on Thursday, in New York."


Gasoline Cost Off Again
The price of gasoline at the pump has dropped for a second consecutive week, the American Automobile Association reported yesterday.
The nationwide average price for a gallon of self-service regular unleaded fell 0.8 cent, to $1.152, for the week ending yesterday, the auto club said.
Prices were higher in New England and the West, although they fell in all other regions, according to the report prepared for the association by the Computer Petroleum Corporation of St.
Paul.


Democrats Denounce Albany Republicans' Congressional Map
A Republican Assemblyman made the opening bid yesterday in New York's high-stakes game of reapportionment, proposing a plan that could add two minority members to New York City's Congressional delegation while giving Republicans a chance to oust two Democratic incumbents.
The plan, unveiled in New York City by Assemblyman John J. Faso, Republican of Kinderhook, instantly generated cynical responses from minority legislators and members of Congress.
They questioned whether Mr.
Faso and other Republicans were more committed to increasing minority representation or to increasing their own ranks.


Cybermedic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Inquiry on Taylor's Bar
A bar and restaurant co-owned by Giants linebacker LAWRENCE TAYLOR is among those being investigated by a New Jersey state commission reviewing possible crime links to liquor establishments.
Taylor testified voluntarily without an attorney before the State Commission of Investigation, said attorney ALFRED S. PORRO JR., a co-owner with Taylor of LT's Restaurant and Sports Bar, situated in East Rutherford, N.J.


Freight Trains Collide in Indiana


Aquino Revokes Eviction Notice for a U.S. Base
President Corazon C. Aquino announced formally today what has been clear for some time -- that the Philippines will not evict thousands of American sailors and soldiers from the Subic Bay Naval Station for at least a year.
In a diplomatic note to the United States made public a day after the Philippine Senate rejected a new agreement extending an American lease on the naval base, her Foreign Secretary, Raul Manglapus, said President Aquino had revoked an earlier eviction notice that had been scheduled to go into effect with the termination of the lease on Monday.
The move had the effect of overruling the Senate, at least for now.


Mr. D'Amato Strikes Out
Senator Alfonse D'Amato's remarks about Mayor David Dinkins are a crass attempt to divide New York City for personal political gain.
The Senator disavows that motive, but there is no other reasonable interpretation of his words and timing.
Mayor Dinkins is not above criticism.
The tone of the Senator's remarks suggests, however, that he was not interested in constructive criticism.
Constructive critics do not say that the city would be better off if Mr.
Dinkins took a "long sabbatical" in South Africa.
Nor do they accuse the Mayor of being "afraid" of black leaders like the Rev.
Al Sharpton and of allowing "racial racketeers" to hold the city "hostage."


The Unnecessary Tests Medicare Encourages
To the Editor:
A man and his wife came to visit me in July for medical consultation.
They are both 80 years old and have been married more than 55 years -- a success story of good fortune, good health and perhaps good medical care over the years.


Sprouse-Reitz Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Discomfort Index Rises to 'Wilt'


Olga Spessivtzeva, Ballerina, 96; Called One of the Great Giselles
Olga Spessivtzeva, a Russian ballerina whose dancing was praised for its Romantic purity and spiritual radiance, died on Monday at Nyack (N.Y.) Hospital.
She was 96 years old and lived at the Tolstoy Foundation Nursing Home in Valley Cottage, N.Y.
She died of pneumonia, said Elizabeth Lopukhin, a social worker at the nursing home.


Private Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Charge by CPC
CPC International Inc. said yesterday that it would reduce its 1991 earnings by $32 million, or 42 cents a share, as a result of charges for the cleanup of industrial waste sites that were contaminated by chemical operations the company subsequently sold.
The company, based in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., said the charges were intended to cover the company's cost of actual cleanup and associated fees at sites in New Jersey, Rhode Island, Michigan and other states.


NHD Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Soviets Drop Solzhenitsyn Treason Charges
The chief prosecutor of the Soviet Union said today that he was dropping treason charges against Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, removing the last legal obstacle for the Russian writer to return to his homeland after 17 years in exile.
Mr.
Solzhenitsyn, living in exile in Vermont, has said he will return after charges were dropped.
But he indicated today that he would not return to Russia immediately.


Parking Rules
Because of Yom Kippur, alternate-side parking rules are suspended today in New York City.
Other regulations remain in effect.


CHANGE IS SOUGHT IN MEDICARE PLAN
Despite the Government's efforts at compromise, the American Medical Association said today that it remained dissatisfied with a new Federal fee schedule because the schedule would still cut payments to doctors treating elderly patients under Medicare.
The fee schedule assumes that doctors would perform more services to offset cuts in Medicare payments.
Dr.
James S. Todd, executive vice president of the association, said there was no evidence to support that assumption, and he declared that doctors would lobby Congress to overturn the provision.


CHRONICLE
It was one of those occasions that drive orchestra managers to distraction.
RICCARDO MUTI, the music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, was scheduled to take the baton for opening night on Monday when his physicians in Ravenna, Italy, declared him too ill to travel.
It was tonsillitis.
No matter that it was to be his last opening night with the Philadelphians; he is to step down at the end of this season.


American Biodynamics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


To Bar Failure, Con Ed Asks for Energy Curbs
Fearing a brownout, Consolidated Edison asked residents of the Upper East Side to conserve electricity last night.
The advisory came as 6 of the 24 large cables at Con Ed's Yorkville substation failed -- four between Monday night and yesterday afternoon and two more last night, said Patricia Richardi, a spokeswoman for the utility.


Bank Barrier Resists Foes; Glass-Steagall Walls May Just Be Replaced
For nearly a decade, bankers have trooped to Congress and pressed for repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act, which bars banks from underwriting securities.
And over the same period, banks and Wall Street firms have devised clever ways to get around this barrier, so that it is often difficult to tell one from the other.
Now, as Congress considers broad banking industry changes to reflect this new situation, the Glass-Steagall law that initially seemed vulnerable to repeal is beginning to display a remarkable staying power.


PHONE BREAKDOWN IN NEW YORK CITY SNARLS AIR TRAFFIC
A power failure at an American Telephone and Telegraph Company switching station in lower Manhattan cut off half the company's long-distance phone traffic into and out of New York City last night, and took a particular toll on air traffic at the metropolitan area's three major airports.
The impact of the failure, at 4:50 P.M., was minimized to some degree because many businesses, including the stock markets, had closed for the day and many workers had left their jobs early to be home for the start of the Jewish holy day, Yom Kippur.


Topics of The Times; Stopping the Shoplifters
Shoplifting is costly to New York City department stores and consumers alike.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo can take a significant step to reduce it by signing a bill before him that would offer a civil alternative to criminal procedures.
Thirty-one other states have found that it works.
The bill reflects the fact that shoplifting, while a crime, is a nonviolent form of petty larceny that rarely results in prosecution but gives the culprit a police record.
The new law would allow defendants to return the merchandise without criminal prosecution -- provided the goods are in salable condition, and that the defendant pays a civil penalty not to exceed $500.
No criminal record would be established, unless the defendant elects not to pay the penalty and to face criminal charges instead.


U.N. Considering a Troop Escort in Iraq
The United States, Britain and France are discussing sending military teams into Iraq to escort the United Nations inspectors looking for President Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction if Baghdad's authorities continue trying to obstruct the search, diplomats here said today.
But the troops may not be needed because Iraq appeared tonight to be backing down in its quarrel with the Security Council, after its United Nations representative, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, said he hoped that a complete agreement could be reached soon.


Capital of Croatia Under Attack As Yugoslav Accord Breaks Down
This city, capital of the secessionist Croatian republic, was under fierce attack by the Yugoslav Army and Air Force today, hours after federal military leaders signed another European Community-brokered cease-fire.
Yugoslav Air Force planes could be heard streaking through the darkness, strafing the blacked-out city below, and the ground shook with the explosions of artillery shells fired into the city center from Yugoslav Army bases on the outskirts.
Transport helicopters, presumably carrying federal troops, were seen flying over the city in what appeared to be a drive to knock out the local television transmitter.


Israel Says It's Ready to Placate Bush, but First It Wants Assurances
Israeli officials said today that they were ready to end their worsening battle with the Bush Administration by giving up their campaign for swift approval of American loan guarantees.
But they insisted that before they yield to President Bush's demand for a four-month delay on Congressional debate over the loan guarantees, they must get assurances that they will definitely receive the assistance early next year.


Henley International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


People
*
Joe Fontana, creative director at Sussman Ziccardi Group, New York, has been promoted to senior vice president from vice president. *
Carmen Baez, 34 years old, president and chief executive of Rapp Collins Marcoa, Boston, said she had resigned for personal reasons.


Wisconsin Southern Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Federal Reserve Fines a Saudi Linked to B.C.C.I.
The Federal Reserve today announced a $37 million civil fine against a Saudi businessman for concealing the Bank of Credit and Commerce International's acquisition of the Independence Bank in Encino, Calif., in 1985.
The bank regulators also moved in Federal court in Manhattan to freeze the assets of the businessman, Ghaith R. Pharaon, amid indications that he was selling off his American holdings.
Judge Peter K. Leisure of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York issued a temporary restraining order today preventing any transfer of Mr.
Pharaon's assets until a hearing next week.


Marshall Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


HRE Properties reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Astro-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Named Rick Bay executive vice president effective Oct. 1.
Basketball  Continental Basketball Association
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Gary Waites, guard. Global Basketball Association
ALBANY -- Announced they will be called the Sharp Shooters. Italian League
BREEZE ARESE -- Signed Adrian Dantley, forward. Football  National Football League
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Placed Pat Beach, tight end, on injured reserve.
Signed James Coley, tight end.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed James Pruitt, wide receiver.
Placed Fred Banks, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Curt Singer, tackle, and Bernard Clark, linebacker.
Placed Edwin Bailey, guard, and Marcus Cotton, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Canadian Football League
SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Released Sean Dykes, defensive back.
WINNIPEG BLUE BOMBERS -- Released Troy Johnson, wide receiver.
Added Stan Mikawos, tackle, to the practice roster.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Assigned Kord Cervich, Murray Duvall, Mike Hurlbut, John Mokosak and Shaun Sabol, defensemen; and Patrick Cavanagh, Don Diggs, Chris Chichocki, Ross Fitzpatrick, Glen Goodall, Steven King, Daniel Lacroix, John Paterson, Jason Prosofsky and Soren True, forwards, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Reached agreement with Mark Recchi, right wing, on a multiyear contract.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Announced affiliation with the Thunder Bay Thunder Hawks of the Colonial Hockey League.
College
BROWN -- Named Mike Muska and Tom Bold assistant athletic directors.
CLARKSON -- Named John Zulberti men's assistant coach for soccer and lacrosse, and Jeff Ferreri men's assistant basketball coach.
COASTAL CAROLINA -- Named Elizabeth Size assistant trainer.


Anthony Expected at Camp
Although serious negotiations are just beginning, Greg Anthony's attorney expects the Knicks' first-round draft pick to sign a contract before training camp begins Oct. 4.
Anthony is expected to be involved in a battle at point guard with Mark Jackson and Maurice Cheeks.
Because both Cheeks and Jackson are veterans, it is crucial for Anthony to report on time to avoid difficulty making the transition from college to pro basketball.
Anthony's attorney, Leigh Steinberg, hopes to move quickly in agreeing to contract terms with Knicks president, Dave Checketts.


Alpine Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
Another unveiling this week was of a 6-foot-2-inch statue of Hank Williams, the country-music titan, in Montgomery, Ala., across the street from the City Hall Auditorium, where he used to perform and where his funeral was held in 1953.
Mr.
Williams's son, HANK WILLIAMS JR., was on hand for the unveiling on Tuesday, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The elder songwriter's daughter, JETT WILLIAMS of Nashville, was noticably absent, even though she is a country-music singer who plies her trade with her father's old band.


Management Tech reports earnings for Year to April 30


Botanist's Quest: Plants for All Ills
DR.
JAMES DUKE is one of those rare botanists who actually eat what they preach.
He loves to watch the evening primrose open within 60 seconds.
But he also munches its seeds, which are high in tryptophan, an essential amino acid that can relieve pain and depression.
Purple coneflowers thrive in his rather rumpled wild garden in Fulton, Md.
He eats their roots to boost his immune system.


Cable Car Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Creedmoor Journal; Patients Find Freedom In 'Battle' of the Mind
Behind the locked gates of Building 75 at the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens, warmth and chaos blend in a carnival of colors, paintings, sculpture and poetry.
A body outline is sketched on linoleum, a typewriter has eyes.
There is bold Arabic on the walls, gnarled surreal fists on a canvas, a face sketched on a bedroom sheet.
There is no censorship and no limits to what a patient can do in the 20,000 square feet of free space of this dead dining hall.


Albany Shouldn't Cut Corners in the Courts
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 6 report that New York State budget cuts would make it necessary to lay off 495 court employees should be of serious concern to this state's citizens.
The resulting substantial closing down of civil parts of the courts will cause further unacceptable delays in the resolution of citizens' claims.
Justice delayed is justice denied, and such delays will have an adverse effect upon the already faltering economy of the state.


Oppenheimer &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


How Much Advice and Consent?
The Senate committees now assessing the qualifications of Clarence Thomas to be a Supreme Court justice and Robert Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence have a duty to interrogate the candidates aggressively and issue fiercely independent judgments of their merits.
These are not ordinary offices that the President can fill with any compatible nominee.
They are jobs that both Congress and the public must be certain are carried out with unusual trust and responsibility.


South Africa Charging 6 Policemen With Murder
Six South African police and security officers have been charged with murder in connection with a 1988 raid on a black township.
Eighteen more have been suspended, and face the possibility of charges ranging from assault to murder in connection with acts of political violence, a South African newspaper reported today.
The charges in Business Day, the most widely circulated financial daily in the country, seemed sure to revive arguments over who is primarily responsible for the continuing strife in the nation's black townships, in which more than 3,000 people have died in the last year.


INSIDE
Allstate Vacuum Feared
Insurance companies say they will have difficulty absorbing the drivers now covered by Allstate if it pulls out of New Jersey.
Page B1.
Patrol Car Economy Move
The New York City police will experiment with putting one officer in some patrol cars, instead of two, a move the unions are resisting.
Page B1.
Counseling's Legal Problems
A suit involving a counseling program for I.B.M. employees shows the complications in trying to solve workers' personal problems.
Page B1.
Retailers vs.
Shoplifters
Retailers applaud a trend among states, which New York may join, to let them collect payments and fines when they catch shoplifters.
Page D1.
Not Drugs but Plants for Ills
Dr.
James Duke eats flowers' seeds to ease pain, boost his immune system, his capillaries and to cure colds.
The Home Section, page C1.


A Picnic on the Hudson Will Benefit Wave Hill
If you're in the mood to eat dinner by the Hudson River tonight -- and help out horticulture at the same time -- Wave Hill, the city-owned environmental center and museum in the Bronx, is holding a picnic and plant auction at 5 P.M. to benefit its John Nally Horticultural Apprenticeships.
Mr.
Nally worked at the Wave Hill gardens, at 675 West 252d Street in the Riverdale section, for almost 20 years, and was its curator for four years when he died in 1988.
The silent auction will include Wave Hill's eight-foot-tall weeping willow, grown from a cutting taken from Napoleon's tomb.
The late financier and plant-lover Clarence Lewis smuggled a cutting or two into the country under his hat and planted them at his Skylands estate in Ringwood, N.J.


Airsensors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Oppenheimer Multi-Sector reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Appointment At Grand Met
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. appointed Ian Martin group managing director and chief operating officer, effective Oct. 1, the company said today.
Mr.
Martin is responsible for Grand Met's food activities.
He will also become responsible for all operational activities worldwide and will report to Allen J. G. Sheppard, chairman and group chief executive.


U.S. WARNS IRAQIS IT MAY USE FORCE TO INSPECT ARMS
President Bush authorized American warplanes today to fly into Iraq to protect United Nations inspectors if President Saddam Hussein does not back down from his refusal to permit helicopter inspections of his military installations.
As he intensified a long-simmering diplomatic stalemate with Iraq into a new threat of force, Mr.
Bush said he was "plenty fed up" with Mr.
Hussein's defiance of United Nations Security Council resolutions and warned the Iraqi leader not to test American resolve once again.


New Greek Press Law Cited in 2 Bombings
Two bomb explosions shook the northern Greek city of Salonika early today, just as the nation's governing conservatives narrowly defeated a move in Parliament by the Socialist opposition intended to change a controversial law banning unwarranted publicity for terrorists.
The law has so far led to the jailing of seven editors for violating the ban.
The bombs caused extensive damage to offices of the state-run electricity board and the social insurance fund but no casualties.
The May 1st Organization and a group called Revolutionary Popular Struggle claimed responsibility for the attacks.
In proclamations today, they protested both the press law and moves by the Government to privatize state-run industries and services.


A Suggestion for Viola
After watching Frank Viola lose his seventh straight decision last night, 4-1, to Chicago, Mets manager Bud Harrelson thought it might be a good idea if the frustrated free-agent-to-be not pitch the rest of the season.
"It might be a good idea for him to just shut it down," Harrelson said, while adding it would be Viola's choice.
"I'm no quitter," Viola said when the issue was raised. "Go back and tell him that."


Review/Television; 2 New Faces Join Crime Dramas
Of the very few hourlong crime dramas left on the new season's sitcom-saturated schedule, two are featuring major new players in their casts.
Paul Sorvino joins "Law and Order" (Tuesdays at 10 P.M. on NBC), while Ed Asner is being added to "The Trials of Rosie O'Neill" (Thursdays at 9 P.M. on CBS).
These are substantial adjustments, but far more intriguing developments can be detected in a hardening of each series' political attitudes -- rightist for the aptly named "Law and Order," leftist for the unreconstructed liberal "Rosie O'Neill."
The cast changes are fraught with behind-the-scenes corporate politicking.
Mr.
Sorvino replaces George Dzundza, who apparently wasn't happy with the weekly exposure he was getting in the "Law" portion of the program.
No problem for the producers of this ensemble show.
The Dzundza character was simply mowed down.
Goodbye George, welcome Paul, who will now play a New York City detective sergeant, Phil Cerreta, new partner to the younger Mike Logan (Chris Noth).
Slipping into the series on Tuesday, Mr.
Sorvino joined the regulars like an old friend from another precinct.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Geico Corp., Washington, has filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an offering of $100 million in debentures, due in 2021, through Salomon Brothers Inc.
A portion of the proceeds from the offering will be used to redeem in full, at par, all outstanding Geico 11 percent debentures due in 1999.


Stanley Swerdlow, 72, Executive and Producer
Stanley Swerdlow, a textile executive and Off Broadway producer, died on Monday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 72 years old and lived in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Mr. Swerdlow died of Parkinson's disease, his son Ezra said.


MSR Exploration Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cut-Rate Air Fares Bring Out the Buyers
Airline reservation agents in New York were busily writing tickets yesterday for passengers eager to take advantage of the $198 round-trip transcontinental air fares announced earlier this week by T.W.A., American Airlines, Delta Air Lines and United Airlines.
"I've sold gobs of them already this morning," said Arlene Smith, a United agent at the Airlines Ticket Offices in mid-Manhattan, where several airlines operate ticket-issuing counters.


Calendar: Bobby Short, Macy's Designer
Antiques and Entertaining  Macy's, 34th Street at Broadway; (212) 560-4049.
As part of the store's "Entertaining With Style" program, Bobby Short will introduce a room that he designed at 12:30 P.M. today in the Corner Shop galleries on the ninth floor.


Entertainment Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Dance; Symbols and Bravura by American Indians
Few outsiders have witnessed the secret sacred dances of the American Indians, but those who have seen them sometimes note an increase in their pulse rate as they watch the dancing.
Racing pulse or not, it was obvious that both the audience and the energetic members of the American Indian Dance Theater were fiercely worked up at the company's opening on Tuesday night.


17 Are Killed and Dozens Injured in Guatemalan Earthquake
Two earthquakes rocked Guatemala today, killing at least 17 people and injuring dozens when their houses collapsed on them.
Landslides blocked the Pan American Highway.
The first, measuring 5.8 on the Richter scale, shook much of the country shortly after 4 A.M. and lasted about 10 seconds.


House Drops Effort for 5-Cent Gasoline-Tax Rise
House leaders today abandoned efforts to try to enact a nickel-a-gallon gasoline tax to help pay for a renewal of the Federal highway construction program.
The tax was an integral part of the five-year, $153.5-billion bill that was pulled from the calendar suddenly last month when it faced defeat because of opposition to any kind of tax increase.


Global Push By British Telecom
In what may be an important bid to capture a lucrative share of the international communications market, British Telecommunications P.L.C. on Thursday will announce details of a new subsidiary that will manage worldwide communications networks for multinational corporations.
The new venture, the Syncordia Corporation, will be based in Atlanta and represents an attempt by the British telephone company to capture some of the big-business customers served by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


Alexander Calder, 75; Led a Paper Producer
Alexander Calder Jr., former chairman of the Union Camp Corporation, died on Wednesday at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, N.J.
He was 75 years old and lived in Upper Montclair.
He died of a cerebral hemorrhage, said a Union Camp spokesman, Timothy McKenna.


Navigators Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ramsay Health Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Paper Gives a Voice to Plains Indians
The bright red pennant of the Cleveland Indians baseball team hangs in the office of The Lakota Times newspaper.
Alongside it are flags for the "Pittsburgh Negroes," the "Kansas City Jews" and the "San Diego Caucasians."
Beneath the pennants is the statement, "Now you know how Native Americans feel."


Weak Phone Link Known for Years
The Federal Aviation Administration's reliance on a single telephone circuit to carry dozens of critical communication links in the New York region has been recognized by the agency for years as a glaring weakness in its air traffic control system.
The setup risks exactly the kind of phone breakdown that froze air traffic in the region for several hours on Tuesday night.
To a lesser degree, it also creates the risk that planes might fly dangerously close or even collide, aviation experts say.


National Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


First Boston in Accord To Revise Sealy Debt
The First Boston Corporation has agreed to exchange more than $500 million in debt in Sealy Holdings Inc. for equity and notes, executives at Sealy and on Wall Street said yesterday.
Under the deal, which would reduce the mattress company's total indebtedness by $400 million, to about $500 million, an affiliate of First Boston, which holds the debt, would own 93.6 percent of the company after the restructuring.
First Boston now controls about 40 percent of Sealy Holdings' outstanding stock.


CHANGES IN CHINA STIR FEAR OF U.S.
Americans may have missed it, but they are engaged in a bitter and deceitful conspiracy of sabotage and infiltration called "peaceful evolution," aimed at subjugating the Chinese people under the horrors of capitalism and imperialism.
That, in any case, is the view presented by the Chinese leaders to their people.
The harsh language does not usually appear in China's English-language publications, which still maintain a smiling face to the outside world.
But in the Chinese-language news media, the alarms are shrill, vehement and growing.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-18
American warplanes may enter Iraq if Saddam Hussein does not back down from his refusal to permit helicopter inspections of his military installations.
President Bush did not set a deadline for compliance.
Page A1
News analysis: The threat to Iraq to send warplanes is designed to make Saddam Hussein retreat and permit unfettered inspections.
If the threat fails, President Bush may face new diplomatic or political risks.
A16


Maradona Sentenced
The soccer star DIEGO MARADONA was given a 14-month suspended sentence on cocaine possession charges yesterday, his lawyer said.
The sentence was handed down after the lawyer reached a plea-bargaining agreement with the prosecution at Maradona's trial in Naples, Italy.


Sun City Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Corrections
A brief report about menopause in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Tuesday incorrectly rendered an explanation by Dr.
Zev Rosenwaks about the blood levels of follicle- stimulating hormone at which conception may be impaired.
Levels at or over 20 milli-international units per milliliter suggest a woman may have difficulty achieving pregnancy through in vitro fertilization.


Direct Rule in Punjab
The Indian Parliament today extended the four-and-a-half-year-old direct federal rule in the northern state of Punjab, where Sikh rebels have been fighting for independence since 1982.
The resolution was adopted a day after Parliament indefinitely postponed state elections that had been scheduled next Monday.The Indian Home Minister, S. B. Chavan, said that a Punjab assembly would be elected before Feb. 15.
About 4,300 people have been killed in Punjab this year, including nearly two dozen candidates for the state assembly.


Recycling Inner Tubes Into Handbags
ABOUT seven years ago, when she was still a college student, Mandana MacPherson ruined one of her leather handbags and looked for one made of rubber to replace it.
Then she saw an inner tube in one of her classrooms and a light went off.


Super Valu Stores Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 7


In Manhattan, the Harvest Is In


Interior Designer-Artist Calls the Road His Home
HE calls himself a nomad, partly because traveling to faraway places is what he likes to do most.
But for the next year or so, Rod Jacobson has alighted in Manhattan and is working as a music-business publicist.
That is, when he is not busy pursuing interior design, an activity "over which," he said, "I have total control."


From Unemployment, Into Self-Employment
When Susan LaCroix, an out-of-work chef from Lowell, Mass., visited the local office of the Massachusetts Department of Employment and Training in April of last year, she was intrigued by a notice saying some would-be entrepreneurs could collect unemployment insurance benefits while they started their own businesses.
Ms.
LaCroix, 33 years old, had recently lost her job at the Appleton Inn in Lowell, and she knew finding another chef's position would not be easy in the dismal Massachusetts economy.
Having long harbored a dream of owning her own business, she applied to the helping-hand program.
In a lottery of 587 applicants, Ms.
LaCroix and 104 other people across the state were chosen.


Rangers Devise 'Tryout' for Richter
Mike Richter will play for the Rangers without a contract, for at least part of the preseason.
After speaking with General Manager Neil Smith yesterday morning, Richter's agent, Herb Pinder of Saskatoon, said the two sides had agreed on the outline for a "tryout agreement." Under this arrangement, Richter, a free agent, would be allowed to circumvent the recently expired collective bargaining agreement and to play with the team before signing a new pact.


Megadata Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Yields on Money Market Funds Are Mixed
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday, with tax-exempt funds yielding more than they did a week earlier, while the taxable funds yielded less.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist at Donoghue's, said he was somewhat surprised at the mixed signals.


Loan Dispute Perplexes Israel's Soviet Emigres
Many Soviet Jewish immigrants say they are perplexed and hurt at finding themselves suddenly at the center of American plans to convene a Middle East peace conference.
Most Soviet newcomers feel that their integration into Israeli society and the peace talks are completely different matters that should not be linked.


How to Recycle a Closed Military Base
To the Editor:
"Recycle Military Bases" (Op-Ed, Sept. 7) by Mark Paslawsky recommends that closed military bases not be turned into ghost towns, but redeveloped to offer economic and social benefits.
The idea is good, and one the Defense Department follows.
For fully three decades the Defense Department and other Federal Agencies have been assisting communities in redeveloping closed military bases.
Communities find they can supplant military spending with other economic development that diversifies and expands the local economy.


Dollar Up in World Trading And Gold Prices Strengthen
The dollar rose sharply yesterday on worldwide markets as uncertainties in the Middle East and the Soviet Union pushed some traders to the relative safety of the United States currency.
Gold prices also strengthened.


Kelly Helps Yankees Savor a Sweet Victory
The Yankees had lost so many of these games lately that the fashion in which they finally won last night was part drama and part disbelief.
Even as it unfolded, everyone braced to see if something would go awry.
Could Roberto Kelly's liner to left field in the 10th inning carry into the seats?
Could the Yankees win a game?
The answer to both questions was affirmative as Kelly clubbed his second home run off Jaime Navarro to start the inning, finish the game and power the Yankees to a 2-1 victory over Milwaukee at Yankee Stadium.


Goodmark Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25


Topps Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cooper Development Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Meadow Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Fastcomm Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


PS Business Parks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Window on Deep Israel-U.S. Tensions
The struggle between the Bush Administration and Israel over the question of United States loan guarantees and Israeli settlements illuminates all of the underlying -- often unspoken -- anxieties, tensions and contradictions in the relationship between America and Israel.
The specific issue is whether Israel should receive its requested $10 billion in loan guarantees for housing Soviet Jews without any restrictions or freeze settlement activity in the occupied territories, or whether it should postpone its request for four months -- until after an Arab-Israeli peace conference has begun -- so the explosive issue of settlements can be dealt with then.


Crown Heights Is Site Of New Disturbances
For the second night in a row, there were street disturbances last night in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, as a group of 10 blacks confronted Hasidic men near a synagogue on Eastern Parkway.
The police said 18-year-old Joseph Delgado, whose address was not available, was arrested last night and charged with creating unnecessary noise after he began shouting through a bullhorn in front of the synagogue at 770 Eastern Parkway, the headquarters of the Lubavitcher Hasidic sect.


China Says Its President Is Ill
The Chinese President, Yang Shangkun, canceled a meeting with an African leader today because of illness, but there was no indication that the 84-year-old official was suffering serious health problems.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said Mr.
Yang had a cold, but refused to say if he had been hospitalized.
Mr.
Yang had been scheduled to meet with President Quett K. Masire of Botswana.


Santiago Journal; Graves Without a Name Yielding Their Secrets
They were buried, unidentified, in a remote corner of this capital city's sprawling General Cemetery.
And now, under court order, the Chilean Government is exhuming and trying to identify the remains of more than 120 people who died in 1973 in the first three months of military rule by Gen.
Augusto Pinochet.
While other common graves and clandestine cemeteries have been found and excavated in the last 18 months, the number of unidentified bodies in Yard No. 29 is by far the largest.


The Mets' Season May Be Fading, but Johnson Isn't
By the end of the season, the coach's shoulders are going to be very sore.
Tom Spencer must endure two more weeks of Howard Johnson calling for the ball in right field.
"He's wearing Tommy out," Bud Harrelson said, gesturing from the Mets' dugout to Spencer on the field, several feet in the direction of right field.
The outfield coach, as usual, was hitting fungoes to Howard Johnson, who apparently cannot field enough of them.


Ennis Business Forms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Library Bureau Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Monitek Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home Loan Banks In 2 Note Offerings
The Federal Home Loan Bank system is offering $200 million in three-year notes through Lehman Brothers.
The notes were priced at par to yield 6.575 percent, 14 basis points over the comparable three-year Treasury notes.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Skyline Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Salomon Sells Holdings To Finance Operations
Faced with higher borrowing costs in the wake of the Treasury market scandal, Salomon Brothers Inc. is selling large holdings of its securities to help finance its operations, the firm said yesterday in a filing with the Government.
The securities sales are the largest piece of an asset reduction strategy that is at the center of a contingency financing plan that Salomon had assembled before the scandal began last month.
Salomon put the emergency plan in place days after the scandal erupted.


A Top Iran Aide Predicts Release of All Hostages
A close adviser to President Hashemi Rafsanjani predicted today that all 10 of the Western hostages remaining in Lebanon would be free in two months.
The adviser, Mohammed Javad Larijani, who sits on Mr.
Rafsanjani's 15-member National Security Council and is a longtime moderate voice in the Government, said that "not very far from at least one or two" Western hostages would be released in response to the release last week by Israel of more than 50 Arab detainees.


Jews Observe Day of Atonement


Emir of Kuwait Visits Gulf War Allies


Soviet Barter: The Haves and Have-Nots
A gloomy, rainy dusk was beginning to descend on this industrial city when four trucks, each laden with four cows, pulled up at the city's huge slaughterhouse -- another ton of beef headed for cold storage.
But the delivery still left the Sverdlovsk Meat Factory here in the city where President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic was born some 15,000 tons shy of its 1991 production goal.
Vasily I. Nazarenko, the plant's general director, said there was no way the quota would be met.
The problem, he said, was an inability to pay his suppliers.


Bush Hikes in the Grand Canyon, Mixing Politics and Governance
President Bush today hiked into the Grand Canyon, defended his record as an environmentalist, visited a children's hospital here and awarded Federal grants to combat infant mortality in 15 communities across the country.
The day's events provided a textbook illustration of how a Chief Executive uses the powers of the Presidency to maximum political advantage, and how Mr.
Bush intends to do just that for the next 14 months as he tries to rebut Democratic charges that he has neglected domestic problems for the more glamorous challenges of foreign policy.


Allied Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Opto Mechanik Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Micronetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


End Practice of Immunized Testimony
To the Editor:
Lawrence E. Walsh, the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, has had great difficulty in carrying out the assignment of his office, namely the prosecution of those about whom there is sufficient evidence of violations of United States law to warrant proceeding.
His task has been made more difficult by Congressional hearings that immunized the testimony of certain witnesses, precluding the use of their testimony as evidence by the special prosecutor.


Novametrix Medical reports earnings for Qtr to July 28


Measured Force on Iraq
President Bush has moved firmly but shrewdly to counter Saddam Hussein's persistent defiance of United Nations cease-fire resolutions.
Yesterday he ordered American warplanes to prepare to escort U.N. helicopters should that be required to complete their arms inspection mission mandated by the Security Council.
The President has wisely resisted the temptation to bomb suspected weapons sites -- an indiscriminate and probably futile approach.
Instead, by backing up the U.N. mandate with an unmistakable threat of force, the President, in coordination with other Security Council members, reinforces respect for international law.


Preferred Homecare of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Change the Behavior Of Squirrels for Peanuts
To the Editor:
The squirrels that chewed into the plastic on Henry Morgan's air-conditioner and attacked his wisteria (letter, Sept. 6) did so because they had nothing better to eat.


CHRONICLE
Nature is to imitate art, sort of, around 6 P.M. today in Times Square.
Then and there LINDA EVANGELISTA, the fashion-world personage whose fans call her a super-model, will unveil a billboard featuring her own lissome self.


Prized Holdings in Cubist and Tribal Art to Be Sold
One of the season's most sought-after private art collections, the Cubist paintings, tribal art and Art Deco holdings of the interior designer William A. McCarty-Cooper, will be auctioned next year, Christie's in New York announced yesterday.
The McCarty-Cooper collection, which includes works by Braque, Picasso, Juan Gris and Fernand Leger, is expected to bring more than $30 million, said Christopher Burge, president of Christie's in America.
The prize painting in the collection, Braque's "Studio VIII," was described by Jean Leymarie in his catalogue of the 1988 Braque exhibition at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York as "the largest, the most daring and most complex" of the artist's "Studio" series.
Michael Findlay, who heads Christie's New York sales of Impressionist and modern art, said the presale estimate for the 4-by-6-foot painting was $7 million to $10 million.


Publishers Weekly Covers Hails a Book
In a break with its 119-year tradition of not endorsing a book on its cover, Publishers Weekly will devote the entire front page of its Sept. 27 issue to an open letter to President Bush urging him to read Jonathan Kozol's "Savage Inequalities."
"We don't normally take positions, and putting something like this on the cover is unprecedented," said Fred Ciporen, vice president and group publisher at Cahners, a division of Reed Publishing, the publisher of the trade journal, which lists and reviews thousands of new books every year.


Bethel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nature's Ribbons Color An Industrial Wasteland
ALONG the train tracks between Philadelphia and New York, there are a few bucolic stretches of woodlands, fields and pastures, but much of the journey leads through rot, rust and ruin.
Factories that once hummed with activity, manufacturing dyes, carpets, batteries and other necessities and amenities of life for earlier generations, now stand vacant and wounded.
Windows are broken or missing everywhere.
Graffiti, junked cars and rubber tires line the verges of the tracks.
The shining coils of silvery concertina wire send the forbidding message that this is no man's land.


U.S. Olympic Chief Resigns Under Fire
Robert Helmick, the president of the United States Olympic Committee since 1985 and chief architect of its steady growth, resigned yesterday amid questions about possible conflicts of interest.
The 54-year-old attorney from Des Moines has acknowledged to the committee that he was a paid consultant to clients interested in expanding their involvement with the Olympics.


Talking Deals; Nynex Clears Air With Its Unions
WHEN the Nynex Corporation and its unions announced a new labor contract on Monday, nearly a year before the old one was to expire, the move cleared an atmosphere so hostile that some union members once considered getting even with a hated Nynex official by disrupting his daughter's wedding.
The story of how the Bell operating company negotiated the new contract is one of exhausted opponents trying to make peace, despite bureaucratic wrangling, a legacy of mistrust and even an emergency eye operation for a key participant.


Plants For Tomorrow reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cobi Foods reports earnings for Qtr to July 28


18 Months Of Hunting Landmarks
AS it happened, the first day Marion Brenner, an architectural photographer in Berkeley, Calif., began work on a book, she decided to leave San Francisco and go home early.
"That was 4 P.M. on Oct. 17, 1989, the day of the earthquake," she said.
"I was lucky to get across the bridge in time."


Federated Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Public Service Enterprise Group reports earnings for 12mos Aug 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
*Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., said its APAC Construction Group had completed the sale of 20 operating properties in Arizona to a subsidiary of the Onoda Cement Co. of Japan. *
Frederick &amp; Nelson, Seattle, a retail chain, announced a restructuring plan to improve financial stability and to return to profitability.


One-Officer Cars: A Plan Tried Before
One-officer patrol cars were introduced in New York City in 1977 in 43 low-crime precincts under an arbitration award in a contract dispute between the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and the Police Department.
A proviso, however, was that there be enough two-officer cars already operating in each of the precincts, under a different formula for each precinct.
The program also placed limits on the type of calls to which one-officer cars could respond.
Risk-Cost Argument
In 1980, the program was expanded through another arbitration award to include members of the sergeants' and lieutenants' union.
The program, though, all but ended that same year when Officer Cecil Sledge was killed on a solo patrol in the 69th Precinct, in Brooklyn.
Shortly after the shooting, the head of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association at the time, Sam DeMilla, warned that there would be a police walkout if the program was not ended.
Police unions have historically argued against one-officer cars, saying they put a lone officer at risk.
Police departments have favored them in low-crime areas, saying they are cost-efficient.
In the early 1980's, there were discussions about renewing the full one-officer program, possibly with financial rewards for the officers involved.
But the program has not been reinstituted, in part because of the association's continuing concerns about safety and in part because few precincts ever had the necessary number of two-officer cars.
Since then, one-officer cars have been limited to an experimental program that evolved in 1980 out of the remains of the 1977 arbitration award.
The experimental program, which is limited to about 30 officers riding alone with shotguns, restricts officers from responding to most situations where they might be in serious danger without a partner.
Apart from the experimental program, one-officer cars are used only in rare instances, such as in highway patrols or on special assignments.
They are also used in one precinct: Central Park, where officers riding alone also keep shotguns in their cars.
One-officer patrol cars are common in American cities, though.
The New York Police Department is the only one of the country's six largest police forces to allow only two-officer cars to respond to 911 radio calls.


A Year Later, Children's Summit Spawns Progress and Skepticism
A year after President Bush joined 70 other heads of state here at a World Summit for Children, a senior United Nations official says these leaders have made "an encouraging start" on meeting the pledges they made but warns that a high level of public vigilance is needed to insure they stay the course.
James P. Grant, head of the United Nations Children's Fund, known as Unicef, said at a news conference today that commitments given at the Children's Summit last September have already raised immunization levels among poor children, increased support for a new convention defining children's rights and led over 100 countries to give higher priority to children's problems.


Chronic Back Problem Reported for Becker
BORIS BECKER appears to be suffering from a chronic back injury, his manager, ION TIRIAC, said yesterday.
"All the signs are that Boris's back injury is chronic," Tiriac said at a news conference in Essen, Germany.
"Boris can hardly walk without pain, never mind play tennis."


Global Income Plus reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Dow Rises by 4.70 in a Light Trading Day
Stock prices moved slightly higher yesterday with trading light as many participants observed the Jewish day of atonement, Yom Kippur.
News of a slight rise in housing starts failed to affect the market much.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 4.70 points at 3,017.89.


AEL Industries Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 30


Syracuse's Pasqualoni Makes Himself Known
So far, so good for Syracuse.
The Orange is unbeaten after easy victories over Vanderbilt and Maryland in its first season under a new coach named Paul Pasqualoni who is as understated as his predecessor, Dick MacPherson, was flamboyant.
While Mac from Maine, now the head coach of the New England Patriots, had a long agenda, Pasqualoni just wants to coach football, according to Larry Kimball, the Syracuse sports information director.


Accessories for the Small, Off the Wall
ROSLYN VIEMEISTER is feeling pretty cheerful these days.
She's just moved Shoofly, her jaunty emporium of children's shoes, hats and accessories, to a larger location, at 465 Amsterdam Avenue, at 82d Street.


Ex-Nazi Guard at Auschwitz Is Said to Kill Himself in Cell
A former Nazi guard serving a life sentence for killing gypsies at the Auschwitz death camp committed suicide today by hanging himself in his prison cell, officials said.
Ernst-August Konig, 71 years old, was found dead in his cell in a Bochum prison this morning, according to the Justice Ministry in North-Rhine Westphalia state.


Stanford Asking Government To Take Auditor Off Inquiry
Stanford University said today that it was seeking the removal of a Government auditor from his investigation of the college's research grants after learning that he had filed a lawsuit against the university.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Andrew Hill  Sweet Basil 88 Seventh Avenue South (above Bleecker Street) Through Sunday
Andrew Hill's band played a sprawling first set at Sweet Basil on Tuesday night.
Mr.
Hill, who produced some of the best records of the 1960's for the Blue Note label, used to write pieces that tied the soloists to the mood of the composition.
His pieces might have had odd meters, or set drum patterns, or worked with vinegary harmonies; now Mr.
Hill lets his soloists just go at it.
Sometimes this works and sometimes it doesn't, and on Tuesday, Mr.
Hill's wide-open plans were helped by an exceptional young band whose members were ready to impose their will over the pieces.
It was a set in which the members of the band were left on their own to exercise their imaginations.


Phoenix Network Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Plan Lets Addicted Mothers Take Their Newborns Home
Under a new strategy aimed at keeping families together, encouraging drug treatment and saving millions of dollars in foster-care expenses, New York City is allowing thousands of drug-abusing mothers to take their newborns home from the hospital.
As recently as last summer, child welfare officials routinely moved to have babies born with drugs in their systems placed in foster care for their own protection.


DWG Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


'Horrible' Pressures
MIKE MILLER, a wide receiver known for his blazing speed, said he dropped out of Notre Dame because the pressure was "horrible" from the constant comparisons to RAGHIB (ROCKET) ISMAIL.
Miller, who also is a kick-returner, dropped out of Notre Dame on Monday and said he may transfer to a Southwest Conference school.
The 5-foot-7-inch, 165-pound freshman returned 3 kicks for 28 yards against Michigan last Saturday.
Miller said he was not happy at Notre Dame because of the comparisons to Ismail, who left Notre Dame earlier this year and is playing in the Canadian Football League.


Taiwan Opposition Pushes for Independence
Picking up on the fragmenting of the Soviet empire, Taiwan's opposition party is voicing the official heresy that Taiwan should not worry about reuniting with the Chinese mainland, but should forge an independent future.
"If the three Baltic republics can become independent, why can't Taiwan?" a legislator from the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, Hong Chichang, asked.
"Taiwan is economically more powerful than they are, it has more people, and it has a military. If Taiwan is stronger than they are and China is weaker than the Soviet Union, then why can't Taiwan submit a vote to the people to declare independence?"


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MITERING and coping are ways to join moldings to make neat corners.
Mitering is used when forming outside corners like those on the trim surrounding a window frame.
Coping is used when forming inside corners with molding, like those where walls of a room meet.
Both techniques take practice, but can be accomplished by a patient beginner.
To make a miter joint, each of the two pieces must be cut off at an angle that is exactly half that of the corner.
For example, to miter molding to fit a right-angle corner (90 degrees), each piece must be cut at an angle of 45 degrees.
The pieces are then fastened together so the cut faces of the wood touch, forming the joint.


Samuel Manu-Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A roll-call yesterday by The Associated Press of the House vote on a measure to extend unemployment benefits misstated the votes of the two Congressmen from Idaho.
The representatives, Richard Stallings and Larry LaRocco, both Democrats, voted for the measure.


Ban in Hammer Throw
JOHN BILLINGSLEY, a hammer thrower, has been suspended from competition for two years after testing positive for high levels of testosterone during the United States track and field championships, The Athletics Congress announced yesterday.


JORDAN CAUTIOUS ON PEACE SESSION
On the eve of a visit here by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, senior Jordanian officials expressed pessimism that the American effort to assemble a Mideast peace conference next month can yield concrete results resolving the 40-year Arab-Israeli conflict.
With more than 30 percent unemployment, an $8 billion foreign debt and a cutoff of Arab financial aid, Jordan is facing the burden of caring for a new flood of impoverished Palestinian refugees being expelled from Kuwait at the rate of 34,000 a month.
Jordanian officials are angling for rewards in exchange for attendance at the peace talks.


Nendels Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Frank Netter, Surgeon and Master Of Medical Illustration, Dies at 85
Dr.
Frank H. Netter, a physician and medical illustrator whose works became standard reference materials in medical school libraries around the world, died at Mount Sinai Medical Center on Tuesday.
He was 85 years old and lived in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He died of heart failure after a long illness, a cousin, Richard Netter, said.


Kings Road Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Insurers Unload Junk Bonds
Large life insurance companies have been selling billions of dollars of junk bonds to free themselves from an investment they contend weighs more heavily on their images than on their balance sheets.
Ten insurers, each with assets of at least $4 billion, have reduced their exposure to the high-yield, high-risk corporate bonds by an average of 26 percent in the first six months of 1991, says Weiss Research Inc., a West Palm Beach, Fla., concern that rates the financial strength of insurance companies.


Jewelmasters Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Polish Primate Sees U.S. Jews Friday
There may be no empty chairs tomorrow when Jozef Cardinal Glemp of Warsaw, Roman Catholic Primate of Poland, meets with officials of American Jewish organizations in Washington, but there will be some missing faces.
While Catholic-Jewish cooperation has increased lately, especially in Eastern Europe, some leaders of major Jewish organizations are refusing to meet with Cardinal Glemp, the Archbishop of Warsaw, who is beginning a visit to the United States.


Canadian Priests Are Asked To Boycott Speech by Cuomo
A guest appearance by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has refused to oppose abortion rights, at a fund-raiser for a hospital has set off a dispute.
The area's Roman Catholic priests are being discouraged from attending the $125-a-plate dinner on Friday for St.
Joseph's Hospital because of the Governor's stand, Bishop Anthony Tonnos said.
"I would not like the clergy at the fund-raiser lest their presence be misinterpreted as supporting Cuomo," the Bishop said.


Man Held in Slaying Of 2 Women in 1988
A Brooklyn man has been arrested and is being held without bail on murder charges involving the deaths of two women who disappeared three years ago, the Brooklyn District Attorney announced yesterday.
The defendant, Demetrio Lifrieri, 42 years old, was described as a coffee supplier who lives in the Borough Park section.
He was arrested Monday night on a criminal complaint that charged him with choking the two women to death in September 1988.


States Act To Combat Shoplifting
Stores across the nation, under growing financial pressure to stem losses from shoplifting and employee theft, say they are encouraged by the increasing number of states that are acting to give retailers the power to extract payments and fines from thieves they catch in the act.
The New York State Assembly, after two years of strong urging by department stores and other merchants, has voted to have New York join the 31 other states that give retailers the option of handling shoplifting cases much the way cities deal with uncontested tickets for illegal parking.


Heico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Insurers Say Filling Gap Of Allstate Will Be Hard
Insurance companies already coping with the 1.6 million drivers being thrown on the market by the demise of the New Jersey's high-risk pool say they would have difficulty absorbing the drivers now covered by Allstate when it leaves the state.
But the Florio administration insisted that the five years an Allstate pullout would take would allow ample time for an orderly transition.
The head of the state's second-largest insurer of New Jersey drivers, State Farm, said today that the departure of the Allstate Insurance Company, the biggest, would "create havoc."


Cimarron Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Excalibur Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Out of Africa, 'Savage' Furniture
MAXIME DE LA FALAISE, a consultant to Yves Saint Laurent's licensees in America, was inspired to start painting furniture when she wanted pieces "that were savage enough and would not show the paw marks," of her dogs.


Poddubny Could Fill the Devils' Gap
With Scott Stevens a question mark, the Devils are searching for a way to replace the scoring of Brendan Shanahan.
Even if Stevens, who was awarded to New Jersey as compensation for St.
Louis's signing of Shanahan, never plays in a Devils' uniform, Walt Poddubny may be able to pick up the slack.
Poddubny had three remarkably productive seasons before joining the Devils, but he has been plagued by injuries in his two years with the team, playing only 47 games.
He is now 31 years old and is returning from major knee surgery.


MGI Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Property Trust of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Promotion to No. 2 At New Jersey Utility
Lawrence R. Codey yesterday was named president and chief operating oficer of the Public Service Electric and Gas Company, which is the principal subsidiary of the Public Service Enterprise Group and New Jersey's largest utility.
The president's position has been held by E. James Ferland, who remains chairman and chief executive of both the utility and the holding company.
Mr. Codey was also elected a director of the parent company.


Giants' Tight Ends Are Forgotten Men
One reason the Giants are 1-2 is that their opponents have produced big pass plays on offense.
So, where might the Giants look for an offensive jolt?
Finding tight end Howard Cross is an obvious start.


Metcalf &amp; Eddy reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


PC Etcetera reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Slow Day for Treasury Securities
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in light trading yesterday, as bonds came under some selling pressure but shorter-term notes were little changed.
There was little news to spur activity, and market participants said the session was made even more sluggish by the Yom Kippur observance.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF McDougal Wins Met  Ron McDougal, the assistant at the Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y., ran away with the 65th Izod Met P.G.A. title yesterday at the Country Club of Fairfield, Conn., with a seven-shot margin.
The 28-year-old McDougal, in his third year as an assistant to Nelson Long at Century, shot a 54-hole total of 200 from rounds of 65-68-67 and earned the $6,500 first prize in the $45,000 tournament.
Larry Rentz, the assistant at Knollwood Country Club in Elmsford, N.Y., last year's winner of the Met Open, finished second at 207 from rounds of 70-68-69 and earned $4,000.
Mel Baum, the assistant at Bonnie Briar in Larchmont, N.Y., and the winner of the Met PGA the last two years, finished tied with four others at 211.
Whitman Leads in New Jersey: Ed Whitman moved closer to a record-tying fifth New Jersey PGA championship yesterday by shooting a record six-under-par 65 for a two-stroke lead after 36 holes.
If the 38-year-old Whitman can hang on in the 36-hole final today, he will join Babe Lichardus and Emery Thomas as the only five-time winners of the tournament.
Whitman, the head pro at Knickerbocker in Teaneck, finished 36 holes on the par-71 Shore Oaks Golf Club in Farmingdale with a six-under-par 136, leaving him two strokes ahead of Ben Karalis of Packanack Lake, James Weeden of Crystal Springs, Steve Sieg of Navesink and Charles Cowell of Echo Lake.
Karalis, 40, joined Whitman in setting the course record of 65.
The old record on the two-year-old course was 67, set by an amateur, Bob Housen, and equaled by Gary Ostrega of Colonia in this tournament's pro-am Monday.
Weeden had a second-round 67, while Sieg and Cowell both had 68's. (AP) TENNIS  Fernandez Advances  Second-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez of the United States and three other seeded players advanced yesterday to the quarterfinals of the Nichirei international at Tokyo.
Fernandez defeated Patricia Hy of Canada, 6-1, 6-1, while third-seeded Katerina Maleeva of Bulgaria beat Andrea Strnadova of Czechoslovakia, 6-1, 6-2, in other second-round matches.
Fifth-seeded Laura Gildemeister of Peru beat Akiko Kijimuta of Japan, 6-1, 6-2, and seventh-seeded Marianne Werdel of the United States downed Anne Minter of Australia, 7-5, 7-6 (7-3).
"Usually my first match is not so good, but today I played pretty well," said Fernandez, who was upset in the third round of the United States Open earlier this month.
Maya Kidowaki of Japan, overcoming a pulled leg muscle, beat Carrie Cunningham of the United States, 5-7, 7-6 (7-4), 6-1, in a near three-hour struggle on the hard court of Ariake Colosseum. (AP) Martinez Wins in Paris: Top-seeded and defending champion Conchita Martinez of Spain reached the quarterfinals of the Paris Women's Open with a 6-0, 6-3 victory over Sabine Hack of Germany.
Martinez, ranked eighth in the world, will face sixth-seeded Emanuela Zardo of Switzerland, a 6-3, 6-2 winner over Silke Frankl of Germany.
There were two upsets.
Mercedes Paz of Argentina beat third-seeded Radja Zrubakova of Czechoslovakia, 7-6 (7-4), 6-2.
Another unseeded player, Veronika Martinek of Germany, defeated No. 8 Federica Bonsignori, 7-6, (7-4), 6-3.
In the quarterfinals, Martinek will meet Julie Halard of France, a 7-6 (8-6), 6-2 winner over Laura Garrone of Italy. (AP)


RCM Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Market Place; Restaurant Plan Attracts Buyers
WILL good restaurants sell meals at 50 percent discounts, even after the recession ends?
A lot of stock buyers are betting that they will, a fact that has sent shares in Transmedia Network Inc. spiraling upward.
Transmedia's business is financing restaurants at what would seem to be high interest rates.
It gives the restaurant $10,000, a debt that is paid off by providing $20,000 worth of meals to Transmedia customers.
The customers pay Transmedia $15,000, a 25 percent discount from face value.


Cease-Fire Efforts Fail Again in Yugoslavia


Thermo Electron Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


For Vintage Radio Fans
Antique Radio Restoration And Repair  20 Gary School Road, Pomfret Center, Conn. 06259; (203) 928-2628.


Report Assails Housing Agency On Its Programs
The New York City Housing Authority so poorly monitors its programs addressing the day care, recreation, education, health and medical needs of its 600,000 tenants that it often has no idea how well those programs are working, a consultant study says.
The study turned up no evidence of waste or fraud, but its findings raised the issue of whether the authority's system for checking the programs was so disorganized that those problems could easily arise.


New Indians President
The Minnesota athletic director, RICK BAY, was named yesterday to succeed the retiring HANK PETERS as president of the Cleveland Indians.
Bay, 48 years old, will become executive vice president of the club Oct. 1, then become president when the 67-year-old Peters retires Jan. 1.
JOHN HART, 42, director of baseball operations for the Indians, will become general manager and vice president of baseball operations. (AP)


U.S. Says That Obstacles to Soviet Loans Will Be Overcome
Senior American officials studying the crippled Soviet economy said today that the Bush Administration expected to solve the problem of American banks' resistance to $500 million in Government-guaranteed loans needed to sell American grain to the needy Soviet Union.
"We don't think that's going to be a problem," said an official traveling with a special delegation led by Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady and the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan.
"The President made his mind up."


Securities Group Will Join Debate on U.S. Debt Policies
The Public Securities Association, a trade group composed of banks and brokerage firms that trade, underwrite and distribute Government securities, announced yesterday that it would get involved in the debate over how the debt of Federal agencies is distributed.
The initiative comes in response to investigations by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Federal National Mortgage Association into possible securities laws violations by Salomon Brothers Inc. and other firms in their efforts to gain an edge in the markets for the securities of other Federal agencies.


National Health Enhancement Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Arabian Nights Berkeley Style
On a hill above San Francisco Bay perches a small Arabian palace, with copper domes reflecting the sun, spiral columns soaring two stories and pointed arches framing doors and balconies.
But this palace does not belong to royalty.
It is the home of a married couple, Mick Austin and Ruth Tabancay, both physicians, and their daughters, Renata, 8 years old, Caitlin, 5, and Mariel, 3.


Who Shops at Child World? Well, Toys 'R' Us, for One
Diaper raids are rocking toyland, and babes are nowhere in sight.
Child World, it seems, offered a deal on disposable diapers that some at Toys "R" Us could not resist.
And now the two toy rivals are lobbing charges at each other.


Clayton Bid For Petrolane
Clayton &amp; Dubilier Inc., the buyout firm, has proposed to take control of Petrolane Gas Service in a deal that would restructure the debt of the nation's largest propane gas distributor.
Petrolane, which is owned by a partnership of the First Boston Corporation and the Quantum Chemical Corporation, has struggled under nearly $1 billion in debt and mounting financial problems that it says threaten its continued viability.


Parkway Will Test Electronic Toll Plan
Electronic toll-collecting equipment that could replace toll booths and the traffic tie-ups they cause will be tested on the Garden State Parkway this fall, officials said yesterday.
In the test, to be conducted by the agency that operates the parkway, the New Jersey Highway Authority, in late October or early November, 400 cars will be equipped with a small transmitter-receiver on the dashboard and an A.T.&amp; T. microprocessor the size of a credit card.


RELM Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mabus Wins in Mississippi Primary


Diversified Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bridge
Defensive signals are primarily meant to give information to a partner, but in rare situations they can be used to give planned misinformation.
Consider the diagramed deal, which was given as a defensive problem by Albert Dormer of London, in his column in The Times there.
It demonstrates the importance of thinking before playing to the first trick and doing some simple arithmetic.
A routine auction leads to four hearts and West leads the club king.
North-South are using a 16-18 point no trump, and East counts the points.
He is looking at four in his own hand and 10 in the dummy.
South has at least 16 and West is known to have the ace-king of clubs.
That adds up to 37, so the most West can have in the other suits is three.


Text of a Letter From Bush: 'Deception and Concealment'
Following is the text of a letter, dated Sept. 16, from President Bush to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate:
Dear Mr. Speaker: (Dear Mr. President:)
Consistent with the Authorization for the Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution (Public Law 102-1), and as part of my continuing effort to keep the Congress fully informed, I am again reporting on the status of efforts to obtain compliance by Iraq with the resolutions adopted by the U.N.
Security council.


Strange Foes in California Redistricting
Pete Wilson's main purpose in running for governor of California last year was to prevent the Democratic-controlled Legislature from cheating the Republicans when it came to reapportioning the state's huge delegation to Congress.
But the supreme irony now is that the Republican Governor, a moderate, is facing some of his stiffest opposition from Republican conservatives in Congress in redrawing district lines.
Indeed, a kind of de facto alliance has formed between these Republicans and liberal Democrats in Congress, who have crafted three alternative plans that protect incumbents of both parties to the greatest possible extent.


Spartech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Israel Closes Down for Day of Atonement
Israel was wrapped in a peaceful silence today, its skies and highways deserted and its synagogues crowded with Jews observing Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement.
As in past years, an entire country, which for 364 days rides an emotional roller coaster, virtually shut down for 25 hours.


CBS Is Taking a Risk With New Series Set In Brooklyn in the 50's
On a beautiful late summer afternoon, Gary David Goldberg stood on the sidewalk in front of the house he had grown up in on 21st Avenue in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, remembering the days when "you could walk out the door and there would be 800 children to play with."
Those days were in the 1950's when Mr.
Goldberg, now one of the most successful writers in television, the creator and producer of the former NBC hit series "Family Ties," lived in a four-family house, in a tiny four-room apartment, with his parents and his brother, just upstairs from his grandparents.


Science Accessories Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Soybeans Post Strong Rise On Cold Midwest Forecasts
Soybean futures prices rose strongly for the third straight day yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, reflecting increased prospects for overnight frost damage to crops in Iowa and Minnesota.
Most grain futures also advanced as buying interest spilled over from the soybean pit.


Home Video
Troubles With 'Wolves'
Is "Dances With Wolves" too big for its cassette?
A runaway best renter for three weeks, the three-hour film, released by Orion, is encountering mechanical problems in video stores.
"It's just too much for the reel," said Keith Ondrush, the general manager of a Palmer Video store in Manhattan.
"If it's not tightly rewound, the tape spills off. Then it tangles, twists and gets jammed."


PARENT &amp; CHILD
AMERICAN culture values neatness and drive in children.
Parents encourage them to "stick with it" until they have finished a task.
Teachers reward them for turning in neat papers and getting every answer right on a quiz.
Most children gain a sense of mastery from putting together a jigsaw puzzle, painting a picture or writing an essay.
But there are some children for whom orderliness is not enough.
Their rooms are never quite tidy enough to suit them.
They may put off doing their homework until the last minute, then rush through it, claiming they could do better if only they had had more time.
These overly compulsive children usually need some professional help to break the cycle.


Sensor Control Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


3 Top Officers Would Quit In Pan Am Bankruptcy Plan
The three top executives of Pan American World Airways would step down under a plan being presented today to the judge overseeing Pan Am's bankruptcy case, a spokesman for the airline said yesterday.
But he would not comment on a report in The Miami Herald indicating that the job of running the smaller, reorganized Pan Am was likely to go to Randall Malin, USAir's executive vice president of marketing.
The Herald cited sources close to Pan Am and its creditors.


Employee Counseling Puts Company in Divorce Dispute
A program that makes counseling available to employees of the International Business Machines Corporation has landed the company in the middle of a bitter divorce dispute.
Beyond that, the case provides a window on the complications that can arise when companies try to help solve personal problems that affect employees' work.
I.B.M. is being sued by an employee's former husband, who contends that the counseling given to his son amounted to an attempt to "brainwash" the boy against him after his parents' divorce.
I.B.M. has called the allegations "ludicrous and sad."


A Mansion Is Restored And Opens As Exhibit
FOR the last two decades, The Carolands, an outstanding Beaux-Arts house in this city just south of San Francisco, has stood in increasing decay.
Vandals broke the mansion's windows and doors, dirt and plaster piled up in its vast rooms, and birds built nests in the light fixtures.
Now through the efforts of 61 California interior designers and six landscaping companies, the mansion has been restored to a new version of its former grandeur.
The Carolands opened to the public on Sept. 10 as a show house to benefit the Coyote Point Museum in San Mateo, Calif.
It will be on exhibition through Oct. 20.


Syracuse Investigators Rebuffed
The lawyer for Nets forward Derrick Coleman confirmed yesterday that Coleman had refused to cooperate with a Syracuse University investigation into alleged rules violations at the school.
The lawyer, Harold MacDonald, said Coleman had refused to be interviewed by lawyers hired by Syracuse.
MacDonald also said Coleman would not speak with the National Collegiate Athletic Association if he is asked.
Coleman, last season's National Basketball Association rookie of the year, played at Syracuse.


Premature to Accept Homosexuality Theory; To Serve With Dignity
To the Editor:
"Gay Soldiers, Good Soldiers," your thoughtful Sept. 1 editorial on gays in the military, brings into focus the discriminatory policies that deny our country the service of extremely competent and qualified men and women.
Your use of Gallup poll figures in the accompanying graph, however, may understate public opposition to the policies.


Don't Punish City College
New York and the nation have reaped enormous benefit from City College, founded in 1847 as a free college open to "the children of the whole people." Tens of thousands who might otherwise have gone without education have used it to vault from poverty into the middle class and beyond.
Controversies surrounding two City College professors have now begun to undermine support.
New Yorkers, alumni in particular, would do well to come to the college's aid.
Public funding furnishes the basics, but private contributions fill in for the recent budget cuts and help pay for buildings, scholarships and curriculum innovations.


Interstate Bakeries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 24


Capucino's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Essay; The Trial of Casey
On Nov. 10, 1982, the day Leonid Brezhnev died, as all the sages of Congress and media thumbsuckers were speculating on the Kremlin succession, Director of Central Intelligence William J. Casey sent a C.I.A. assessment to President Reagan.
The last sentence of that memo concluded with the Director's personal judgment: "As for me, I bet Andropov on the nose and Gorbachev across the board."


Milestone Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Helmick Should Have Known
ROBERT HELMICK'S judgment as president of the United States Olympic Committee began to look weird on that February day in 1988 when he trotted out the man who was going to lead a review of the American programs.
During a raucous press conference in Calgary, Helmick seemed stunned when about 100 writers from the States began making jokes about whether George Steinbrenner was going to change pitching coaches on the bobsled team the way he did with the Yankees.
Steinbrenner promptly lived up to his reputation by blustering that the United States would have to win more gold medals, that losing was unacceptable.


Bush Rattles Saber: Will Iraq Flinch?
By threatening to send American warplanes back over Iraq, President Bush is hoping to make President Saddam Hussein retreat and permit unfettered United Nations inspections, but if he fails, he will face few major diplomatic or political risks in taking direct military action.
Administration officials and other experts expressed doubt today that a new American initiative would disrupt the Administration's plans for a Mideast peace conference next month.
In any event, these plans have been menaced by other developments, including the dispute over loan guarantees for Israel.


Howell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Maple Leaf Gardens reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Roosevelt Governorship
To the Editor:
In "The Roosevelt Upset" (letter, Sept. 5) D. M. Marshman Jr. writes that Gov.
Franklin D. Roosevelt persuaded the New York Legislature to change the governor's term from two years to four, to allow him to run for President in 1932 without risk to his position in Albany.
The four-year gubernatorial term did not begin until 1939.
When Roosevelt ran for President in 1932, Lieut.
Gov.
Herbert H. Lehman was elected governor to a two-year term by a plurality of almost one million votes over his Republican opponent.
Governor Lehman was elected to two more two-year terms and to a four-year term in 1938.
WALTER R. WERTHEIM  Milwaukee, Sept. 9, 1991


LaFontaine Takes Hard Line
Don Meehan, the agent for Pat LaFontaine, said yesterday that the Islanders' offensive star wouldn't report to camp next week when he is due.
Disenchanted with the Islanders' ownership and with his $400,000 salary, LaFontaine said last season that he wanted a trade unless the team was sold.
Although the owner, John O. Pickett, has the team on the market, no buyer has been announced.
LaFontaine just concluded playing in the recent Canada Cup tournament for the United States team.
Asked if LaFontaine would rejoin the Islanders, Meehan said:


Indictment Names Woman in Fatal Fire
An indictment was unsealed yesterday charging a Brooklyn woman with murder and arson involving a Sept. 12 fire that took the life of a New York City firefighter.
The woman, 23-year-old Elizabeth Couret, who told the authorities that she lived in Cobble Hill, was charged with causing the fire in which the firefighter, Kevin C. Kane, was killed.
The fire occurred in a building in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
Ms.
Couret was previously described as a squatter in the building.


Paragon Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


So Who Is This Tommy Virgets?
Tommy Morrison is not lacking for big-time connections.
The heavyweight is co-managed by John Brown and Bill Cayton.
You remember Cayton.
With his partner, Jimmy Jacobs, Cayton astutely guided Mike Tyson to the heavyweight title in 1986.


Hunt Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1


Manor Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cabot Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sabine Royalty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Rise or Fall of Lonnie Smith and the Atlanta Braves
Otis Nixon has gone sliding out of the Atlanta Braves' picture, banished from the game for violating the commissioner's drug policy.
Now it is fitting, ironic and intriguing that, Lonnie Smith has come sliding in right behind him, an occurrence that has returned one of the game's more fascinating figures right back to center stage right in the middle of a pitched battle in the National League West Division race.


Japan Satellite-Subsidy Plan Dropped After U.S. Pressure
A senior United States trade official said today that Japan had drafted a plan to subsidize the entry of several Japanese companies into the commercial satellite-building industry but then abandoned the idea under American pressure.
Japan's Ministry of Post and Telecommunications drafted a plan for a joint venture by the Government and three Japanese companies to work on space satellites, said the official, who spoke at a press briefing on condition of anonymity.
American trade officials learned of this effort from an article in a Japanese newspaper and complained the same day to the Japanese Embassy in Washington and to Japanese officials in Tokyo, he said.


IPS Health Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ferryboat With Italian Relief Arrives in an Albanian Port
A ferryboat with food and other supplies docked today at the Albanian port of Durres as Italy began a large-scale Albanian relief effort.
Witnesses, speaking from the nation's capital, Tirana, said the ferry carried 200 vehicles filled with basic goods, part of 2,000 tons in aid scheduled for distribution over the next three months throughout the country.


Chicago Dock &amp; Canal Trust reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Cyromedical Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Great Oaks Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Police to Put Lone Officers In Patrol Cars
The New York City Police Department announced yesterday that it would soon begin deploying a limited number of patrol cars occupied by one officer instead of two in 14 precincts under a pilot program that would eventually expand to cover more than half the city.
But the program immediately came up against opposition from the police unions, which have historically argued that putting officers alone in cars places them at risk by stripping them of the protection that a fellow officer provides.


Paychex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Premature to Accept Homosexuality Theory
To the Editor:
"Zone of Brain Linked to Men's Sexual Orientation" (front page, Aug. 20) lends premature credence to Simon LeVay's study, which seeks to demonstrate anatomical differences between the brains of homosexual and heterosexual men.
This study will undoubtedly have an impact in the scientific community, owing to the credentials of its author and the prestige of Science, the journal that published it.
But in this area of research, scientists with impeccable credentials have often been wrong.
Early in the acquired immune deficiency syndrome epidemic, for instance, Norman Geshwind, then head of the department of neurology at Harvard Medical School, conjectured that homosexuals contracted AIDS because of prenatal hormonal conditions that disrupted their immune systems and determined their sexual orientation.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Phone Breakdown
Long-distance service failed in New York because A.T.&amp; T. technicians did not notice for six hours that a generator had stopped working and that a key switching station was therefore running on batteries, the company said.  [ Page A1. ]
The F.A.A.'s reliance on a single telephone circuit in the New York region has been recognized by the agency for years as a glaring weakness in its air traffic control system.  [ D21. ]
MCI began working on TV commercials arguing that A.T.&amp; T. can no longer be trusted with providing the bulk of the country's corporate and Government long-distance service.  [ D21. ] The Economy
Construction of new housing slowed to a sluggish 0.6 percent gain in August, the smallest in three months.  [ D1. ]
Under pressure to stem losses from shoplifting, stores across the nation say they are encouraged by states acting to give retailers the power to extract payments and fines from thieves.  [ D1. ]
The recovery's cold feet have landed in Reading, Pa.
After spotting the early signs of a rebound three months ago, this diverse factory town is watching business tail off again.  [ D1. ]
Demonstration projects have been set up by the Labor Dept. find ways to get the unemployed back into jobs.  [ D1. ]
A manufacturing rebound is leading the economy in an uneven recovery, the Fed said in its "beige book."  [ D7. ]
Whether insurers should pay for bone marrow transplants has become tinder for bitter lawsuits and poignant talk shows.  [ A1. ] Companies
Child World offered a deal on disposable diapers that some at Toys "R" Us could not resist.  [ D1. ]
Salomon is selling large holdings of its securities to help finance its operations, the firm said in a Government filing.  [ D2. ]
Trump named a president of the Trump Shuttle and gave an upbeat appraisal of its finances.  [ D3. ]
Airlines were busily writing tickets for the $198 transcontinental fares.  [ D3. ]  The three top Pan Am executives would step down under a plan being presented to the bankruptcy judge.  [ D3. ]
First Boston has agreed to exchange more than $500 million in debt in Sealy Holdings for equity and notes.  [ D3. ]
New Jersey insurers say they would have difficulty absorbing the drivers now covered by Allstate.  [ B1. ] International
British Telecom plans a new subsidiary that will manage worldwide communications networks for multinationals.  [ D1. ]
Japan drafted a plan to subsidize the entry of Japanese companies into the commercial satellite-building industry but then abandoned the idea under U.S. pressure, a U.S. official said.  [ D5. ] Markets
Stock prices moved slightly higher in light trading, with the Dow rising 4.70, to 3,017.89.  [ D10. ]  Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in light trading.  [ D16. ]
The dollar rose sharply on uncertainties in the Middle East and the Soviet Union.  [ D17. ]  Soybean futures prices rose for the third day, reflecting increased prospects for frost damage.  [ D17. ] Today's Columns
The story of how Nynex negotiated a new labor contract is one of exhausted opponents trying to make peace despite bureaucratic wrangling and a legacy of mistrust.
Talking Deals.  [ D2. ]
Many stock buyers are betting on Transmedia's restaurant discount plan.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D10. ]
Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein has more than tripled in size in a year, thanks to strategic thinking.
Advertising.  [ D19. ]


Schwartz Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Water Is Called Safe To Drink Again
City officials informed 3,000 Staten Islanders that their water was safe to drink again yesterday, three days after it was declared off-limits because of a high bacteria count.
The water alert for Port Ivory was called off after two days of clean water samples, said the Department of Environmental Protection Commissioner, Albert F. Appleton.


Petrol Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pacific Gas Appointment
The Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the large California utility, today named Stanley T. Skinner president and chief operating officer, effective Nov. 1.
The company also made several other executive assignments, naming a new executive vice president, two new senior vice presidents and two new vice presidents.
Mr.
Skinner, 54 years old, has been vice chairman of the board and chief financial officer.
In his new capacity he will be taking on the responsibilities of George A. Maneatis, the president of P.G.&amp; E. since 1986, who is retiring.
The position of vice chairman will be eliminated.
Mr.
Maneatis will continue as a member of the board after his retirement.


Pioneer Fed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Premier Choix TVEC reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Pit Stop Auto Centers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Luria (L.) &amp; Son Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Quotation of the Day
"Our eyes got big when they told us what happened. It was very, very low-tech stuff." -- James Spurlock of the Federal Communications Commission, explaining the A.T.&amp;T. breakdown in New York.  [ D21:1. ]


Public Storage Properties XVI reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A.T.&amp; T. EMPLOYEES MISSED BREAKDOWN
Long-distance telephone service failed in New York City on Tuesday night because A.T.&amp;T. technicians did not notice for six hours that a generator had stopped working and that a key switching station was therefore running on batteries, the company said yesterday.
It was in the end a failure by employees to follow routine procedures, the company said, that set off a cascade of events that blocked more than five million calls into and out of New York and paralyzed the air traffic control systems at the region's airports, which rely exclusively on A.T.&amp; T.'s long-distance service for communication links with other air traffic control centers.


Premature to Accept Homosexuality Theory; Bieber's Findings
To the Editor:
I wish to correct inaccuracies in your obituary article on Dr. Irving Bieber (Aug. 28).
Dr.
Bieber did not view male homosexuality as an illness, but rather as a form of adaptive behavior for the purpose of avoiding the perceived injurious consequences of heterosexuality.
According to him, the fear of heterosexuality stems from inappropriate parental responses toward the developing male child.


Cousins, Both 16, Are Slain On a Busy Street in Harlem
Two 16-year-old cousins were shot to death -- one of them hit seven times in the head at close range -- on a crowded street in Harlem late yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The two youths were at the corner of Madison Avenue and East 132d Street when they were attacked by two gunmen, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about a dance performance at the Kampo Cultural Center in Manhattan reversed the identities of the dancers.
Rodolfo Diaz was at left; Jeff Bliss was at right.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Terence Blanchard  Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at Perry Street) Through Sunday
The trumpeter Terence Blanchard's show at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night was an argument for the use of small group arrangements.
Mr.
Blanchard, who is now leading one of the better groups working in jazz, has turned most of his pieces into tightly controlled compositions, where trios merge into quartets, then into quintets, where stop-time figures break up the flow of tunes and where pieces segue into each other.


Outlook Graphics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Microenergy Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Noise Cancellation reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Monarch Avalon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Concern in Nicaragua Increases Over Civilians Who Carry Arms
The tens of thousands of automatic and semiautomatic weapons still in civilian hands across the Nicaraguan countryside after a decade of civil war are of rising concern because of their potential to set off new fighting between Sandinistas and demobilized contra rebels.
There is also fear that the arms contribute to personal vengeance killings and are a reason for a wave of common crime, which officials say rose 18 percent last month alone.


IRAN IS CAUTIOUS ON SOVIET MUSLIMS
Iran has formulated a cautious policy of support for the independence movements in Muslim-dominated republics of the Soviet Union as it also tries to maintain strong ties with the central Government in Moscow, Iranian officials say.
Despite fears of instability in border regions like Azerbaijan and fears that millions of Soviet Muslims might flood into Iran to escape poverty at home, officials here have decided that with the collapse of Communism it is worth the risk of maintaining strong ties with their northern neighbor and keeping borders open.


Under Fire for Business Ties, Helmick Resigns
Robert Helmick, the president of the United States Olympic Committee since 1985 and chief architect of its steady change from a good-old-boy network to a polished, corporate-style organization, resigned yesterday amid questions about whether he had used his office for personal gain.
A 54-year-old lawyer from Des Moines, Helmick led the U.S.O.C. through a period of sharp growth, during which greater numbers of athletes received more financial support than ever for their Olympic preparations, and revenues nearly tripled to $75 million per year.


Krelitz Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Dantley Goes to Italy
ADRIAN DANTLEY, former N.B.A. star, signed yesterday with Breeze Arese a few days before the start of the Italian League season.
Club officials said that the 35-year-old guard will debut in Sunday's opener against Sidis Reggio Emilia.
The former scoring star for Detroit, Dallas and Milwaukee will team at Arese with another American, DANNY VRANES.
Terms of his contract were not made public, but club sources indicated that Dantley would get $340,000 for one season. (AP)


The U.N. Today
General Assembly DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, GOVERNING COUNCIL, STANDING COMMITTEE FOR PROGRAM MATTERS -- 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


MCI Ads to Question A.T.&amp; T. Reliability
Acting quickly to take advantage of Tuesday's telephone disruption, the MCI Communications Corporation began working on television commercials arguing that A.T.&amp; T. can no longer be trusted with providing the bulk of the country's corporate and Government long-distance service.
MCI plans to put them on the air as early as this weekend.
"A.T.&amp; T. has described its system as self-healing and fully redundant," said Daniel F. Akerson, executive vice president for MCI.
"Clearly it's not. Their reliability is more advertised than delivered."


Home Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Donald Harrison  Tramps
In politics, a resurgence of regionalism and ethnic pride can lead to bloodshed.
In music, however, it can be a revitalizing force.
Donald Harrison, an alto saxophonist from New Orleans, has established himself as one of jazz's young hard-bop adepts, able to navigate all the harmonic and rhythmic turns of jazz's most complex idiom.


Pinnacle Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Facelifters Home Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Cowardly Vote for the Jobless
House Democrats displayed neither courage nor sense on Tuesday when they voted to extend unemployment benefits for the long-term unemployed without raising taxes to pay for the plan.
By raising the deficit, the bill would effectively violate last year's tortuously negotiated budget law, paving the way for further violations as the delayed pain from deficit reduction takes hold.
The plight of the unemployed is serious.
Each month more than 300,000 Americans exhaust the standard 26-week limit for unemployment benefits; these families can face loss of their homes or apartments, if not worse deprivation.
The House bill would extend benefits for up to 20 additional weeks, at a cost of over $6 billion.


Medical Sterilization reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Books of The Times; The New Geography: It's Not an Atlas
The Real World Understanding the Modern World Through the New Geography Edited by Bruce Marshall Illustrated. 264 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $35.
Here is a book that claims to explain the modern world better than history, economics or anthropology can.
It is subtitled "Understanding the Modern World Through the New Geography." What is the "new geography"?
Neither the book's editor, Bruce Marshall, nor its principal writer, Philip Boys, ever defines it in so many words.
But one quickly gets the idea that whatever it is, it's more dynamic than the old geography, which, one supposes, confined one to looking at maps of countries and memorizing capital cities, average rainfalls, principal raw materials, characteristic crops and so forth.


Slanting of Intelligence Becomes Issue for Nominee
The possible shaping of intelligence to fit the foreign policy goals of an administration has emerged as an important issue in the confirmation hearings of Robert M. Gates, raising questions about the integrity of the intelligence process.
Mr.
Gates, nominated to be the Director of Central Intelligence, was accused this week by Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, of bending intelligence assessments while serving in senior positions at the Central Intelligence Agency in the 1980's, either to fit his pessimistic view of the Kremlin or to please his bosses.


The Price of Hope: Medicine's Disputed Frontier - A Special Report; Patients and Insurers Clash On Therapy's Outer Limits
Last fall, two months after the birth of her second child, Marie McCook of Philadelphia discovered she had breast cancer that had spread into her neck.
Her prognosis was poor, but her doctors told her she was a suitable candidate for a dangerous, unproved and costly therapy under study, a bone-marrow transplant that would allow them to bombard her body with huge, otherwise lethal doses of anticancer drugs.
She grasped the slender reed.
"I feel it has given me an opportunity at a possible cure," Mrs.
McCook, 35 years old, said of the $100,000 procedure.
It was performed this spring at the University of Pennsylvania Cancer Center, and while her cancer has melted away, she will not know if she is cured for years.
The bills were paid by her health insurance company, which is supporting the study.
Denial and Near Death
Evelyn Harper, 47, with two children, learned last fall that her breast cancer had invaded her eyes and liver.
A resident of the Virgin Islands, she sought treatment in Los Angeles, where doctors said she too should consider a marrow transplant.
But her insurer, like many around the country, said it would not cover an experimental therapy.
In February she appealed, sending reams of data provided by her doctors arguing that the procedure might give her a 20 percent chance of surviving cancer-free for years.
At the end of May the appeal was denied.
By then the cancer had spread too widely to consider a transplant and now, with no hope of effective treatment, she is near death.
"That might not have sounded like a big chance of success, but it's a lot better than nothing," said her husband, Dennis Harper.
"It seems like the insurance company holds you off as long as possible, waiting until it's too late for a transplant. That's not right."
Whether insurers should pay for marrow transplants has already become tinder for bitter lawsuits, poignant talk shows and an emerging political movement of breast cancer patients.
The debate exemplifies the wrenching issues that may increasingly bedevil American medicine in an era of fast-changing, enormously expensive treatments and rising concern about costs.
Benefits vs.
Costs
Health experts and government leaders, as well as insurers, hope to tame runaway medical expenses through more stringent assessment of new treatments and by weighing their benefits and costs.
The concepts sound sensible and uncontroversial -- until they are applied to real people, especially with life-threatening diseases like breast cancer, and to promising treatments being urgently refined, like marrow transplants.
Grueling ordeals that put patients through at least three harrowing weeks of hospitalization, transplants have already proved useful against certain cancers of the blood, and insurers generally pay in those cases.
Doctors are now trying the therapy in patients with several other kinds of cancer, including ovarian, testicular and especially breast cancer.
Some patients have shown encouraging responses, but many have not.
The mortality rate from the procedure itself, while improving, is still 5 percent or more.
All the researchers agree on the need for more research, but they put different shades on the same skimpy facts.
"For the right patient, I think it should be considered a therapeutic option," said Dr.
William P. Peters, director of the Duke University Medical Center's marrow transplant program, a leader in research on transplants for breast cancer and a critic of insurance companies that refuse to pay when the procedures are performed at experienced centers.
Other experts are skeptical.
"We have raised the public's expectations far beyond what is supported by the published data," Dr.
I.
Craig Henderson, director of the breast evaluation center of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, wrote in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute this summer.
"We have no evidence as of yet that any patient will be cured by this therapy who would not have been cured by more conventional treatment."
Hundreds of women with breast cancer this year will endure the transplants and accompanying blasts of drugs.
Researchers believe at least 10,000 women a year, of the more than 40,000 who die from breast cancer annually, may be good candidates if the procedure is shown to help more than it hurts.
Clinical Trials Under Way
Most women whose cancer is caught in early stages are cured with conventional treatments, including removal of the cancerous lump or the entire breast, along with drug therapy and radiation.
For them, there is no reason to take on the risk and travails of a marrow transplant.
Many more women are ruled out as transplant candidates by age and condition.
Because it is so demanding on the body, the procedure is seldom tried on women older than about 55, or on those with other medical problems.
Firm answers about effectiveness are several years away: controlled clinical trials, comparing patients receiving transplants with similar women receiving conventional chemotherapy, have just begun.
The procedure is becoming safer and less expensive, but even at best, research suggests, it will never offer a miraculous cure for patients with advanced breast cancer; it will, however, raise their odds of survival.
For advanced breast cancer, it appears that transplants will, at best, keep 10 to 20 percent of the women cancer-free, said Dr.
Edward A. Stadtmauer of the University of Pennsylvania Cancer Center, who is treating Mrs.
McCook in a study comparing transplants with traditional drug therapy.
And that success rate may fall, he said, as more patients are followed for more years.
"That still would be wonderful," he said.
"But we also have to look at quality of life, toxicity and costs. I have to say I still don't know which group in the study is going to do better. There is truly no right answer in 1991."
With known therapies offering little, some patients see the unknown in a different light.
"There's a whole list of things that could go wrong, and yes, it scared me," Mrs.
McCook said.
"But I also have two small children, and the chance of not being here in 10 years also scares me." The Controversy State of the Art Or Experimental?
Insurance companies have long said they do not cover unproved therapies, but they have often paid for innovative, unapproved uses of cancer drugs.
In decades past, too, they started paying with little question for costly new procedures, like coronary bypass operations, that were widely adopted with little evaluation.
But today, expensive new procedures receive much closer scrutiny.
The official position of the insurance industry on transplants is clear enough.
"We are not saying this is too expensive and it shouldn't be covered," said Naomi Aronson, director of technology assessment with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association in Chicago.
"We are saying that procedures need to be evaluated so that precious health care resources can be used for things that are effective." If studies provethat transplants improve survival, Dr.
Aronson said, the companies will pay.
Many Insurers Are Paying
To speed the search for answers and perhaps fend off lawsuits, many Blue Cross affiliates and, in the Philadelphia area, U.S.
Healthcare, a large health maintenance organization, have agreed to contribute to the costs of patients' receiving transplants in certain clinical trials.
In practice, after hearing pleas or threats from doctors or lawyers, many insurers are paying transplant bills for some breast cancer patients, but many, too, are denying coverage.
Recently, some insurers have begun writing policies that specifically exclude coverage of marrow transplants for breast cancer.
Cancer researchers, as well as desperate patients, are angry.
"It's unfortunate, because basically they are holding transplants for breast cancer up to a different standard than other costly procedures," said Dr.
Karen H. Antman, director of the transplant program at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute.
Insurance officials deny they have a double standard.
"It will be impossible to do studies unless patients have coverage," Dr. Antman added.
Ellen Hobbs, a 36-year-old breast cancer patient in Sacramento, Calif., said: "What's the difference between experimental and state of the art? The doctors told me that traditional chemotherapy would be ineffective."
"This country spends a lot of money fixing up people with no hope," said Mrs.
Hobbs, who had a transplant in June and became politically active after fighting for months, with the help of a lawyer, before persuading her insurer to pay.
Now receiving radiation therapy in followup treatment, she is doing well so far, but, like Mrs.
McCook, cannot know her long-term prospects since cancer cells can lurk in the body for years before resurging.
The Transplant Bombarding Body With Cancer Killers
For such a trying ordeal, the transplants involve a series of undramatic steps.
Doctors have long suspected that in some patients they could kill cancer in the body by dousing it with enough toxic drugs.
The problem was that this would kill the patient, too, by destroying the marrow cells that generate vital red and white cells and platelets in the blood.
In autologous marrow transplants, as these are called, some of the patient's own marrow cells are extracted from bone or blood and frozen; outside donors are not needed.
The patient is then subjected to several days of intensive chemotherapy, 10 times the normal dose.
Her marrow cells are reinjected, and the real drama begins.
For weeks, until the reinjected marrow begins producing new blood cells, assuming it does, the patient lives without much of an immune system, susceptible to vicious fungal, bacterial and viral infections.
"It is horrible," Mrs.
McCook said.
"Everything just hits rock bottom. I had temperatures of 105, vomiting, bowel problems and I needed morphine. You lose your hair and your appetite, you lose your taste buds. You get depressed."  Vulnerable Period Shortened
Until recently all patients spent more than a month in the hospital and transplant-related mortality at some leading centers was over 20 percent, most often from infections.
But the recent availability of growth factors, manufactured versions of natural body chemicals that stimulate the marrow cells, has shortened the period of critical vulnerability, reduced hospital stays to as little as three weeks and pulled down death rates to 5 percent to 15 percent at various centers.
The growth factors have also pulled down the cost, which is attributable more than anything else to the length of the hospital stay.
Dr.
Antman said cost for some patients at some centers was down to $70,000 or less.
Dr.
Peters believes that over the next several years the price could fall to $25,000 or less.
The Results Encouraging Signs But Doubts Persist
Right now, transplants are considered worth risking for the several thousand women each year whose cancer has spread to 10 or more lymph nodes, meaning that they a high chance of relapse after normal therapy.
It is also considered worth the risk for the smaller number of women with large tumors that cannot be surgically removed or with inflammatory tumors and for the tens of thousands of women whose cancer has already spread to other parts of the body, who are rarely cured.
Among those groups, only some can even potentially benefit.
Before a transplant is considered, a woman is given a course of conventional chemotherapy.
Only those whose tumors shrink in response to lower doses, studies have found, may potentially be helped with the all-out attack of high doses and a marrow transplant.
Will Remissions Last?
In a positive sign, studies indicate that women receiving transplants are far more likely than others to show a good short-term response -- disappearance of detectable cancer.
The open question is whether these remissions will last.
Dr.
Peters and other researchers point to encouraging recent results from studies involving limited numbers of patients.
In one recent study at Duke, among 59 women whose cancer had spread to 10 or more lymnph nodes but not more widely, three-fourths were cancer-free after four years, he said.
With conventional therapy, he said, he would only expect about one-fifth of such patients to be cancer-free.
Among a group of 45 transplant patients whose cancer had already spread to distant sites beyond the lymph nodes, he said, 20 percent are cancer-free after an average of four years.
With conventional therapy, almost none with such advanced disease would be cancer-free at that point, he said.
Of another group of 22 women with advanced cancer who were early pioneers with the therapy, three remain cancer free after five to eight years.
But others say figures like these, while intriguing, may easily mislead.
"The question is, what would have happened to those same patients if they had gotten conventional chemotherapy," said Dr.
David M. Eddy, a health economist at Duke University who is a consultant to insurance companies.
"I can show you individual patients who received conventional therapy who also survived 5 or 10 years."
Among other problems with existing comparisons, the patient groups may have differed in important ways.
"The transplant patients are very healthy, good candidates for treatment," noted Dr.
Bruce D. Cheson of the National Cancer Institute.
Dr.
John H. Glick, director of the University of Pennsylvania Cancer Center, says four or five years is not long enough to say a patient is cured of breast cancer.
"Some of the advocates are speaking too soon," he said.
The Outlook Weighing Lives Against Costs
Within three or four years the clinical trials should yield convincing evidence about the comparative effectiveness of transplants, although it will take longer to know whether cures are achieved.
If a statistically significant survival benefit is shown, even for a few years, then the insurance dispute may fade away.
But, depending on how dramatic the trial results are, divisive questions of cost versus benefit may persist.
"If there is a big difference in survival, then it will be persuasive," said Dr.
Cheson of the National Cancer Institute.
"But if there is only a small advantage for transplants, it's still going to be an individual decision the physician will have to make with the patient."
Even the insurance industry has shied away from the more explosive, but ultimately unavoidable issue for American medicine: How good does a treatment have to be to make it worth the price?
Benefits to Bring Pay
In the case of marrow transplants, insurance companies have said that if studies yield proof of benefit, they will cover the procedure whatever it costs.
But some experts wonder whether this approach will remain feasible, or even wise.
"I think they should take the cost into account, and weigh it against the benefits," said Dr.
Eddy, the health economist.
"I think in five years they will do that, but they don't now."
"Somewhere, some time, someone will have to judge what additional benefit is worth what additional cost," Dr.
Eddy said.
He acknowledged that this would be treacherous new terrain for government, insurers, doctors and patients who, like Mrs.
McCook, put a value on hope itself.
"Society has had very little experience doing this," Dr. Eddy said.


'Cheers' Premiere Challenges 'Beverly Hills 90210'
Tonight at 9 the most successful television show of the summer confronts the most successful television show of the decade.
"Beverly Hills 90210," the Fox Broadcasting series that emerged from cult status during the regular television season into growing popularity and multiple magazine covers this summer, will find out tonight if the summer romance can turn into the real thing.


CHRONICLE
BERNARD LESER, the president of Conde Nast Publications, announced yesterday that JULIE LEWIT-NIRENBERG, publisher of Mirabella magazine since 1988, has been named publisher of Mademoiselle magazine.
Ms.
Lewit-Nirenberg, 46 years old, succeeds RICHARD KINSLER, 49, who was made a corporate sales development director of Conde Nast.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, some copies yesterday omitted page C14 and carried page A14 twice.
Readers wishing copies of the missing page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Transformative Reinterpretation or Total Rip-off?


School Board Continues Fighting Over Condom Distribution Plan
The bitter fight over condoms in the New York City schools may not be over.
A week after the Board of Education voted 4-3 to let high school students receive condoms without any say from their parents, one board member, Irene Impellizzeri, has filed a request with the State Education Commissioner for a hearing on the legality of the plan.
And Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez in response has said that neither he nor his staff would talk about any aspect of the plan with Dr.
Impellizzeri without consulting with the board's lawyers first.


Shuttle Head Is Appointed By Trump
Donald J. Trump appointed Terry Hallcom as president of the Trump Shuttle yesterday.
Mr.
Hallcom has been director of flight operations and before that was a pilot for Eastern Airlines for 22 years.
He replaces Richard F. Cozzi, who will leave Oct. 1 to become a vice president at the DHL Corporation, an air cargo company.


Lamont Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Where the Recovery Fails to Tread
The recovery's cold feet have landed here.
After spotting the early signs of a rebound three months ago, this diverse factory town that makes everything from bricks to shoe polish to Godiva chocolates is watching business tail off again.
"We thought that June was going to be the end of it, that things were turning around," said Glenn Unger, manager of a Berks Products Corporation building materials store in suburban Temple.
But after a fairly active July that matched last year's level, sales in August sagged 8 percent below those of August 1990 and, combined with a "flat" early September, have brought disillusionment about imminent recovery.


A.T.&amp;T. to Sell Mobile Telephones
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it would begin selling mobile telephones next month, returning to a business it quit four years ago.
A.T.&amp;.
T. said it would offer a full line of cellular products: a portable phone, a car phone and a transmobile phone, which can be moved from vehicle to vehicle.


Louis Roddis Jr., 73; Designed Submarines
Louis H. Roddis Jr., an engineer who helped design the first nuclear submarine and who was president and vice chairman of the Consolidated Edison Company from 1969 to 1974, died on Sunday in Charleston, S.C.
He was 73 years old.
He died of bone marrow cancer, his wife, Alice Stets Roddis, said.


Colorocs Names Officer To Replace President
The Colorocs Corporation, a financially troubled designer and marketer of full-color printers and copiers, has named Donald R. Shifflett president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Shifflett was vice president of operations.
The company, which two weeks ago filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, has been in turmoil since August, when James Watts Jr. resigned as president and chief executive.
Company officials said Mr.
Watts left because the board had decided Colorocs was in serious need of resuscitation and hired Chamberlain &amp; Cansler, an Atlanta-based management consulting firm specializing in corporate turnarounds.
Under that move, Frank Chamberlain, a principal of the firm, was named interim chief executive of Colorocs, which is based in Norcross, Ga.


A Picture, a Sculpture and a Lawsuit
Three years ago, the artist Jeff Koons, who had decided to create a sculpture called "String of Puppies," sent a greeting card that he had bought in an airport gift shop to his workers in Italy, telling them that the sculpture "must be just like photo" on the card.
The photograph, which featured a couple holding eight German shepherd puppies, became the model for four Koons sculptures, three of which sold for a total of $367,000 after being shown at the Sonnabend Gallery in SoHo.


MDS Health Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


American Nursery Products reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Ceramic Vessels, Painted
Although Rudy Autio is one of the elder statesmen of modern American ceramics, he continues to try new ideas.
Sixteen of Mr.
Autio's recent works can be seen at the Helen Drutt Gallery New York, 724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street), through Oct. 26.
In the early 1970's, after two decades of decorating his pots with abstract patterns, Mr.
Autio decided to paint figures on the surfaces of his vessels.
His renderings of male and female nudes, horses and other creatures became more distinct over the years, while the shapes of his pots turned increasingly abstract.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 19


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Appliance Store, Pittsburgh, a retail chain, named Louis Bernucca president and chief executive. *
Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C., London, a confectionery and beverage company, appointed Richard Stradwick group human resources director.


Fourth Yugoslav Cease-Fire Shot Down
Fighting was reported in cities of central and eastern Croatia and in ports along the Adriatic coast today as Yugoslavia's warring factions ignored another cease-fire brokered by the European Community.
Zagreb, the capital of the secessionist Croatian republic, was mostly quiet after a night of terrifying ground clashes and attacks by the federal air force.
Scattered sniper fire could be heard near the central train station and air-raid sirens wailed several times in the city, but the Yugoslav Air Force later said that they were false alarms.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
5.50
11.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.18
5.19
7.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.23
5.23
7.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.39
7.39
8.74
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.91
7.91
9.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.98
8.98
10.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.93
6.93
7.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


INSIDE
In Rare Step, Council Overrides Dinkins on Prices
Asserting its new power, the New York City Council unanimously overturned Mayor Dinkins's veto of a bill requiring price stickers on supermarket items.
It was only the fourth time in 20 years that a mayoral veto had been overturned.
Page B1.
Pink Slips in Hartford
Layoff notices went out to about 2,500 state workers in Connecticut, the first wave in what could become 8,000 dismissals as Governor Weicker presses for concessions by unions.
Page B1.
Time Inc.
Plans 105 Layoffs
Time Inc. said it would lay off 105 editorial employees at six of its magazines.
With advertising slumping, Time has already laid off 500 business workers.
Page D1.
Trade Deficit Widens
The nation's foreign-trade deficit widened sharply to $5.9 billion in July as soaring imports overwhelmed a modest rise in exports.
Page D1.
An AIDS Threat Discounted
Mandatory AIDS testing of health workers would be costly and useless because the risks are so small, medical experts told Congress.
Page A22.


Hearing on Court Seat Turns Spirited
The Senate Judiciary Committee today heard the most intense and spirited testimony yet as to whether Judge Clarence Thomas would set back the cause of civil rights and eliminate the constitutional right to abortion if he is confirmed to the Supreme Court.
Five black members of the House of Representatives testified in sometimes angry terms that Judge Thomas would be an unworthy successor to Thurgood Marshall, the only black ever to serve on the Court.


New Setbacks for Nuclear Arms Complex
The Department of Energy's drive to control its broken-down bomb production factories and to get a handle on its monumental waste problems both suffered setbacks yesterday.
The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, said in a report that the department and its contractor, Westinghouse, knew for months about a huge leak in a waste tank in Washington State but kept it secret, apparently in violation of Federal law.


Army Moving on Croatia
As European diplomatic efforts to resolve Yugoslavia's crisis faltered tonight, a 12-mile-long column of Yugoslav Army tanks, artillery and troops was reported moving north from Belgrade toward this secessionist Croatian capital, suggesting that a cease-fire that never held had given way to preparations for escalated confrontation.
Zagreb itself was mostly calm after air strikes two nights ago by the Serbian-dominated federal air force that brought the bitter ethnic war between Serbs and Croats to the breakaway capital in earnest for the first time.


Cattle Prices in a Big Jump; Soybeans Plunge Sharply
Live cattle futures prices surged to a two-month high yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange after the Government reported a smaller number of cattle being fattened for slaughter than traders had expected.
Other livestock and meat futures also rose sharply.


People
*
Dobbi Massey, associate creative director at Klemtner Advertising, New York, has been promoted to senior vice president.


Many Rape Victims Finding Justice Through Civil Courts
Just after she was raped, while she was still in the emergency room reeling both from the assault and her feelings of rage and terror, Juli Bliskey decided that filing criminal charges against the rapist would not be enough.
So Ms.
Bliskey, while pursuing her assailant in criminal courts, also filed a civil lawsuit against the Berry Property Management Inc., the company that managed her town house, which had refused to allow her to install a lock that could be opened from only the inside.


James Stewart, 78, Ex-Executive At Insurance Brokerage Company
James Stewart, a former chairman and chief executive officer of Frank B. Hall &amp; Company, an international insurance brokerage company, died Sept. 15 at New York Hospital.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a heart attack, his family said.


2 Brothers Tied to Subway Thefts Are Held in Murder
Two brothers suspected in 11 armed robberies on the D train in Brooklyn in the last month were charged late Wednesday with killing a young man after he used a street-corner pay phone against their wishes, police officials said yesterday.
In an odd coincidence, the arrests of the brothers, Thurston Pilgrim, 16 years old, and Prince Pilgrim, 17, came several hours apart by two different law-enforcement agencies.


Quotation of the Day
"All sides seem to be guilty of cease-fire violations. If there is no political will for peace in Yugoslavia, there is no substitute through outside action." -- Foreign Minister Hans van den Broek of the Netherlands.  [ A6:4. ]


Colleen Dewhurst Memorial
A memorial service for the actress Colleen Dewhurst is to be held on Monday at 12:30 P.M. at the Martin Beck Theater, 45th Street and Eighth Avenue.
Among those scheduled to take part are Mayor David N. Dinkins, Edward Albee, Jason Robards, Zoe Caldwell, Maureen Stapleton and Jose Quintero.
The public is invited to attend.
Miss Dewhurst died of cancer on Aug. 22 at the age of 67.


A Cartoonist in Song And Intricate Lyrics
The sophisticated urban psyche has rarely been delineated in songs that have the wry accuracy of Dave Frishberg's pop-jazz line drawings.
Take "My Attorney Bernie," his caricature of a hotshot lawyer flaunting his status at a fancy restaurant.
"When I dine with my attorney Bernie, he buys wine from the rare imported rack," goes the second verse, which continues: "That's 'cause Bernie is a purist, not your polyester tourist. Bernie waves the glass around a while, then takes a sip, and always sends it back."
"My Attorney Bernie," which was written in the early 1980's, is typical of the work of the jazz pianist turned songwriter and entertainer, who is appearing at the Ballroom through Sunday.
Like many of his songs, he said recently, it was written as an assignment he gave himself.


A Fuel-Efficient Grab for Power
About 18 years ago, the Honda Motor Company got a lot of attention when it displayed its Civic, which had an unusual, fuel-efficient engine that satisfied pollution concerns.
In two weeks, Honda will introduce a Civic model whose engine could have a big impact on a current debate: whether fuel-efficient cars need come only in small packages.


Art in Review
Gandy Brodie Edward Thorp Gallery 103 Prince Street SoHo Through Oct. 12
Gandy Brodie, who died in 1975 at the age of 50, has a well-deserved reputation as a painter's painter.
In the small canvases shown here paint is piled up in thick accretions, as in the work of Hans Hofmann, Brodie's teacher, or of Milton Resnick.
Like a number of other artists, Brodie appears to have equated thick paint with deep emotion.
But he combined his heavily worked surfaces with a delicate sense of color, with pale yellows, pinks and aquas emerging from silvery gray or dark backgrounds.


Review/Film; 1990's Through a 60's Lens
Of all the questions to ask about a loved one, surely this is the least pressing: how would you get along if you were suddenly separated by an extra 29-year age gap?
Yet this matter is central to "Late for Dinner," a time-travel story that suffers from temporal problems of its own.
Arriving in the shadow of the "Back to the Future" series, this light romantic comedy adds little to what is already known about how disorienting it can be to wake up in the wrong decade.
Even the obligatory Ronald Reagan double-take ("Someone shot the guy from 'Cattle Queen of Montana'?") sounds less than new.
This odd film was directed by W. D. Richter, whose even odder 1984 "The Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai" had a much more confident brand of eccentricity.
Here, the burden of being heartwarming as well as funny becomes a constraint.
And the humor itself is apt to show up in odd places, as in the running kidney-failure references that are actually quite important to the plot.
One of the story's two heroes, the cheerfully dim-witted Frank (Peter Berg), is stuck in 1962 with the kind of kidney problems that only a 1991 kidney transplant can cure.


Sounds Around Town
Creole Cha Chas
Nathan and the Zydeco Cha Chas, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
One of the best young bands to come out of Louisiana, Nathan and the Zydeco Cha Chas are there for the audience's dancing pleasure.
Part of an explosion in regional activity in Louisiana music, the band represents Creole culture at its Saturday-night best.
Mixing blues, French folk music and rock-and-roll, the group kicks up a fuss.
Shows tomorrow are at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.
The cover is $12.50.
Night of 2 Guitars
Danny Gatton and Lonnie Pitchford, Lone Star Roadhouse, 240 West 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 245-2950.
Danny Gatton and Lonnie Pitchford play entirely separate guitar styles, related but distinct.
Mr.
Gatton plays a style of his own making that imagines a 1950's hybrid of country, jazz and blues, overdriven and raw and backed by a band.
He is as showy as a '59 Cadillac, and twice as smooth.
Mr.
Pitchford, who can play the one-string diddley bow from Mississippi, is perhaps the best interpreter of Robert Johnson working.
He captures both Johnson's drive and his delicacy.
The show tomorrow starts at 9 P.M.; there is a $17.50 admission charge.


Art in Review
'Paris in the 1930's: Surrealism and the Book'  Zabriskie Gallery  724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street)  Through Oct. 26
With more than 100 books, pamphlets, drawings, photographs and other objects, this show is on the scale, and is certainly of the quality, of a museum exhibition.
It concentrates on the Surrealist publications of the 1930's, when the movement was at full throttle in Paris and when a number of artists sought to collaborate in the mixing of text and image.
Andre Breton collaborated with Giacometti, Paul Eluard with Salvador Dali, Michel Leiris with Andre Masson, Tristan Tzara with Joan Miro.
What the Surrealists produced were magazines and broadsides, but also books of extreme fineness.


No Headline
Palestinians suddenly softened their stand today after indicating Thursday that they could not yet agree to accept Washington's invitation to a proposed peace conference because the Bush Administration was unwilling to meet some of their minimum political demands.
In a surprise reversal early today, West Bank Palestinian leaders suddenly decided to resume talks with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d about their terms for the conference and sent one of their senior negotiators, Hanan Ashrawi, to Amman for talks with Mr.
Baker.


Program and Availability
The 29th New York Film Festival opens tonight with two screenings of "The Double Life of Veronique" and closes Oct. 6.
All films are at Alice Tully Hall except the late show on opening night and the closing-night show, which are at Avery Fisher Hall.
Many screenings are sold out, but tickets to those showings may be available because of returns.
Remaining tickets are $7 or $10 and may be purchased at the Alice Tully Hall box office, (212) 875-5050; tickets for opening and closing nights are $15 and $20.
Some films are scheduled to open commercially in New York City; those dates are noted.
Here is a schedule of the festival.
Tonight
"THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE" (Poland-France, 1991), directed by Krzysztof Kieslowski. 7:45 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall (sold out) and 9 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall (partial-view seats available).
Both shows sold out.
Opens commercially on Nov. 22.
Tomorrow
"ADAM'S RIB" (Soviet Union, 1990), directed by Vyacheslav Krichtofovich. 12:30 P.M.
Also Sunday, 7 P.M.
Both shows sold out.
"ROCCO AND HIS BROTHERS" (Italy, 1960), directed by Luchino Visconti. 3 P.M. Sold out.
"AMELIA LOPES O'NEILL" (Chile-France-Spain, 1990), directed by Valeria Sarmiento.
Preceded by "Cairo as Told by Youssef Chahine" (Egypt-France, 1991). 6:30 P.M.
Sold out.
Also Sunday, 9:30 P.M.
"TOTO THE HERO" (Belgium-France, 1991), directed by Jaco van Dormael. 9:30 P.M.
Also Sunday, 1:30 P.M.
Both shows sold out.
Sunday
"NO LIFE KING" (Japan, 1989), directed by Jun Ichikawa. 4 P.M. Also Monday, 9:15 P.M.
Monday
"THE SUSPENDED STEP OF THE STORK" (Greece-France, 1991), directed by Theo Angelopoulos. 6:15 P.M.
Sold out.
Also Tuesday, 9:15 P.M.
Tuesday
"INVENTORY" (Germany-Poland, 1989), directed by Krzysztof Zanussi. 6:15 P.M.
Also Thursday, 9:15 P.M.
Wednesday
"THE OTHER EYE" (Austria, 1991), directed by Johanna Heer and Werner Schmiedel. 6:15 P.M.
Sold out.
"JACQUOT DE NANTES" (France, 1991), directed by Agnes Varda. 9:30 P.M. Sold out.
Thursday
"THE ADJUSTER" (Canada, 1991), directed by Atom Egoyan. 6:15 P.M.
Also Sept. 28, 9 P.M.
Both shows sold out.
Opens in February.
Next Friday
"WOMAN OF THE PORT" (Mexico-United States, 1991), directed by Arturo Ripstein. 6:15 P.M.
Sold out.
Also Sept. 28, 2:45 P.M.
"MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO" (United States, 1991), directed by Gus Van Sant Jr. 9:15 P.M.
Also Sept. 28, midnight.
Both shows sold out.
Opens Sept. 29.
Sept. 28
"A ROOM IN TOWN" (France, 1982), directed by Jacques Demy. 12:30 P.M. Sold out.
"PROSPERO'S BOOKS," (Netherlands-Britain, 1991), directed by Peter Greenaway. 5:45 P.M.
Also Sept. 29, 1:30 P.M.
Both shows sold out.
Opens Nov. 8.
Sept. 29
"LOCKED-UP TIME" (Germany, 1991), directed by Sibylle Schonemann. 4:30 P.M. Sold out.
"BEAUTY AND THE BEAST" (United States, 1991), directed by Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise. 7:15 P.M.
Sold out.
Also Oct. 2, 11:15 P.M.
Opens Nov. 22.
"LIFE ON A STRING" (China-Britain-Germany, 1991), directed by Chen Kaige. 9:30 P.M.
Also Sept. 30, 6:15 P.M.
Sept. 30
"THE RAPTURE" (United States, 1991), directed by Michael Tolkin. 9:15 P.M.
Also Oct. 1, 6:15 P.M.
Both shows sold out.
Opens Oct. 4.
Oct. 1
AVANT-GARDE VISIONS, with "FLAMING CREATURES" (United States, 1962), directed by Jack Smith; "THE MAKING OF 'MONSTERS' " (Canada, 1991), directed by John Greyson, and "OPENING THE 19TH CENTURY: 1896" (United States, 1990), directed by Ken Jacobs. 9:15 P.M.
Oct. 2
"LA BELLE NOISEUSE" (Switerland-France, 1990), directed by Jacques Rivette. 6 P.M.
Also Oct. 3, 8:45 P.M.
Both shows sold out.
Opens Oct. 4.
Oct. 3
"INTIMATE STRANGER" (United States, 1991), directed by Alan Berliner; "THE BODY BEAUTIFUL" (Britain, 1991), directed by Ngozi Onwurah. 6:15 P.M.
Sold out.
Oct. 4
"ZOMBIE AND THE GHOST TRAIN" (Finland, 1991), directed by Mika Kaurismaki; "TENDER, SLENDER AND TALL" (United States, 1991), directed by Lesley Ellen. 6:15 P.M.
Also Oct. 5, 9 P.M.
"NIGHT ON EARTH" (United States, 1991), directed by Jim Jarmusch. 9:15 P.M.
Also Oct. 5, 12:30 P.M.
Both shows sold out.
Oct. 5
"EARTH ENTRANCED" (Brazil, 1967), directed by Glauber Rocha. 3:30 P.M. Sold out.
"PICTURES FROM A REVOLUTION" (United States, 1991), directed by Susan Meiselas, Richard P. Rogers and Alfred Guzzetti. 6:15 P.M.
Sold out.
"DELICATESSEN" (France, 1991), directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro.
Midnight.
Opens in late January.
Oct. 6
"HOMICIDE" (United States, 1991), directed by David Mamet. 8:30 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
Sold out.
Opens Oct. 9.


Ford Light Trucks Will Get Air Bags
The Ford Motor Company will install driver-side air bags on all its light-duty trucks by 1994, its chairman, Harold A. Poling, said at a news conference.
Ford will put more than a million "air-bag-equipped light trucks on the road by the end of 1995," Mr.
Poling said.
It will begin installing passenger-side air bags in all light trucks in the middle of the decade, he said.


Man Who Set Social Club Fire Gets 25 Years to Life


Restaurants
Cellar in the Sky
Nearly 14 years ago, Joseph Baum had the idea to enhance the new Windows on the World with a smaller, more sophisticated restaurant that would serve one menu nightly, paired with different wines for each course.
Cellar in the Sky was a novel concept then, and it remains an appealing one today.
Not everyone is willing to surrender decisions on food and wine, but Cellar puts so much thought and skill into its menus, which change every two weeks, that it makes a visit worthwhile, even for the most persnickety diner.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 20


Bruins Sign Stevens
The Boston Bruins have signed free-agent left wing KEVIN STEVENS to a reported $1 million-a-year contract for five years.
"We have notified Pittsburgh and the National Hockey League that we have received a signed offer sheet from Stevens," Assistant General Manager MIKE MILBURY said yesterday.
"Pittsburgh has seven days to match the offer. If they choose not to match our offer, he will then become Bruins property and the Penguins will receive our first-round draft pick in each of the next five seasons." Milbury said.
Stevens, 26 years old, had his best season in 1990-91 and helped the Penguins win the Stanley Cup.
He had 86 points (40 goals and 46 assists). (AP)


Review/Art; Majesty Made Out of Plywood, Aluminum and Plexiglas
The exhibition of new work by Donald Judd at the Pace Gallery has a commanding grandeur that is owed not simply to the strength of the individual works, but also to the self-evident rightness with which they have been installed.
Mr.
Judd is known to be a ferocious perfectionist when it comes to installation, and the first thing that needs to be said about this show is that if it were to stay there forever, this critic would not get tired of it.
Immediately in front of the gallery's windows on East 57th Street there is, for instance, a row of four tomblike boxes, made of Douglas fir plywood.
In the top of each of them, an identical semicircular hollow has been made, somewhat off center.
That hollow is filled with aluminum cut, it is said, from standard ship's masts.


Smaller Is Better in Space
Budgetary and political pressures are forcing the space program in a welcome new direction.
After decades of seeking to build ever larger and more complicated spacecraft, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration will rely on a smaller-scale approach for at least the next five years.
Whether this is the most significant change at NASA in two decades, as one analyst suggests, or simply a temporary shift in emphasis, as some officials see it, the change will inject a new sense of realism into programs swollen by grandiosity.


The Spoken Word
WALKING TOUR AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Streets Where We Lived" walking tour, Sunday at noon; "Hua Fu" Chinese heritage walking tour, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "House of Heritage," a lecture on the history of the Tenement Museum building, Sunday at 2 P.M.; walking tour fees, $12 each ($11 for students and the elderly); lecture: $7 ($6 for the elderly, $5 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
"American Life in American Art," by Carl Palusci, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari," by Mr.
Palusci, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.; free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
LECTURES AND GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
All free with museum admission of $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Uncovered Short Sales Are Up 3.3% on Big Board
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that short interest increased by 24 million shares in the monthly period ended Sept. 13.
The Big Board said that as of that date its short interest totaled 749 million shares, up 3.3 percent from the 725 million shares in a short position on the Aug. 15 settlement date.


Why the M.I.A.'s Live On
I am the child of an M.I.A.
My father, Hale Boggs, disappeared in the line of duty, summoned not by his country but by a Democratic colleague in Congress.
He was a good man who went to the aid of his party.
At this time, when the families of the missing from Vietnam have again captured national attention, it seems to me that we are asking the wrong question.
While focusing on whether some M.I.A.'s might still be alive, we fail to understand why it's crucial to solve the mystery of the missing.


Art, Art, Everywhere Art
THE art season, which chugged off to a quiet start last week, moves into high gear this weekend with the opening of shows in dozens of galleries and museums from SoHo to Harlem.
Several of the most extensive exhibitions look back in time, as far back as the Bronze Age in a show of Etruscan art at the Grey Art Gallery of New York University.


U.N. Chief Raises Salvadoran Hopes
Talks that began on Monday between Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar and both sides in the Salvadoran civil war took on a hopeful appearance today after the Government and guerrillas responded positively to proposals by Mr.
Perez de Cuellar.
A spokesman for the United Nations leader said he had "received encouraging reactions to his ideas," which were presented Tuesday afternoon to the Salvadoran President, Alfredo Cristiani, and the five guerrilla commanders.


Shell Oil Plans to Sell Its Alaskan Properties
The Shell Oil Company said today that it planned to sell its oil and gas properties in Alaska as part of an effort to shed high-cost production operations in the United States.
The company also said it had halted drilling in the deep waters of the Chukchi Sea about 80 miles west of Barrow, Alaska, and near waters controlled by the Soviet Union.
Shell drilled four wells in the area during each of the last three summers but has not disclosed any of its findings.


Nixon Is Entering Treatment Program
Otis Nixon's agent indicated yesterday that the suspended Atlanta Braves left fielder was entering a drug treatment program.
That action would not necessarily preclude a grievance challenging Commissioner Fay Vincent's 60-day suspension of Nixon, but it most likely would limit the grounds for a grievance.
In a brief statement issued by his office in Richmond, Joseph Sroba, Nixon's agent, said, "By returning to an active counseling program, I am confident he will overcome this sad story and use his skills for great achievement again." Nixon underwent drug rehabilitation in 1987 after he was arrested on a charge of cocaine possession while he was in the minor leagues.
Sroba did not return a telephone call seeking expansion on his statement and comment on the possibility of a grievance.


Faculty Senate Assails Jeffries but Resists Censure
Almost two months after he became the center of a political storm over racially charged remarks, Dr.
Leonard Jeffries defended himself before his colleagues for the first time yesterday as they deliberated on whether to censure him.
After a prolonged 2 1/2-hour debate that alternated between arcane parliamentary squabbles and impassioned speeches by Dr.
Jeffries and his supporters, the City College Faculty Senate voted to "disavow and reject" what it described as the "abhorrent anti-Semitic and anti-Italian sentiments" expressed by Dr.
Jeffries.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.31
5.30
8.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.21
5.18
7.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.26
5.23
7.32
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.40
7.39
8.75
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.91
7.91
9.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.98
8.98
10.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.92
6.93
7.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Meadow Star Ranks 3d for Ruffian
Meadow Star, who evoked the memory of the great Ruffian while winning nine races in a row, will evoke the memory of the filly champion in a different way tomorrow: as one of the seven contestants in the Ruffian Handicap at Belmont Park.
But this time, Meadow Star will be no better than third choice as she struggles to regain the command that reminded racing people of Ruffian, who won 10 in a row before her storied match race in 1975 against Foolish Pleasure, the winner of the Kentucky Derby.


Israel Questions Fairness of U.S. In Peace Effort
Israel took a tough public stand today toward the United States, with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir questioning American impartiality in the Middle East and one of his chief lieutenants cautioning that Israel could still say no to a planned Middle East peace conference.
The Israeli criticism came as Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d continued to make the rounds of Middle Eastern capitals, trying to nail down agreement by all parties -- Israel, the Palestinians and key Arab states -- that they will sit down together at a conference that the United States hopes to arrange for next month.
With each passing day, that timetable seems to be a more elusive goal.


Violations by Salomon
Salomon Brothers, already hobbled by the Treasuries market scandal that erupted last month, has uncovered two additional violations of trading rules in that market, Government officials said.
The discovery of the new violations, which the firm is expected to announce today, indicates that the full dimensions of the scandal are still not fully known.
Business Day, page D1.


2,500 Connecticut Workers Are First Round of Layoffs
Layoff notices went out to about 2,500 state workers today, the first wave in what could rise to 8,000 dismissals as Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and labor unions battle over an unraveled package of concessions linked to the state's new income tax.
The layoffs, and the threat hanging over every state agency that more could come soon, have made the pain long promised by Connecticut's budget troubles suddenly and uncomfortably real.


Clayton &amp; Dubilier Adds New Principal
Clayton &amp; Dubilier Inc. announced that Andrall E. Pearson had been named a principal of the New York private investment banking firm.
Mr.
Pearson, 66 years old, is a former president and chief operating officer of Pepsico Inc.
He joined Pepsico in 1970 as the executive vice president for operations and was elected president in 1971.
As the top operating executive of Pepsico, he was primarily responsible for supervising the company's 15 operating divisions.


Helmick Mess Could Hamper U.S. Pursuit of the Gold
Robert Helmick's resignation on Wednesday as president of the United States Olympic Committee after questions about his business relationships has undermined the stability of the organization, say some Olympic officials, who fear that the situation could affect public confidence in Olympic efforts and financial support.
By yesterday, the committee was moving quickly to limit damage from the episode, which began earlier this month when Helmick admitted to other U.S.O.C. officers that he had worked as a paid consultant to groups seeking greater ties to the Olympics.


Higher Food Aid Would Tax Soviet System of Distribution
American experts said yesterday that Moscow's doubling of its request for food aid to $14.7 billion for the coming year would, if granted, be a greater challenge to the Soviet Union's ability to distribute the food than the West's ability to supply it.
Last year, the Soviet Union's total food imports were $9.8 billion.
About half of the total was imports of grain like wheat and corn, with the remainder being meat, soybeans, dairy products and other foodstuffs.
In the past, Moscow has paid for these imports mainly from the hard currency it earns by exporting commodities like oil and gold, and by borrowing from Western banks.


EXECUTIVES
*
Alk Associates, Princeton, N.J., a computer imaging company, named George C. Woodward senior vice president and chief commercial officer. *
Conoco Inc., Houston, an energy division of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, named Gary W. Edwards executive vice president for refining, marketing, supply and transportation as well as a senior vice president at Du Pont.
Conoco also announced that Robert E. McKee 3d, a Du Pont vice president, had been named senior vice president for administration.


In a Fire-Plagued Section of Queens, a 5-Year-Old Girl Is the Latest Victim
A 5-year-old girl died and six others in her family were critically injured early yesterday as smoke and flames fed off piles of clothes and furniture and tore through their crowded house in an area of Queens that has had the largest number of fire-related deaths in the city.
Hospital officials said the chances of survival for four of the injured were poor.


Bush Act Seen as Bolstering U.S. in Gulf
Beyond his stated desire to uncover all of Iraq's weapons programs, President Bush's new threat of military force against Iraq was motivated by an attempt to hold together the anti-Iraqi coalition and bolster the American military presence in the region, officials said today.
But as the Administration tried to quiet publicity over Mr.
Bush's decision to send warplanes into Iraq if necessary to protect United Nations weapons inspectors and waited for a reply from Baghdad, the disclosure of the plan complicated American diplomacy at least temporarily.


Subordinate Gives Inside Account Of Casey's Intrigues at C.I.A.
In a revealing account of life behind the scenes at the Central Intelligence Agency during the Iran-contra affair, a former intelligence officer said today that he felt like a "cat being thrown in a clothes dryer," caught up in a swirl of deceit, confusion and bureaucratic intrigue.
In testimony today before the Senate Intelligence Committee, Alan D. Fiers Jr., the former head of the agency's Central America task force, said he realized the awkward nature of his role when he took part in an elaborately staged meeting involving William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence at the time.
In the meeting, he said, Mr.
Casey tried to establish a facade of ignorance for himself and top aides about Oliver L. North's secret efforts to arm the Nicaraguan rebels after Congress barred the C.I.A. from any role in supplying military aid to the contras.


Auctions
Auction fever flared briefly last Friday during an afternoon sale of 19th-century furnishings and bric-a-brac at Sotheby's in New York.
Midway through the dispersal of elaborately carved and gilded commodes, chairs and chandeliers, a bidding duel in the pre-recession style developed between two dealers vying for a pair of damaged seven-foot stone candelabra, which Sotheby's had estimated would bring $6,000 to $8,000.
It was when the numbers reached $150,000 that the contest narrowed to two dealers: Carlton Hobbs of London, whose brother, John, placed bids for him from there by telephone, and Bernard Steinitz, who flew over from his Paris gallery and bid in person.
They battled on, propelling the price to $330,000 -- more than 40 times Sotheby's presale estimate -- and Mr.
Hobbs became the new owner.


North Carolina Bank Wins Bid for Southeast of Miami
The First Union Corporation, a rapidly growing North Carolina banking company, was named the winning bidder yesterday for the Southeast Bank of Miami, the city's largest bank.
The troubled Southeast Bank was closed late in the day and its 224 branches in Florida will open today as branches of the First Union Bank of Florida, which will accept all the old bank's deposits.
Customers of Southeast will continue to be insured for up to $100,000 in each account.


CHRONICLE
President Bush's mother, DOROTHY WALKER BUSH, is taking her son's 1988 campaign promise of no new taxes seriously.
She is challenging the latest assessment and tax bill for her property in Jupiter Island, Fla., The Associated Press reported.
Mrs.
Bush, who is 90 years old, filed a petition this week challenging the Martin County property appraiser's $682,320 assessment of her Jupiter Island winter home, maintaining that it is $173,000 too high.


Sports of The Times; A Tie, A Wallet, A Wedding
HE wasn't the story that cloudy Saturday afternoon 25 years ago when No. 1-ranked Notre Dame and No. 2 Michigan State battled to one of college football's most memorable and controversial ties.
Then an 18-year-old sophomore quarterback for the Fighting Irish, Terry Hanratty was waiting in the huddle during the scoreless first quarter for a teammate to arrive with a play from Coach Ara Parseghian.
"Quarterback draw," his teammate said.


Rob Tyner, Singer With MC5 Group In 60's, Dies at 46
Rob Tyner, the lead singer for the rock group MC5, died on Tuesday in Detroit.
He was 46 years old.
He died of a heart attack, the police said.
The Reuters news agency reported that Mr.
Tyner, whose real name was Robert Derminer, was found near his home in the suburb of Berkley, slumped behind the wheel of his car, not breathing and with an irregular pulse.
Police officers took him to Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, where he died, a police spokesman said.


G.M. Will Lease Tools to Get a Tax Break
The General Motors Corporation for the first time will raise money from investors by leasing machine tools rather than owning them, the company said today.
G.M., which has been unprofitable in its North American automotive operations and therefore unable to use the tax advantages from depreciation of tools, said it was creating two "pass-through trusts" to raise $480 million.
The company did not disclose how it plans to use the money.


At Wendy's, An Author Sells Burgers
COMMERCIALS "are like sausage," said R. David Thomas, the founder and senior chairman of Wendy's International Inc.
"You don't want to see how they're being made."
For two years, Mr.
Thomas has been the Lee A. Iacocca of the hamburger business, appearing in an estimated $150 million worth of spots for the fast-food chain he founded in 1969.
Now, Mr.
Thomas is seeking to emulate Mr.
Iacocca further by publishing an autobiography.
His book, "Dave's Way," (G. P. Putnam's Sons, 256 pages, $19.95), officially goes on sale on Monday.


CHRONICLE
There is no question that the red carpet will be rolled out for journalists, along with authors, playwrights and composers, on Sunday at a celebration of the 75th anniversary of the Pulitzer Prizes.
More than 300 winners and 700 guests are expected for ceremonies at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University and a party in a tent afterward.
"I can't imagine that there were ever so many winners in one place before," said ROBERT CHRISTOPHER, administrator of the prizes.
Among those who have accepted invitations are PETER ARNETT, JIMMY BRESLIN, HARRISON SALISBURY, ART BUCHWALD, DAVID BRODER, NAN ROBERTSON, CARL SAGAN, NEIL SIMON, WENDY WASSERSTEIN, NORMAN MAILER and MARVIN HAMLISCH.
RUSSELL BAKER, the New York Times columnist, is to give the main address, and MICHAEL PULITZER, grandson of Joseph Pulitzer, founder of the prizes, is to be among the speakers.


At the Bar; Nursing a bruise from a New York basher, a New York hotel decides to bash back.
You may know that Carson McCullers once wrote a ballad about a sad cafe.
But have you heard the tale about the hotel with hurt feelings?
It is not clear whether Lewis Grizzard, the Southern-fried columnist of The Atlanta Constitution, had ever slept in the Milford Plaza Hotel, on Eighth Avenue between 44th and 45th Streets, or even set foot in the place.
But in August 1990, after repeated commercials for the hotel upset his enjoyment of the P.G.A. golf tournament, he took off after it.


MOSCOW INCREASES ESTIMATE OF NEED FOR FOREIGN FOOD
Soviet officials taking stock of the stagnant economy today doubled their estimate of their foreign food aid needs for the coming year, to $14.7 billion.
The higher request was submitted to the European Commission in Brussels as Russian economic officials reported that the republic's oil export sales had dwindled by 50 percent, further decreasing the hard currency on hand to buy needed foreign grain.


That Wild and Crazy N.F.L.
Is the National Football League becoming frivolous?
The league has been criticized as the No Fun League because, among other things, it has fined players and extracted penalty yardage after balls were thrown into the stands or fans were high-fived.
But Commissioner Paul Tagliabue said yesterday that "a kinder, gentler approach was needed."


Vodka Rivals Compete On Film and in Print
Two rivals in the highly competitive imported vodka market are each introducing an innovative ad.
TBWA Advertising, New York, has created the first Absolut vodka commercial for the United States.
Beginning in November, the 70-second spot for the Swedish import will appear during in-flight programming on MGM Grand Air's flights between Los Angeles and New York.


Former Judge's Verdict: He Was Wrong
Time does not erase injustice, James J. McCartney believes, but maybe a newspaper can.
Mr.
McCartney, 68 years old, recently came to the difficult conclusion that 15 to 17 years ago, while serving as a Municipal Court judge in San Bernardino, Calif., he made a mistake when someone's liberty and good name were at stake.


Aquino Backs Down in Conflict Over U.S. Bases
President Corazon C. Aquino backed away today from a confrontation with the Philippine Senate over the presence of American forces, saying she would hold a referendum on the issue only if the people demanded one.
Mrs.
Aquino, facing mounting opposition to her efforts to keep an American naval base here in defiance of a Senate vote to end the United States military presence, said in a statement that she would abandon her plan for a referendum if it failed to win public support.


6.68% Top Yield On Delaware Issue
The Delaware Transportation Authority has tentatively priced $180 million in revenue bonds through Dillon, Read &amp; Company at a yield of 6.68 for maturity in 2016.


Dollar Rise Tied to Concern On Soviets and Persian Gulf
The dollar rose slightly in light trading yesterday, influenced largely by political uncertainty in the Soviet Union and increasing tension in the Persian Gulf.
Gold prices were mixed.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery was quoted at $348.30 a troy ounce, down 30 cents.
A late bid at New York's Republic National Bank quoted gold at $348.25, up 5 cents.


Behind Girl's Chaining, Siren Call of the Streets
Few residents of Elliott Place are eager to venture into the darkness that descends over their corner of the Bronx each evening and transforms it into a gantlet of drug dealers, where the nightlife is punctuated by gunfire and illuminated by the flashing lights of police cars.
But to 15-year-old Linda Marrero, the swirling action down the street from her apartment building in the High Bridge section was an irresistible siren call.
For the two years since she dropped out of the sixth grade, her parents said, she would skip off into the dark, only to return days or weeks later from crack binges emaciated, bruised and disheveled.


25 Years to Life For the Arsonist At Happy Land
The man who set the fire that killed 87 people in the Happy Land Social Club in the Bronx was sentenced to 25 years to life yesterday, the maximum allowed under New York State law.
Julio Gonzalez, 37 years old, a Cuban refugee who set the club on fire on March 25, 1990, was convicted last month of two counts in each death: murder and felony murder.
He was sentenced to 25 years to life on each count, but by law, the sentences will run concurrently.
Mr.
Gonzalez will be eligible for parole after 25 years.


Some Athletic Plays Warm Ditka's Frigid Air Toward Perry
Ever since the Bears selected him in the first round of the 1985 draft -- a pick that Chicago's defensive coordinator at the time, Buddy Ryan, said was wasted -- William (Refrigerator) Perry has been the largest Monster of the Midway.
Tipping the scale at well over 300 pounds each training camp, he wages a constant battle of the bulge to please the coaches.


Court Upholds Prison Policy On Separating AIDS Inmates
In what Alabama officials called a national test case, a Federal appeals court has upheld the state's policy of segregating prisoners who have the AIDS virus from other inmates.
The ruling, issued Wednesday by a unanimous three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in Atlanta, backed a lower court's finding that Alabama's policy was a reasonable response to prison behavior that might otherwise cause rapid spread of the disease.


Yankees' Maine Man: Down East, and Out?
Stump Merrill left the Bronx yesterday and drove home to Maine.
He was visiting for only a day, so he was hardly gone long enough to satisfy the whining players who would prefer to see a new manager at Yankee Stadium.
Merrill expected a peaceful trip because friendly faces awaited him.
Although there would be little talk of the seemingly imminent pink slip, Merrill did not need reminders to ponder his future.
If the team you were in charge of lost 20 of 27 games, you would think about job security, too.


The Settlements, Born of War, Are Barrier to Peace
What began as a Passover seder in occupied territory, less than a year after the 1967 Middle East war, would soon evolve into the Jewish settlement movement.
It has been a contentious issue in Israeli-American relations for years, with President Bush only the latest American leader to be incensed by the settlements and to call them an obstacle to a possible Middle East peace.
On the eve of Passover in 1968, 73 religious Jews checked into the Park Hotel in the West Bank city of Hebron and announced that their seder, the ritual meal celebrating the exodus from slavery in Egypt, symbolized the return of Jews to the biblical lands of Judea and Samaria, their term for the West Bank.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Centocor Inc., Malvern, Pa., said it planned to issue about $100 million in convertible subordinated debentures in a public offering outside the United States.
They would be convertible into common stock of the company, which develops and makes diagnostic and therapeutic health-care products.  *
Bausch &amp; Lomb, Rochester, an optical company, has filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $250 million of debt securities to be offered through a group headed by Lazard Freres &amp; Co.
The company expects to use the proceeds for general purposes.


Review/Theater; Life on the Edge in a Canadian Winter
In the eyes of the playwright Brad Fraser, Edmonton, Alberta, is the bleakest of cities, filled with dropouts and dead-enders who have no aim except to pass a 10-month winter with casual sex, alcohol and hard drugs.
For some, life is meaningful only when one is flirting with death.
This is, Mr.
Fraser suggests, an ideal breeding ground for a serial killer.
The view in his play, "Unidentified Human Remains and the True Nature of Love" (at the Orpheum Theater), is cynical in the extreme -- a pitch black vision of people falling off the edge.
With its pungent dialogue and highly graphic sexuality, the play repeatedly arrests the audience's attention, but the cynicism wears thin and the plot is porous.
This study of sex and violence is not, as intended, a thriller.
Instead of being mysterious, it telegraphs its twists, and at moments it approaches sentimentality.


Review/Film; A Cynic's Quest for Forgiveness
The cry of contrition that is sounded in "The Fisher King" can be heard long after the film is over.
In bringing a jaded late-1980's celebrity to the brink of destruction and then allowing him to do penance for his cynicism, this film strikes at the heart of something disturbingly real.
That, apparently, was not enough for the film makers, who have feverishly piled on elements of whimsy, mythology and romance to what was never a simple concept in the first place.
The likelihood of creating an unholy mess is further heightened by the throwing in of the Holy Grail.
Yet "The Fisher King," directed by the ever-fanciful Terry Gilliam from an ingenious if loose-knit screenplay by Richard LaGravenese, is capable of great charm whenever its taste for chaos is kept in check.
For every wild ride through Manhattan by an imaginary Red Knight trailing billows of flame, there is a small, comic encounter in a more down-to-earth mode.


Our Towns
Once upon a time there was a young man from Ohio named Robert.
He wanted very much to be an artist.
So he went to a special school in Boston.
One day on his way to class Robert saw a family of ducks stroll from the Public Gardens as bold as you please and waddle off down the busy sidewalk, quacking back at honking cars.
It was a simple sight.
Thousands saw the same thing over the years.
Robert was more interested in sketching elaborate dragons, evil forests and heroes from Greek mythology.
But he filed the scene away in his mind, the way artists do.


Excerpts From U.N. Approval of $1.6 Billion Oil Sale by Iraq
Following are excerpts from
a resolution adopted today by the United Nations Security Council
authoriz
ing the sale of $1.6 billion in Iraqi oil over a six-month period:
THE SECURITY COUNCIL, RECALLING its previous relevant resolutions and in particular Resolutions 661 (1990), 686 (1991), 687 (1991), 688 (1991), 692 (1991), 699 (1991), 705 (1991) and 706 (1991)


U.S. Drops Mulheren Case
The Federal Government yesterday dropped all remaining criminal charges against John A. Mulheren, the former Wall Street trader whose conviction for securities fraud was thrown out by an appeals court earlier this year.
The decision not to prosecute Mr.
Mulheren, 42 years old, on 26 remaining counts of securities violations effectively clears him of all criminal wrongdoing in a case that began in 1989, when he was indicted for market manipulation, sham transactions and other crimes with Ivan F. Boesky, a former friend who became the chief witness against him.
At one point early in the case, Mr.
Mulheren's lawyer was Otto G. Obermaier, now the United States Attorney in Manhattan, whose office issued the decision yesterday.


Review/Film; The Ups And Downs Of an Anchor
Michael Schultz's "Livin' Large" is a big-beat, broad, infectiously funny comedy about the rise and fall and rise of Dexter Jackson (T. C. Carson), a young black man whose fondest wish is to make it as an anchor in the white man's world of television.
The setting is Atlanta.
The time is today, and Dexter hasn't the patience to wait around for affirmative action to work.
He's in a hurry.
He wants the celebrity, the money and the perks now.


Crown Heights Ruling Put Off
A judge yesterday again postponed a decision on whether to make public the secret minutes of a grand jury investigation into the death of 7-year-old Gavin Cato in Crown Heights.
The judge, Theodore Jones of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, agreed to give 11 days to the police union, the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, to prepare a written memorandum opposing the minutes' release.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 6 about a television commercial that assailed three Democratic senators just before the opening of confirmation hearings for Judge Clarence Thomas mischaracterized an anti-Dukakis commercial produced by the Bush campaign during the 1988 Presidential race.
That commercial, criticizing a Massachusetts prisoner-furlough program, showed about a dozen prisoners going in and out of a revolving door.
Only a few of the prisoners, not a majority of them, seemed to be black or Hispanic.


The Puzzling George Bushes
The most interesting questions about President Bush near the end of his third year are why he makes the appointments he does and why he loves to fight at home and concentrate on making peace and refereeing fights abroad.
Both involve his attitude toward the responsibilities of Congress, and the record indicates that he regards Congress not as a partner whose advice and consent are required by the Constitution but as a barrier, even a nuisance, to be overcome.
He's a puzzle.
He is always appealing for unity and a kinder, gentler America, and then choosing officials and policies he knows are bound to raise a storm.
He chose Senator Dan Quayle to be Vice President, John Tower to be Secretary of Defense, John Sununu to be chief of staff, Clarence Thomas to sit on the Supreme Court and Robert Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, and wondered why anybody objected.


Salomon Finds New Violations
Salomon Brothers Inc., already hobbled by the Treasuries market scandal that erupted last month, has uncovered two additional violations of trading rules in that market, Government officials said yesterday.
The additional violations, which the firm is expected to announce today, include another instance of illegal bidding involving the S. G. Warburg Group P.L.C.
Salomon has already disclosed that it illegally used Warburg's name and those of affiliates of the British investment banking firm in bids for Treasury securities for its own account.


The U.N. Adjusts to Middle Age
As it begins its 46th annual session, the United Nations is experiencing midlife anxieties.
Freed from its long preoccupation with cold war rivalries, the world body has turned to its own internal aches and pains.
Renewal and reform are essential if the U.N. is to consolidate its unquestioned gains.
A logical beginning would be the prompt approval of a new plan to overhaul its unwieldy, unresponsive bureaucracy.
How much the old order has changed was evident in this week's admission of three Baltic States, two Koreas, Micronesia and the Marshall Islands.
Flags for Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia eloquently confirm the demise of Stalin's empire.
And though still bitterly at odds, North and South Korea at last sit in the same global parliament -- a positive epilogue to a war that pitted U.S. armies fighting under the U.N. flag against a united Sino-Soviet bloc.


Giants Want to Know What Browns Know
One team may have a built-in edge Sunday when the Giants play the Cleveland Browns here.
The question is which team.
Is it the Browns because their new head coach, Bill Belichick, coached the Giants' defense for so many years?


Schlichter's Hopes
Former quarterback ART SCHLICHTER, who was twice suspended from the National Football League for gambling, has applied for reinstatement, saying that his problems are now under control and that he wants to be a backup for the Cleveland Browns.
Schlichter, a onetime Ohio State star, met yesterday with N.F.L. officials in an effort to convince them that his compulsive gambling has come about because of a chemical imbalance in his brain that is under treatment.


A.T.&amp;T. Admits Alarms Failed in Cutoff
After union officials charged that A.T.&amp; T. had falsely blamed technicians for the breakdown of long-distance service in New York on Tuesday, company executives yesterday admitted that some alarms were not working and that managers had not followed proper procedures.
But they declined to be specific and their statements appeared to be inconsistent.
The company said Wednesday that technicians working at a key switching center in lower Manhattan had failed to notice alarms warning that the station was running on batteries.
By the time they did notice, the batteries were nearly out of electricity and the station shut down.


Review/Film; Resolving the Painful Love Between 2 Brothers
"Highway Patrolman," the haunting Bruce Springsteen song that Sean Penn's film "The Indian Runner" is "inspired by" (to cite the diplomatic wording of the credits), tells of the troubled love between two brothers.
Joe, the police officer of the title, struggles to reconcile his civic duty with the responsibility he feels to his kin.
Frankie, Joe's violent and unpredictable brother, does nothing to make this easy.
As Mr.
Springsteen puts it, narrating desolately from Joe's standpoint: "I got a brother named Frankie and Frankie ain't no good."
The succinctness of that is hard to beat.
Yet Mr.
Penn has tried -- and succeeded to a surprising degree.
Devoting more than two hours to the embroidering of a five-minute song, he has reached for a ragged emotional reality that recalls the films of John Cassavetes (one of those to whom "The Indian Runner" is dedicated), and he has framed even his film's most unruly episodes with unexpected delicacy.
Loose, rambling and sometimes rudderless as it is, "The Indian Runner" has a fundamental honesty that gives it real substance.


Art in Review
James O. Clark Max Protetch Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 5
James O. Clark's quirky, often kinetic sculptures deserve some credit for presaging by a number of years the current interest in making sculpture out of discarded materials.
His asymmetrical assortments of dented metal, rubber, plastic and argon lighting -- each piece of which has seen other uses and better days -- provide a link between early 1970's Process Art and early 90's Scatter Art without belonging completely to either.
For one thing, Mr.
Clark persists in structuring his materials rather than just letting them lie there.
"Hamadryad," a combination of copper, brass, plastic and rubber, erupts from the wall like an ugly plant, a glowing, multi-colored bit of argon cradled at its heart.
"T.L.C." the show's best piece, features a helium balloon with a yellow argon light floating inside, something of a levitational feat.
Meanwhile, the helium tank that keeps everything aloft rests on two old couch cushions on the floor, like an indolent pasha.
Also notable is "Daydreamer," which suggests a shorter, wider version of an astronaut's space suit.
Made primarily of chrome and white plastic, this work is actually an outdoor fountain lighted by its own solar-energy system.
Mr.
Clark's ability to juggle the abstract, the real and the human while appearing to do nothing much at all makes his work unusual.


Dinkins Veto Of Pricing Bill Is Overturned
In a forceful display of independence that reflects its new powers, the New York City Council yesterday unanimously overrode Mayor David N. Dinkins's veto of a bill requiring price stickers on supermarket items.
Although the item-pricing bill was by no means a watershed piece of legislation, the Council's 32-to-0 vote was a symbolic victory for the Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, that signaled his determination to forge the Council into a legislative body that will be an equal partner in governing the city.


Review/Art; Stark or Sweet Images Tell Black History's Tale
In the late 1930's and early 40's, when he was still only in his 20's, Jacob Lawrence turned his energies toward several extraordinary groups of paintings about the history of blacks in the United States.
One sequence of works was entitled "The Migration of the Negro"; another was about the life of the abolitionist John Brown.
And he completed two other biographical series based on the experiences of Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman, figures of profound importance in the history of anti-slavery around the time of the Civil War.
By the first decades of this century, the status of Douglass and Tubman had risen to legendary proportions in Harlem, where Mr.
Lawrence lived.
For the Douglass series, which he undertook in 1938 and 1939, Mr.
Lawrence produced a suite of 32 paintings in tempera on gessoed hardboard panels of 12 by 18 inches.
For the Tubman series, which he completed in 1940, the artist used the same format and materials to complete 31 paintings.
He accompanied each painting with an appropriate caption about the lives of the subjects.


Review/Film Festival; Identical Women and Multiple Portents
If one of the main purposes of the New York Film Festival is to show us what film makers around the world are up to, then Krzysztof Kieslowski's "Double Life of Veronique" is a practically perfect opening-night attraction.
It exemplifies a very distinctive kind of contemporary European film.
"The Double Life of Veronique" is intellectually well bred.
It bewitches the eye.
It introduces a lovely new actress named Irene Jacob and, in a series of alternately haunting and opaque sequences, it examines a metaphysical equation whose symbolism and practical application would seem to be of no urgency whatsoever.


Data Show Space Affects People Much Faster Than Was Thought
The body's adaptation to the reduced gravity of space flight begins more quickly than previously believed and affects many systems, according to results from experiments on the June shuttle flight that were reported today
Preliminary findings from the mission, in which seven astronauts orbited the Earth for nine days on a flight to conduct medical studies, indicate that the human body reacts to low gravity almost immediately, scientists said, with changes affecting kidney function, blood cell production and the sense of balance and orientation.


Imperial Chemical
Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. said it had agreed to sell its specialty-compounds business in the United States to the Kawasaki Steel Corporation for about $100 million.
The specialty-compounds business, with headquarters in Exton, Pa., supplies compounds to the automotive, electrical and electronic industries.


Text of Gates's 1984 Memo to Casey On 'Straight Talk' About Nicaragua
The following is the text of a memorandum from Robert M. Gates, then the C.I.A.'s deputy director for intelligence, to William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, made public today by Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio.
It was dated Dec. 14, 1984.
1. It is time to talk absolutely straight about Nicaragua. To recap where we are:


Havana Closes Communist Congress to Outsiders
Faced with a severe economic and political crisis, Cuba has announced that for the first time in the 32-year leadership of President Fidel Castro the coming congress of the island's ruling Communist Party will be closed to foreign delegations and journalists.
The departure from previous practice, a number of experts on Cuban affairs said, reflects a sense of uncertainty within the Cuban leadership bordering on disorientation after the announcement by the Soviet Union last week that it was withdrawing its troops and ending its economic subsidies to the island.


Big Publishers Set Merger
Dealers Digest Inc., a supplier of Wall Street data, yesterday said it had merged with another financial-information concern, the MLR Publishing Company.
The value of the private deal was not released.
The new company will keep the Dealers Digest name.


Sears P.L.C. Brings In A British Air Executive
Sears P.L.C., Britain's largest shoe retailer and a big mail-order company, has announced that Michael Pickard, chief executive, will retire in March.
He will be succeeded by Liam Strong, who has been the director of marketing and operations for British Airways since 1988.
Before the announcement on Wednesday, Mr.
Strong, 46, was considered the most likely person to succeed Sir Colin Marshall as British Airways' chief executive.
It was recently announced, however, that Sir Colin would not immediately replace British Air's chairman, Lord King, and would remain as chief executive for the foreseeable future.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 559 money market mutual funds decreased by $2.37 billion, to $460.85 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.


Shoplifting Bill Signed
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed legislation today that would enable merchants to take civil action against shoplifters instead of pursuing criminal charges that can be time-consuming and expensive.
Under the new law, shoplifters who concede their guilt can reach agreement with the merchant to make restitution for the value of the stolen property, and the merchant can also impose a fine not to exceed $500.
In such settlements, the shoplifter will not get a criminal record.


BRIEFS
*
Electrocon International Inc., a Korean electronic-components distributor, declared a 1-for-50 reverse split of its common stock. *
Newport Corp., Fountain Valley, Calif., a maker of laboratory equipment, completed the acquisition of the micro-positioning business of Micro-Controle S.A., Evry, France, for $45 million.


U.S. and Kuwait Sign Pact on Troops
The United States and Kuwait signed a military alliance today that broadens the long-term presence of American forces in the Persian Gulf region.
The 10-year security pact is the first of several such accords expected to be signed with other gulf nations to allow access to ports by United States Navy ships, the storage of military equipment and joint training and exercises.


Endless Summer
A little before noon yesterday the wind blew, the rain fell and the temperature dropped 10 degrees in what seemed like 10 seconds.
And guess what?
People not only smiled but began to think the unthinkable: Maybe New York's endless summer has come to an end.
Endless is the word for it.
Way back on April 9, when people still had liners in their raincoats, the thermometer hit 86 degrees, 4 degrees higher than the previous record set in 1871 and an incredible
36 degrees
above average.
Totally weird, we thought; certainly can't happen again.
But it did.
On Tuesday, Sept. 17 -- football season! -- the temperature hit 93, another record.


Debt Plan Backed By Sealy Directors
Sealy Holdings Inc., Cleveland, the bedding company, said had directors approved a debt-restructuring plan under which about $520 million in subordinated debt would be exchanged for common stock and $110 million of lower-interest senior subordinated debt.
The plan, which would reduce annual interest expense by 50 percent, is intended to free cash to pay down remaining secured bank debt.


Ku Klux Klan Statute Is Right Law in Wichita; Women Are the Target
To the Editor:
In "Judicial Excess in Wichita" (Op-Ed, Sept. 1), William Bradford Reynolds uses the same strict constructionist argument -- to dismiss Judge Patrick Kelly's authority in Wichita -- employed to dismantle court protection of the right to abortion.
One need not look too deeply to see the danger of having law apply only as originally meant and not as it may extend to unenumerated rights of future significance.


Abroad at Home; Peace or Annexation?
It is important to be clear about the issue in the current dispute between the U.S. and Israel.
It is whether Israel is going to annex the West Bank and Gaza in the years ahead without meaningful objection by the United States.
The nominal subject of the conflict is Israel's request for $10 billion in loan guarantees to help resettle Soviet Jews.
The Israeli Government and its American supporters say the guarantees must be approved at once, while President Bush wants Congress to hold up considering the idea for four months.


Review/Film; Sweet, Yes, But Wild At Heart
Before you can get to the wry tone and strong-willed people of "Rambling Rose," you have to sit through a short corn-pone opening.
In 1971, a middle-aged man drives to his hometown in Georgia.
He is heading toward a flashback about the dusty old days when he was a 13-year-old called Buddy, with a life-shaping crush on a sweet but wild young woman named Rose.
As the adult Buddy Hillyer, John Heard assumes a hopeless Southern accent to say, "In deep Dixieland, the month of Octobah is almost summry," a line worth mentioning only because it so glaringly sets the wrong tone.
"Rambling Rose" sounds like it will be full of molasses, but when the story moves back to 1935, it becomes honest, engaging and quite a lot like its perky, disreputable heroine.


Ghosts Of the Past Haunting Davis Cup
There was a flurry of balloons overhead that gave a festive air to the draw today for the Davis Cup semifinal between the United States and Germany.
Competition begins here Friday afternoon with a singles match pitting a rejuvenated Andre Agassi against Michael Stich, the Wimbledon champion.
There was an undercurrent of bitterness to the proceedings as well for both teams, and it was internally generated.
This Davis Cup confrontation, with the trio of veterans who aren't here -- Germany's Boris Becker and the American doubles tandem of Rick Leach and Jim Pugh -- has taken on a ghostly significance.


Ku Klux Klan Statute Is Right Law in Wichita
To the Editor:
In "Judicial Excess in Wichita" (Op-Ed, Sept. 1), William Bradford Reynolds engages in an unjustified, ad hominem attack on Judge Patrick Kelly of Federal District Court in Wichita, Kan., that is wrong on the law and wrong on the facts.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Salomon Brothers has uncovered two additional violations of trading rules, Government officials said.
The additional violations, which the firm is expected to announce today, include another instance of illegal bidding involving S. G. Warburg.  [ D1. ]
Time Inc.
Magazine Co. said it would lay off 105 editorial employees at six magazines.
The editorial cuts follow 500 layoffs on the business side that Time Inc. made recently.  [ D1. ]


Art in Review
'John Button's New York' Fischbach Gallery 24 West 57th Street Through Oct. 5
When John Button died of heart disease at the age of 53 in 1982, New York City lost one of the painters who was best able to portray it in terms of an unemphatic but penetrating poetry.
He could do other places, too -- among them Philadelphia, Paris, Venice and Hollywood, not to mention the Redwood National Park in California (he was born and raised in the San Francisco area) -- but what he prized above all was the moment at which, as he once wrote, "after a dip, the road leaps high into the air on a huge causeway and all of Manhattan comes into view, broadside."


Surgery for Millard
KEITH MILLARD, the Minnesota Vikings' All-Pro defensive tackle, decided to have knee surgery and will be lost for the rest of the season.
"The best thing for me right now is surgery so I can continue my career," said Millard, who tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee early last season.
"I will be back and I'll be back at full force." Millard said that Dr.
RICHARD STEADMAN, who examined him in Vail, Colo., would perform the surgery in the next week. (AP)


Drug Maker In Genetics Institute Deal
The American Home Products Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire 60 percent of Genetics Institute for $666 million.
The deal, which would value Genetics Institute at $1.11 billion when it is completed early next year, gives the big New York-based drug and consumer products company a running start in the biotechnology business.
It also provides $300 million in cash to help Genetics Institute, based in Cambridge, Mass., to speed the development of its promising research pipeline.


Marriage Gone Bad, Double Slaying and Hung Jury Leave a City Divided
Elisabeth Anne Broderick does not dispute that on the morning of Nov. 5, 1989, she walked into her former husband's bedroom and shot him and his new wife to death with a .38-caliber pistol.
But she insists she is not guilty of murder.
And as the 43-year-old Ms.
Broderick awaits a second trial on two charges of first-degree murder, it is clear that many people here agree with her.
Her case has divided this normally placid city and has drawn attention to the issue of domestic psychological abuse.


U.S. Pension Agency Seeks $914 Million From Pan Am
The Federal agency that insures pension plans went to bankruptcy court yesterday with claims for $914 million that it contended Pan American World Airways owes to three pension plans.
The claims were filed by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation in the United States Bankruptcy Court of the Southern District of New York where Pan Am's filing for protection under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code is being litigated.


At the Movies
Meeting 'The Fisher King'
"I laughed and I cried."
Lynda Obst was recalling her reaction when she first read the script of "The Fisher King."
It could have been a fatal attraction.
For part of the time, Ms.
Obst was driving.
"I had to go around and do errands, and I wouldn't stop reading the script," she said.
"At one point I cried so hard that I took the script and threw it against the windshield."


We Need Less, Not More, Din in the Subways
To the Editor:
With nausea I read your cheerful article of Sept. 10 about Transit Authority officials considering piped-in music for New York City's subways -- "something to calm the nerves a bit" in counteraction to "an underground maze of hostility."


T.W.A. Extends Sale; Others Follow
Trans World Airlines Inc. extended its coast-to-coast fare sale through today, and other airlines reluctantly went along.
"We don't really think that this is going to do anything as far as putting additional people in the seats," said William Berry, a spokesman for Delta Air Lines, which matched the T.W.A. half-price sale that offers round-trip fares for $198.


Art in Review
'The Incoherents' Grolier Club 47 East 60th Street Through Nov. 23
The Grolier Club is in general the very ultimate in respectability.
Walking into its high-ceilinged main hall, one seems to hear a subliminal whisper in which words like foxing and duodecimo, Aldine and incunable, are a part of everyday parlance.
If any among those present have lately been thrown out of a disco for outrageous behavior, they are very good at concealing it.


Division Fever! Baseball Suddenly Has 3 Races
About that American League playoff matchup of the Minnesota Twins and the Toronto Blue Jays -- hold off on the reservations.
The American League's two divisions have suddenly joined the National League West as places where a live race can be found.
While the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Atlanta Braves prepare for their second successive weekend series, the Twins face a belated charge from the Chicago White Sox, and the Blue Jays are having increasing difficulty shaking the Boston Red Sox.


New Chief Executive Named at Leo Burnett
In an orderly change in top management, the Leo Burnett Company announced yesterday that Richard B. Fizdale, president and chief creative officer, will succeed Hall (Cap) Adams Jr. as chairman and chief executive, effective Jan. 1.
Both men are longtime executives of Burnett, which is enjoying a new-business boom that has brought in more than $200 million in billings in the last year.
Mr.
Adams, 58 years old, has been at Burnett for 35 years, and Mr.
Fizdale, 52, for 22.


Art in Review
Group Exhibition Andrea Rosen Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Oct. 5
This group exhibtion is organized less around a theme then around a physical fact: all the works on view use mirrors.
Such blatant simplicity and coherence is refreshing, even if a number of the artists take the simplicity a little too far. (In virtually interchangeable works, Meg Webster, Laurie Parsons and Felix Gonzalez-Torres exhibit unaltered unframed mirrors.) But Jeff Koons is on hand, represented by a Baroque mirror that is mostly ornate gold frame.
Curtis Mitchell has covered another mirror with a weblike mass of hair, dental floss and adhesive tape, evoking the bathroom, perhaps the mirror's most ubiquitous site.
And Simon Leung is represented by one of his small mirrors, covered with little pieces of scotch tape and whatever dust and cells the tape has lifted from the skin beneath the artist's left eye.
As usual, the delicately fogged and patched surface resembles faux mother-of-pearl and, as usual, it sort of hurts to look at it.


Trying to Help His Daughter, Man Kills Her
A building superintendent who tried to stop his daughter's companion from choking her early yesterday fatally shot the two in the family's Manhattan apartment during a struggle, the police said.
The superintendent, Ramon Pollino, also wounded his 2-year-old granddaughter, the police said.


Trade Gap Widened During July
The nation's foreign-trade deficit widened sharply to $5.9 billion in July as soaring imports overwhelmed a modest rise in exports, the Commerce Department reported today.
The sudden deterioration, which followed a June deficit that was the lowest in eight years, was generally anticipated by analysts, many of whom cautioned strongly against interpreting the $2.4 billion jump in imports as a sign of current economic strength that reflected a pickup in consumer demand.


The Real Model for the Statue of Liberty
To the Editor:
You quote Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. as telling an audience that the model for the Statue of Liberty was a black woman ("Watching Dr. Jeffries Self-Destruct," editorial, Aug. 25); you go on to say that "documents show that Frederic August Bartholdi's model was his mother."


Critic's Choice/Jazz; Success for a Saxophone Master
The tenor saxophonist Joe Henderson, who will be performing at Fat Tuesday's this weekend, is one of a handful of musicians who, having made their reputations in the 1960's, are still working and fruitful.
Mr.
Henderson has been undergoing a renaissance recently; he's been adopted by a whole new generation of younger musicians, appearing on albums by Wynton Marsalis, Renee Rosnes, Stephen Scott and others.
They're returning the favor: Mr.
Henderson has recently finished recording an album of Duke Ellington material for Verve on which both Mr.
Scott and Mr.
Marsalis appear.
Mr.
Henderson's new success makes sense.
On a series of Blue Note albums recorded in the 60's, he found his way between the expressionism of what was called the avant-garde and the traditionalism of the mainstream.
Harmonically complicated, his compositions challenged young musicians, who learned them as part of the jazz repertory.


Miscellany
*
The Publishers Information Bureau reported that magazine advertising pages in August totaled 10,263.7, down 10.2 percent from August 1990.
Pages totaled 96,033.7 in the year to date, down 10.3 percent from a year earlier.


Mandatory AIDS Tests for Doctors Would Be Useless, Health Experts Say
Requiring doctors and nurses to be tested for infection with the AIDS virus would be costly but useless because it would assure no additional protection from infection, representatives of the nation's leading medical organizations told Congress today.
The risk of being infected by a doctor "is so remote that it may never be measured," said former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, one of the health experts who testified before the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Health and the Environment.
Requiring the tests would be a "worthless" return to the darker days of the AIDS epidemic, Dr.
Koop said.


Bank of New York Raises $600 Million
The Bank of New York yesterday priced $600 million worth of 7.10 percent securities backed by credit card receipts to yield 7.24 percent.
The First Boston Corporation was lead underwriter.
The yield was 80 basis points, or 80-hundredths of a percentage point, above the prevailing yield on the Treasury's 6 7/8 percent three-year notes at the time of pricing.


Kathryn B. Newman, Lawyer, Is Dead at 83
Kathryn Bereano Newman, a lawyer and one of the first administrative judges in the New York City Parking Violations Bureau, died on Wednesday at Beth Israel Hospital.
She was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Newman was a 1929 graduate of New York University Law School.
She graduated first in her class.
Second was Bernard Newman, now a Federal judge, and her husband for 59 years.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about the actress and playwright Julie Bovasso omitted the films in which she appeared.
They include "Willie and Phil" (1980), "The Verdict" (1982), "Moonstruck" (1987) and "Betsy's Wedding" (1990).


Family Life in '56 Brooklyn
WRITING will out.
It's as simple as that.
As the new television season unfolds, the vast bulk of series are content to be formula-driven concepts, put together by committees of vice presidents and researchers.
A wedding possibility here, some cute teen-agers there, and you pray for a hit.
Only very occasionally is a distinctive voice allowed to be heard above the numbing prattle, and one can be heard tonight at 8 in the special hourlong premiere of "Brooklyn Bridge." It belongs to Gary David Goldberg.
Best known as the creator of the long-running "Family Ties" and the more recent "American Dreamer," Mr.
Goldberg has decided to return to the Brooklyn of his youth for a warm-hearted look at a family and community that he clearly cherished.
The year is 1956, the neighborhood Bensonhurst.
For many young viewers, I suspect, it might just as well be the 19th century.
With a theme song performed by Art Garfunkel, accompanied on the piano by Marvin Hamlisch, "Brooklyn Bridge" is about a time gone by.
A sort of "Wonder Years" crossed with "The Goldbergs," it can be shamelessly sentimental and, at least in this sensitively crafted introduction written and directed by Mr.
Goldberg, thoroughly captivating.


Senate Votes to Limit Arts Grants
The Senate voted overwhelmingly today to prohibit the National Endowment for the Arts from awarding grants that would be used to promote materials depicting "sexual or excretory activities or organs" in an "offensive way."
The amendment, which was attached to an appropriations bill for the Department of the Interior, was sponsored by Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, and attracted the support of lawmakers across the ideological spectrum.
It passed by a vote of 68 to 28.


Sounds Around Town
Persian Songs
Shahram Nazeri Ensemble, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-2824.
Two Town Hall concerts featuring the Iranian vocalist Shahram Nazeri will open the World Music Institute's seventh season.
A master of Persian classical, Sufi and Kurdish repertories, he will perform Persian traditional songs (meditative and reflective music characterized by improvisation and ornamentation), as well as Kurdish folk songs.
The folk selections include ancient songs of wandering minstrels as well as contemporary poems.
Mr.
Nazeri will be accompanied by his ensemble on tanburs (long-necked lutes) and daff (a frame drum).
Performances are tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets are $20, $30 and $35.
Torme in September
Mel Torme, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
For the latest of his annual September engagements at Michael's Pub, Mel Torme, one of the greatest jazz-singing technicians, pays tribute to Benny Goodman, Buddy Rich and Judy Garland, among others.
The voice is still richly burnished and superbly limber, and as always Mr.
Torme's scat singing projects an unexpected rhythmic drive.
His seasoned backup ensemble features Peter Appleyard on vibraphone and Phil Bodner on clarinet.
Shows are at 8:45 and 11:15 tonight and tomorrow and 7 P.M. on Sunday.
The cover charge is $40 tonight and tomorrow and $35 on Sunday.


Europeans Retreat on a Peace Force for Croatia
With Britain warning of the risks of European military involvement in the Yugoslav crisis, the European Community today backed off from sending an armed peacekeeping force to Croatia to enforce a cease-fire.
After an often heated meeting of foreign ministers, the 12-nation community instead called on the Western European Union, a regional military body, to propose ways of strengthening a 200-man civilian observer mission that has so far been unable to halt the fighting.


A.T.&amp; T. Deal For NCR Final
The $7.4 billion purchase of the NCR Corporation by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company was completed yesterday as they filed merger papers in Maryland, where NCR is incorporated.
NCR also redeemed a plan that was set up to prevent an unwanted takeover of NCR, which is based in Dayton, Ohio.
Under the redemption, NCR shareholders of record as of Wednesday will receive notice of the redemption and a payment of 5 cents a share.


Cardinal to Aid Challenges to Condom Plan
John Cardinal O'Connor yesterday opened a new front in the battle over distributing condoms in New York City schools by encouraging parents to challenge the new Board of Education policy in the courts and offering free legal services for such fights.
The Cardinal, the Archbishop of New York and a staunch condom plan opponent, said he was passing on an offer from "a prestigious New York law firm" that had approached the archdiocese.
A spokesman for the Cardinal declined to name the firm.


Review/Photography; The Campagna Romana Viewed by Joel Sternfeld
Whether in word or line, countless poets and artists have celebrated the Campagna Romana, the lushly verdant volcanic plain outside Rome.
Among the legions who have tried over the years to capture its beauty have been the painters Claude Lorrain and Camille Corot, as well as the poet Goethe.
Now the American photographer Joel Sternfeld has turned his hand to the task of recording this storied landscape.
Mr.
Sternfeld recently spent a year in Italy on a Rome Prize fellowship, and during his time there photographed extensively with a large-format camera in the countryside around Rome.
This strikingly beautiful show offers the results of his labors, depicting the Campagna in richly colored images made with a sharply observant eye.
Mr.
Sternfeld is one of a number of American photographers -- among them Stephen Shore, William Eggleston and John Pfahl -- who came to prominence in the late 1970's with color prints, made using the simplified processes that first became available in that period.
Like many of his colleagues, Mr.
Sternfeld has long taken the landscape as his primary subject.
What he is best known for, though, are the deadpan but deflating touches of humor he includes in many of his pictures.
In one, a lovely but insipid vista of tree-covered hills suddenly takes on an ominous, almost Surrealist air when one notices, in the center of the frame, the tiny figure of a circus elephant collapsed from heat exhaustion on a narrow highway.


Ruland Has Hopes
Four years after hobbling to the end of his seven-year National Basketball Association career with a severe knee injury, 32-year-old JEFF RULAND is trying to make a comeback with the Philadelphia 76ers.


Market Place; How High a Price Can Racal Bring?
THE $1.2 billion unfriendly takeover bid this week by Williams Holdings P.L.C. for Racal Electronics P.L.C. must have been bittersweet for Sir Ernest Harrison, Racal's chairman.
Sir Ernest had long complained that investors were so captivated with Vodafone, his company's booming 80 percent owned cellular-phone business, that they were ignoring the value of the company's array of electronics and security businesses.
Several -- like Chubb security products and Milgo computer-communications equipment -- are based or have important markets in the United States.


Economic Scene; Getting the Benefit Of Military Cuts
THE primary economic benefit to the United States of the collapse of the Soviet empire is, potentially, the opportunity to make deep cuts in military spending and use the savings to eliminate the budget deficit, tackle domestic problems, or some combination of both.
Of total American military spending, about 60 percent has gone to block the Soviet threat to Western Europe and deter Soviet nuclear attack.
Yet military spending is still running close to $300 billion, in real terms nearly what it was in 1989, the year the Berlin wall came down and the Warsaw Pact collapsed.


A Movie Revival House Can Stimulate Business
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 10 article on the prospective closing of the Biograph Theater accepts at face value the version of the Toronto-based Cineplex Odeon, owner of the movie revival house on West 57th Street.
Since Cineplex Odeon's takeover of New York cinema, its objective has been to get viewers to watch trash or nothing.
Loew's and City Cinema are equally devoted to trash, but are at least willing to program some independent films at their East Village houses.


Books of The Times; American Dreamers And Their Nightmares
Making History By Carolyn See 276 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.
The Los Angeles depicted in Carolyn See's fifth and latest novel is a place populated by dreamers, people who have migrated -- from small valley towns, from Mexico, from the East, and from countries across the ocean -- to this hot, glittering city in hopes of changing their lives.
Some of their dreams are modest versions of the Horatio Alger myth: a job, a house, the means to support a family in relative security and comfort.
Others dream of hedonistic leisure: some beers, some laughs, lots of sun and attractive members of the opposite sex.


Art in Review
'Gens Antiquissima Italiae: The Etruscans in Umbria'  Grey Art Gallery  33 Washington Place  Through Nov. 2
This exhibition recasts the scope of Etruscan culture, proving that it was not limited to a small part of Tuscany but extended well beyond that region of Italy, and encompassed a wide range of ideas and artistic styles.
Organized by the Umbrian ministry of cultural affairs, the show is an enormous and elaborately designed undertaking.
It traveled to St.
Petersburg, Cracow, Budapest and the Vatican, and in each location looked different: objects of Umbrian provenance in those cities were added to related materials from Italy.
Here, where the show is co-organized with the Grey Art Gallery of New York University, American museum and private collections have lent major works, and a 457-page catalogue has been prepared for the occasion.


On My Mind; Reclaiming the Victory
Spare us the astonishment and indignation that the Bush Administration puts on about Saddam Hussein's naughtinesses.
Maybe then we will see how to get rid of the man.
Did Mr.
Bush, after keeping Saddam Hussein in power, truly believe that he would accept defeat, out of sheer gentlemanliness?
Did Mr.
Bush think that after Saddam so carefully hid all those missiles and chemical and bacteriological weapons he would hand them over to U.N. inspectors, to make their day fruitful?


Layoffs at Time Inc.'s Magazines
In the most drastic staff reductions in almost two decades, the Time Inc.
Magazine Company said yesterday that it would lay off 105 editorial employees at six of its magazines.
The editorial cutbacks come in the wake of another 500 layoffs on the magazines' business side that Time Inc. made with little announcement over the last two months.
They bring the total number of layoffs to about 10 percent of the 6,000 staff positions at Fortune, Life, Money, People, Sports Illustrated and Time.


Regents Flunk Civics 101
By backing off a resolution condemning racial and religious bigotry, New York's Board of Regents has set a sorry example of leadership.
The resolution was a response to racial tensions and controversies involving two professors at New York's City College, Leonard Jeffries and Michael Levin.
Dr.
Jeffries, chairman of the African-American studies department, contends that a conspiracy against blacks was plotted by Jews and the Mafia in Hollywood, and espouses theories of black superiority.
Dr.
Levin, who teaches philosophy, promotes the notion that blacks are intellectually inferior.


Paribas Shifts Chairmen
Banque Paribas said today that its supervisory board had appointed Michel Francois-Poncet as chairman, replacing Andre Levy-Lang.


We Need Less, Not More, Din in the Subways
To the Editor:
I find most offensive in your Sept. 10 report of Transit Authority plans to pipe music into subway stations the idea that "music could vary from station to station depending on the preference of individual communities." How would such "communities" be determined -- geographically?
And if so, by home or by workplace?
By median age?
Socioeconomically?
Racially?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16
Moscow doubled its food aid request for the coming year, indicating to the European Community that it will need a total of $14.7 billion worth of aid.
Page A1


Who's Minding the Net? Almost Anyone but Burke
Coach Tom McVie likes to have a panoramic view of the proceedings on the ice at the Devils' training facility here.
He always sits, usually by himself, in the last row of seats, his head moving back and forth from one end of the rink to the other as if he were watching tennis.
"Come up and sit with me," McVie said around lunchtime today as he watched an end-to-end skate by a group of about 20 players.
"This is a good time to talk before these guys go in to lift weights."


Leath Castile Wed in Scotland
Leath Willow Castile, a Japanese interpreter and art consultant, and Clifford John Fowkes, a financial advisor and investor in Tiburon, Calif., were married yesterday in St.
Andrews, Scotland.
The Rev.
Douglas Galbraith performed the Anglican ceremony at St.
Salvator's Church at the University of St.
Andrews.
Mrs.
Fowkes, 30 years old, is a daughter of Rand and Sondra Castile of San Francisco and New York.
She attended the United Nations International School in New York, and graduated from Lake Erie College in Painesville, Ohio.
Her father, formerly the director of Japan House in New York, is the director of the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco.
Her mother is a conservator of Asian paintings at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Market Unmoved by Iraqi Export Action
The world oil market appeared to take little notice of the United Nations' decision yesterday to allow Iraq to resume limited exports, because buyers had been expecting the move for weeks.
But experts said Iraq could still cause a price jolt, because President Saddam Hussein might not go along with the conditions tied to the sale or because bureaucratic problems could delay exports.
In the long term, however, a return of Iraqi oil to world markets would tend to push prices lower, and some analysts believe that this United Nations decision, which covers a six-month period, is likely to be the beginning of uninterrupted sales by Iraq.
The United Nations said Iraq could export $1.6 billion worth of oil over six months, which at current prices comes to about 500,000 barrels a day.
This is a substantial increment on world markets; for example, the combined quotas of all the members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is now 22.3 million barrels a day.
OPEC is scheduled to meet on Tuesday in Vienna, and the organization may set a new quota based on anticipated demand for oil and production from around the world, including Iraq.


Kwathema Journal; As Apartheid Crumbles, Victim Finds Little Solace
Sandra Laing is a 36-year-old woman with soft brown skin and curly black hair.
Those features, she says, have been an enduring source of pain and degradation.
"My mother and father were white," she said, "And I am white."


Dow Rises 6.48; Closes At 3,024.37
Blue-chip stock prices rose sharply in heavy trading throughout the morning yesterday but gave back most of their gains in the afternoon.
Explaining the seesaw session, some traders cited the expiration of many stock options and index futures today.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which was up more than 25 points just before 1 P.M., skidded to close at 3,024.37, up 6.48.


U.N. PERMITS IRAQ LIMITED OIL SALES FOR CIVILIAN NEEDS
In the most significant easing of its Gulf war trade embargo so far, the Security Council authorized Iraq today to sell $1.6 billion worth of oil over the next six months to buy food and other essential civilian supplies and to compensate victims of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
But the carefully phrased resolution said all the money raised by these oil sales must be paid directly to the United Nations, which will earmark one-third for compensation payments and make sure the rest is spent only on imports approved by the Security Council.  [ Excerpts from the resolution, page A10. ]


Hinson's Thinking About Retirement
ROY HINSON, a Nets forward, is leaning strongly toward retirement after reinjuring his right knee last week.
"It's probably time for me to find something else to do," Hinson said yesterday from the Nets' practice center in North Bergen, N.J.
"The way my knee is now, there's no way. The Nets know the situation. We'll probably announce something official a little bit later."


Tropical Storm Kills at Least 5 in Japan


Review/Art; Gifted With Earth, Rough With a Pen
As an artist, Robert Smithson was nearly all mind and no natural touch, but he made the best of the situation.
In a retrospective of his works on paper at Columbia University, the artist's imagination conveys a dazzlingly literate, voracious, cross-fertilizing force even when the jangling lines of his drawings and collages set your teeth on edge.
In a little more than a decade, this restless, willful imagination propelled Smithson across the varying peripheries of Abstract Expressionism, Pop Art and Minimalism, to the forefront of Post-Minimalism, where he created the monumental earthworks and drawings that are his most important achievement.
By the time he died, in a plane crash in 1973, the 35-year-old Smithson had helped invent a form of expression in which immense scale and the rough-hewn materials of earth and rock made artistic touch beside the point.
In a sense, bulldozers and earthmovers did for Smithson what the newspaper image and silk-screen process did for Andy Warhol: they distanced him from the actual making of his art, paradoxically enabling it to become more personal and original.


Giuliani Faults Dinkins on Response to D'Amato
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican mayoral candidate in 1989, accused Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday of trying to score political points by denouncing recent criticism by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato as race-baiting.
In making that charge, of course, Mr.
Giuliani was trying to score political points of his own for a probable 1993 rematch with Mr.
Dinkins, who defeated him for the mayoralty by just 2 percentage points.
He suggested that the Mayor had been too quick to take umbrage at Senator D'Amato's remark that the city might be better off if Mr.
Dinkins took "a long sabbatical" to South Africa.


What He Told Gates on Iran: Text of Ex-C.I.A. Officer's Answers to Senate
Following are written responses, made public today, to questions of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence given on July 3 and July 8 by Charles E. Allen, former national intelligence officer for counterterrorism for the Central Intelligence Agency.
Q.  [ Mr.
Allen was first asked to recount what he told Mr.
Gates about his concerns that disputes over the inflated price of United States arms sold to Iran were about to compromise the secret arms-for-hostage deals, and that profits from those arms sales had been used to buy arms for Nicaragua's contra rebels. ]


Looking for Solace After Surgery
It could be a long winter for Dave Magadan, as he tells himself in mantra-like fashion, over and over, that he is in no way a .258 major league hitter, that injuries to his shoulders knocked him from the .328 pedestal he stood proudly on a year ago.
As for the Mets, and what they think, Magadan says he doesn't plan on wasting his breath.
He hopes they would just give him the benefit of the doubt.


Drivers, Avoid This Bridge
If motorists remember that Friday night last September with the same horror that Port Authority officials do, then maybe traffic at the George Washington Bridge this weekend won't be so bad -- the Port Authority hopes.
To do some road repairs this weekend and next, the agency plans to close a 700-foot stretch of the two-lane access ramps in Manhattan to the New Jersey-bound side of the bridge's lower level.
When it did similar work last September, the result was a monumental Friday night traffic jam that lasted through rush hour and past midnight, trapping thousands of New Jersey-bound motorists.


Diner's Journal
A Nova to Watch
Lespinasse, the sumptuous restaurant in the newly renovated St.
Regis Hotel at 2 East 55th Street in Manhattan, is the most ambitious and elegant spot to open this season.
The gilded, high-ceilinged dining room is done in soft shades of beige, with classical murals overhead and a giant crystal chandelier.
Roomy, well-spaced tables are draped in thick white linen, and guests sink into deep-cushioned armchairs.


CHRONICLE
News conferences are not normally by-invitation-only affairs.
But when RANSDELL PIERSON, a reporter for The New York Post, turned up at the Helmsley Park Lane Hotel yesterday morning for a news conference, security guards for LEONA M. HELMSLEY told him he was not on the invitation list.
Reporters -- Mr.
Pierson excepted -- had been told that Mrs.
Helmsley, who is seeking a new trial after her 1989 conviction for Federal tax evasion, would produce "bombshell" evidence at the news conference that would help clear her name.


On Stage, and Off
A Hitch in Lloyd Webber's Lyrics
You mean you've never heard of Sydmonton?
Well, darling, don't admit it to a soul.
It's the name of Andrew Lloyd Webber's estate in England where he holds an annual musical festival in late summer, very closed to the public, to introduce new work for assorted cronies, most of them British.
Performances are held at a church that just happens to be on his property.
But for all its pretension, a vow of silence never works with theater people.
British or American, they are so thrilled to be thought intimates of Mr.
Lloyd Webber that they can't stop themselves from telling the tiniest detail to every uninvited peon they know.


Excerpts From Senate Hearing on Nominee to Head C.I.A.
Following are excerpts from today's hearings by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central Intelligence, with questions by John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island, Senators Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio; David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma
; Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska
; John C.Danforth, Republican of Missouri, and
John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia.
The transcript was provided by the Federal News Service.
STATEMENT BY ALAN D. FIERS JR.
For five years, I've waited for this opportunity to speak publicly and uncumbered about Iran-contra.
And I've rehearsed this statement a thousand times in my mind in a thousand different places.
Each time it has a different tone -- sometimes accusative, apologetic, aggressive and disappassionate.
Today I'll make a maximum effort to be dispassionate, and sometimes that's difficult for me to do as I think some of you know.
Always the theme is the same.
The decision points and judgment factors that seem so clear-cut today were far different during the height of the storm. . . .


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Fernandez, Seles Win
Second-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, the defending champion, beat a fellow American, Marianne Werdel, 6-2, 6-3, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Nichirei international championships in Tokyo.
Top-seeded Monica Seles beat Rika Hiraki of Japan, 6-3, 6-4, in their second-round match.


Thomas Timlen, 62, Federal Reserve Leader
Thomas M. Timlen, a former vice president and chief administrative officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, died on Wednesday in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a heart attack, his family said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a chart with an article on the Health page on Wednesday about tests of a synthetic hormone to prevent breast cancer incorrectly described a hypothetical case in which a woman would have a relatively low risk of developing cancer.
The case, the third of four listed in the chart, was that of a 30-year-old woman who started menstruating at 14, had her first child at 19, and had never had a breast biopsy.
The chart should have said that she had no family history of breast cancer, not that her mother and sister had had the disease.


Rangers Slosh Past Islanders
The Rangers defeated the Islanders last night, 5-2, at the new, $65-a-seat Madison Square Garden where a crowd of 12,445 looked on.
Unfortunately, the ice was slushier than ever and the hockey was decidedly preseason.
The Islanders were aggressors at the start, but were quickly neutralized by the hungry, enforcement tactics of rookie left wing, Louie DeBrusk.
DeBrusk scored the first goal of the game, and was involved in three fights.
In DeBrusk's last battle, Mick Vukota received a game misconduct for a head butt.


New Campaigns
*
Madison Square Garden Communications and Entertainment, New York, yesterday introduced separate advertising campaigns for its revamped operations.
One campaign, for the renovated Madison Square Garden, carries the theme "Everything's changed but the memories." The other, for the Paramount, the new theater that replaces the Felt Forum, carries the theme, "The best of times . . . again." Both campaigns are by the company's new agency, Burkhardt &amp; Christy, New York.


Memo Shows Gates Sought Big Anti-Sandinista Effort
In a 1984 memorandum, Robert M. Gates, who was then Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, proposed an extensive American campaign to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government, including bombing raids on Nicaraguan military targets.
"These are hard measures," Mr.
Gates wrote in the memo, which condemned even President Ronald Reagan's efforts in behalf of the Nicaraguan resistance as "half measures, half-heartedly applied."


TV SPORTS
In this era of pregame laser light shows needed to introduce a basketball team, it shouldn't shock the senses to know that an hour will be expended tomorrow at 5 P.M. to present the National Basketball Association interlopers who will fill 10 of the 12 spots on the 1992 U.S.
Olympic basketball team.
Nor should it be a surprise to anyone that the crowning moment of this NBC extravaganza will be the expected introduction of the reluctant demigod, Michael Jordan, even though he would much rather be golfing next summer than running up and down a court in Barcelona, Spain.


Tokyo Debates Offering Troops to U.N.
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu opened a long-awaited drive today to win legislative approval for participation by Japanese troops in United Nations peacekeeping forces, the most sweeping proposal to ease the ban on sending the nation's military forces abroad since World War II.
Aides to Mr.
Kaifu acknowledged that they had not definitely secured the votes for approval of the legislation in the upper house of Parliament, which is controlled by opposition parties.
But they expressed confidence that some modifications might bring its passage in a few weeks.


For Children
Fishing
The Dorothy B. VII
Pier 6
Emmons Avenue
Sheepshead Bay
Brooklyn
(718) 646-4057 (evenings)
Recommended ages: 5 and up
Throughout the year
Even though Labor Day has passed, fishing days aren't necessarily over.
The Dorothy B. VII, a 70-foot charter boat, slips out from its mooring daily at 7 A.M. (for fishermen, that's late) to stalk porgies, sea bass and blackfish, or, these days, tautogs.
The Dorothy B. comes recommended by several tackle and bait stores and is known for accommodating families.
"It's a family-run business," said Capt.
Kevin Bradshaw.
His 84-year-old father, Walter, helps clean up after a day's outing, and his 24-year-old daughter, Dawn, is often the captain on weekends. (During the week, she practices law.)


Don't Tie U.S.-Soviet Relations to Cuba
To the Editor:
The thrust of "Fortress Cuba, Lonely Cuba" (editorial, Sept. 8) is on target.
Cuba is no longer a problem to anyone but itself.
Its troops are out of Africa.
For all practical purposes, the guerrilla wars are over in Latin America.
And the United States need no longer fear a Soviet military threat mounted from Cuba; indeed, as affirmed by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Moscow is beginning to reduce its military presence on the island.
Further, the Cuban economy is in dire straits; the time when it might have been an attractive model for other Latin states has passed.


Leland Bell, a Figurative Painter, Teacher and Lecturer, Dies at 69
Leland Bell, a figurative painter and teacher, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City.
He was 69 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Reykjavik, Iceland.
He died of leukemia, said his daughter, Temma Bell, who is also a painter.


Testimony Casts New Light on Iran-Contra Affair
The Senate Intelligence Committee produced new evidence today suggesting that Robert M. Gates, nominated to be Director of Central Intelligence, was warned earlier, more frequently and in more detail than he has acknowledged about key aspects of the Iran-contra affair.
The evidence, in written statements and new testimony, suggested that Mr.
Gates may have been advised before August 1986 that profits from arms sales to Iran might have been diverted to Nicaraguan rebels.
Until today, August 1986 was the earliest date for which evidence of such a warning to him existed.


Bank Merger Appears To Be Near
Merger talks between the Bank of Boston Corporation and the Shawmut National Corporation have reached a critical stage.
The two New England banking companies, satisfied with their examination of each other, are negotiating fine points.
The talks, which if successful would create a banking company that would be about the 10th largest in the country, come with both companies having suffered heavy losses from commercial real estate loans made in the 1980's.
Also, the banks' stature in the New England market suffered after the Fleet/Norstar Financial Group, based in Providence, R.I., acquired the failed Bank of New England earlier this year.


Art in Review
Jerry N. Uelsmann Witkin Gallery 415 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Oct. 19
This show, which is billed as a "Selective Retrospective," features examples of Jerry N. Uelsmann's work since 1961.
Mr.
Uelsmann, who lives in Tallahassee, Fla., has long been renowned for his elaborate black-and-white photographic works in which he prints half a dozen or more negatives into seamless, Surreal compositions.
Some early pictures feature simple formal comparisons -- of a curled-up nude and a clenched fist, say -- that suggest the oneiric imagery of Man Ray's painting "The Lovers, or Observatory Time" (1932-34), in which a gigantic pair of lips floats above a landscape.


Film Festival: The Spirit Is the Focus
IN years to come, the 29th New York Film Festival, which opens at Lincoln Center tonight with "The Double Life of Veronique," may be remembered as the festival that got religion.
It's not that the 33 films representing 20 countries preach any kind of consistent doctrine; their attitudes toward spiritual and religious matters could hardly be more diverse.
It is that an unusual number of this year's selections touch on issues of religious identity, faith and mystical connection and explore a split view of human existence that might be described as spiritual versus technological.


Three Women Slain in Home In Queens
Three women -- two sisters and a 16-year-old babysitter -- were shot in the head and killed by three gunmen who ransacked their home last night, the police said.
The bodies were discovered by the 10-year-old daughter of one of the women after she was awakened by gunshots around 10 P.M.
The victims had been tied up and shot several times in the head, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League ATLANTA BRAVES -- Signed Bill Lajoie, special assignment scout, to a two-year conract extension.
MIAMI MARLINS -- Named Dave Dombrowski general manager and signed him to a four-year contract.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Named Dan Duquette vice-president of player personnel and general manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association MIAMI HEAT -- Named Tony Fiorentino scouting coordinator.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Announced that Rich DeVos has purchased the club from a group headed by William duPont III.
Football  National Football League INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Chris Conlin and Mark Cannon, offensive linemen.
Placed Ray Donaldson, center, on the injured reserve list.
Released Cedric Figaro, linebacker.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Re-signed Shawn McCarthy, punter.


Art in Review
Adam Rolston Wessel O'Connor 580 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 5
Adam Rolston's plea for safe sex is an installation piece that effectively imitates a warehouse full of condoms.
The gallery's carpet has been taken up to reveal a scruffy paint-stained floor; the space is stacked high with cardboard cartons all printed with the words "Trojan Condoms."


William and Mary's President Resigning to Head Auto Club
Paul R. Verkuil, a former law school professor and dean, is leaving his job as president of the College of William and Mary to become the head of the American Automobile Association.
Mr.
Verkuil, 51 years old, announced his resignation on Wednesday to senior college administrators.


Treasury Issues Narrowly Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed, and interest rates were little changed again yesterday.
Market participants sold securities for a time after the Government reported that the merchandise trade deficit rose sharply in July and that initial unemployment claims fell slightly in the week ended Sept. 7.
The effects of the reports were not long-lived, however, and buyers emerged at the lower price levels.


Resurgens Communications reports earnings for Year to June 30


INSIDE
Cambodian Accord Closer
An end to the Cambodian civil war appeared to move into sight, as the four sides reportedly agreed on a U.N.-supervised election.
Page 3.


Classical Music in Review
Ellen Orner  Weill Recital Hall
Ellen Orner, a Russian-born violinist who has been living in the United States since 1974, when she was 12 years old, played a daring program of unaccompanied violin music on Monday evening.
And although the solo violin literature offers few works that could be described as easy, Ms.
Orner seemed intent on taking a particularly strenuous course: She performed three 20th-century works, starting with Cristobal Halffter's insistent and sometimes harsh Sonata, a 12-tone work composed in 1959.


Tab Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Europe Gives Up on Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia's murderous conflicts defy easy resolution.
But that's no justification for walking away from them, as Western Europe's leaders have now all but done.
The failure of European institutions to respond more effectively to the first forcible change in European borders since World War II is all the more disheartening since similar, but more dangerous, conflicts could easily emerge from a fracturing Soviet Union.
It's now up to the United Nations to impose an equitable peace.


American Recreation Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Vallen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


No Thomas? Then No McCloskey
Jack McCloskey, the Detroit Pistons' general manager, has resigned from the selection committee for the 1992 Olympic men's basketball team because Isiah Thomas, the Pistons' perennial All-Star guard, was not invited to play on the team.
Ten members of the Olympic team -- all of them National Basketball Association players -- will be officially announced this afternoon.
According to several N.B.A. sources who requested anonymity, the 10 will be Charles Barkley, Larry Bird, Patrick Ewing, Magic Johnson, Michael Jordan, Karl Malone, Chris Mullin, Scottie Pippen, David Robinson and John Stockton.


Wasteful Taxes on Waste
Nearly all the 48 contiguous states ship some of their garbage to landfills in other states.
This traffic in garbage is environmentally and economically sound.
Even so, some states are asking Congress to pass a law restricting interstate shipments.
It's a perverse idea.
In the past few years, eight states have passed laws imposing tariffs or bans on imported garbage.
After the courts found that these laws violated the interstate commerce clause, the states asked Congress to let them levy tariffs on trash.
The proposed law would use a sliding scale, assigning lower tariffs to wastes that are shipped between contiguous states and higher tariffs -- more than $50 a ton in some cases -- to wastes that are sent to distant states.


Wild Dogs Are Tenafly's Quarry for a Day
Along with deer, fox, skunks and chipmunks, a small pack of wild dogs lives in the dense forest on the east side of town, emerging to wander the streets and broad lawns of the grand homes nearby.
Some call the animals "coy-dogs" -- not as in shy or bashful, but as in mix of coyote and dog.
Animal experts disagree, insisting they're a cross of Labrador and shepherd, the wild-born offspring of domestic dogs abandoned over the years along the leafy highways atop the nearby Palisades.
No one is sure just how many dogs there are -- the official estimate is 6 to 16 -- and no one has reported being hurt.
But people are sure of one thing: they want to be free of them.


Review/Film Festival; It's Never Too Late To Play The Hero
If "Toto the Hero" (Toto le Heros) is an indication of things to come, then Jaco van Dormael, a 34-year-old Belgian writer and director, is a bright new talent to celebrate.
The festivities begin this weekend at the New York Film Festival, which will present "Toto" tonight at 9:30 and tomorrow at 1:30 P.M.


U.P.I. Seeks Concessions
The chief financial officer of United Press International told a bankruptcy court judge yesterday that the news service would not survive without large concessions from the Wire Service Guild.
The executive, David L. Moier, testified at a hearing in New york on the company's request for permission to stop paying certain benefits that are due employees under their current contract.


Pan Am Names Head As 3 Officers Resign
Russell L. Ray Jr., a man with a long career with the airline industry dating back to 1960, yesterday was elected president and chief executive of Pan American World Airways.
Mr.
Ray, who will leave his present position as president and general manager of commercial marketing at the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, was described as an executive who likes to mingle with his employees and who has enjoyed good relations with some of the industry's unions like the pilots.


Yugoslav Clashes May Be Widening
Yugoslavia's conflict grew more extensive today as communities far from the scene of battle tried to keep federal army forces from crossing into Croatia, where the fighting has been confined for the last three months.
Here in the capital of secessionist Croatia, officials said they expected an all-out attack by federal troops and said a 12-mile-long column of Yugoslav federal Government tanks, troops and artillery that moved out of Belgrade had split and crossed into their republic to launch a three-pronged offensive on settlements including the towns of Osijek and Vukovar.


Corrections
A listing on the Television page of Weekend yesterday misstated the VCR Plus+ number for the movie "Carmen," to be shown at 6 P.M. today on Channel 13.
The correct number is 97995.


Harold's Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Warning Label on Antidepressant Is Opposed
A panel of expert advisers to the Food and Drug Administration told the agency today that there was no sound evidence to conclude that the prescription drug Prozac or any other antidepressant caused suicide or other violent behavior.
As a result of that unanimous finding, the advisers voted, 6 to 3, to recommend against any labeling changes that would warn users of the drug that it posed a suicide risk.


Chronicle
Three years ago it was announced that DANIEL BARENBOIM would take over as music director of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra this season, but seven hours before his first concert, scheduled for Sept. 12, the orchestra went on strike.
Instead of that grand opening in Orchestra Hall, the Israeli conductor and his orchestra are to make music together for the first time in their partnership at a free concert tonight in Grant Park.


Don't Put Hitler Among the Vegetarians
To the Editor:
Robert Milch asserts in "What About Hitler?" (letter, Sept. 2): "Adolf Hitler was a vegetarian all his life and wrote extensively on the subject." Because Hitler suffered from excessive sweatiness and flatulence, he occasionally went on a vegetarian diet.
But his primary diet included meat.
In "The Life and Death of Adolf Hitler," Robert Payne mentions Hitler's fondness for Bavarian sausages.
Other biographers, including Albert Speer, point out that he also ate ham, liver and game.


Mars Graphic Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Primate's Remarks Assailed
Prime Minister John Major's Government rebuked the Archbishop of Canterbury today for saying that poverty played a part in Britain's recent urban violence.
The Anglican Primate, Archbishop George Carey, said in a speech Thursday that rioting in Britain over the summer had its roots in "social deprivation, poverty, poor housing and illiteracy." His remarks were interpreted as a challenge to Conservative Government policies on the inner cities and education.
Today, Mr.
Major argued that the riots had been carefully planned in advance.


Slow Crossing
The Port Authority is warning motorists to avoid the George Washington Bridge this weekend because of repair work there.
Several access ramps will be closed on the Manhattan side of the bridge.
Until 7 P.M.
Saturday: All access to the New Jersey-bound lower level will be shut. 7 P.M.
Saturday to 3 P.M.
Monday: Ramps to the New Jersey-bound lower level from the Henry Hudson Parkway will be open.
All access from the Harlem River Drive, the Cross-Bronx Expressway and the Major Deegan Expressway will be shut between 3 and 5 P.M.
Sunday, and will otherwise be limited to one of two lanes.  3 P.M.
Monday: All lanes re-open.


Newcastle-Under-Lyme; They're Trying to Stop People From Being Beastly
The people at the Polite Society, a very English organization that preaches the gospel of high courtesy and good manners, have (they're so sorry to report) this small problem: It seems they are a bit short of cash donations these days and (well, it is a bit awkward, isn't it?) they aren't quite sure how to ask for more.
"Money always is such a difficult subject," said the Rev.
Ian Gregory, the founder and chairman of the society.


Adobe Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Julia Preston, Stonewall Jackson Granddaughter, 104
Julia Jackson Christian Preston, a granddaughter of Thomas Jonathan (Stonewall) Jackson, the legendary Confederate general, died Sept. 15 at the Presbyterian Home in High Point, N.C.
She was 104 years old.
Mrs.
Preston was born in San Diego on June 5, 1887.
Her mother, Julia Thomas Neal Christian, died when Mrs.
Preston was a child and she was reared by her grandmother, Anna Morrison Jackson, General Jackson's second wife and widow.


Bush's Letter to U.S. Jews
WASHINGTON, Sept. 20 -- Following is the text of a letter, dated Tuesday, from President Bush to Shoshana S. Cardin, chairwoman of the Conference of Presidents of Major Jewish Organizations:
Dear Shoshana:


Polish Cardinal Acknowledges Distress He Caused in 1989 Homily
Jozef Cardinal Glemp, the Roman Catholic Primate of Poland, told a dozen leaders of Jewish groups today that he recognized the pain caused by statements he made in a widely publicized homily in August 1989.
He also said that "through dialogue" he had come to understand how his statements were viewed as "fostering stereotypes of Jews and Judaism" and were "based on mistaken information."


Syracuse Linebacker Faces Tough Task
So much of the game John Lusardi plays is about identity: Institutional, regional, national, and most of all, personal.
Lusardi, a senior inside linebacker at Syracuse University, will be an important part of the defensive unit that plans to challenge the University of Florida at a sold-out Carrier Dome Saturday afternoon.
Once an afterthought in the recruiting process as the result of a broken ankle in his senior year of high school, Lusardi's opportunity to start is the result of a season-ending knee injury suffered by Dan Conley.


No Indictment of Brooklyn Officer In a Slaying That Led to Protests
A Brooklyn grand jury has voted not to indict the police officer who last month fatally shot a 19-year-old man who had aimed a pistol at the officer's partner, prosecutors said yesterday.
The shooting in Flatbush on Aug. 25, which occurred shortly after racial violence broke out in nearby Crown Heights, led to two nights of protests.


BTR Bids $2.55 Billion for Hawker Siddeley
In the third major takeover bid in Britain in five days, BTR P.L.C, an industrial conglomerate, offered about $2.55 billion today for the Hawker Siddeley Group P.L.C., a diversified industrial manufacturer.
Hawker Siddeley's board said it would fight the bid.
The businesses of the company, whose sales totaled $4.2 billion last year, include electric motors and power equipment, instruments and controls, batteries, rail and industrial goods, and servicing aircraft engines.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Music; Reading the Composer's Intentions
When Leonard Slatkin led the New York Philharmonic in Barber's First Symphony in Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night, the work's lyrical themes stayed in the ears long after its tumultuous outbursts had been spent.
The oboe solo in the third movement, for example, was constructed of spare musical breaths of unequal length that seemed to float above the pulsing strings.
As that pulsing became more insistent, the music constantly undid expectations, switching meters, creating cross rhythms.
Slowly accumulating energy, the music built to a percussive climax complete with shimmering cymbal and beating timpani.
But the oboe's theme remained poignantly intact in memory.


Palmer Talk Show Host
He made it on the mound.
He has made it as an underwear model in magazine ads and television commercials.
Now JIM PALMER is trying to make it as a television talk show host.
The former Baltimore Oriole star said he would soon begin taping a 30-minute syndicated talk show to be called "Living Today."


Russian Assembly Demands That Cabinet Speed Reform
The Russian republic's Parliament vented its frustration over the failing economy today by adopting a motion to recognize the obvious: that reform measures have been unsatisfactory and inefficient, and new approaches and ministers had better be tried fast.
The nonbinding motion was not particularly important, except as a measure of the elected politicians' edginess over being held increasingly responsible for the economy now that centralized Communism has been effectively banned as a Government instrument.


Reviews/Film Festival; A Rare Chance to See Visconti's 'Rocco' in Full
Run, don't lope or jog, to the nearest telephone, or to Alice Tully Hall itself, to see if there are any tickets left for the 3 o'clock screening this afternoon of Luchino Visconti's "Rocco and His Brothers."
It may be your only chance to behold the 1960 Italian epic in something like its original grandeur.
The New York Film Festival is presenting it just once, which is lamentable.
In the come-what-may, eclectic circumstances of a festival like this one, "Rocco and His Brothers" serves as a kind of lodestar, a film that helps you keep your bearings.


Taylor Reinstated
After a year under suspension for drug abuse, Detroit cornerback TERRY TAYLOR was reinstated by National Football League Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE yesterday and is expected to join the Lions on Monday.
The 30-year-old Taylor, a seven-year veteran who had played previously for Seattle, was suspended last year after testing positive for drugs for a third time. (AP)
(AP)


Braves Beat the Dodgers To Move Back Into First
In the heat of a division race that has been boiling for weeks now, the Atlanta Braves turned to 21-year-old Steve Avery tonight.
Their reward was first place -- again -- in the National League West.
Five days after he beat the Los Angeles Dodgers in Atlanta, Avery beat them again, this time a 3-0 victory at Dodger Stadium to send the Braves back into first place by a half game.


Incinerators: A Problem, Not a Solution
Under its latest solid-waste disposal plan, the Dinkins administration proposes burning 68 percent of its municipal trash.
David Dinkins was right in 1989, when he characterized mass-burn incinerators as "belching poison into the air" and producing "toxic" ash.
He is wrong in 1991 when he looks to these same incinerators as a way of compensating for the city's failing recycling programs.
Before the city puts its faith and considerable money in new so-called state-of-the-art incinerators, City Hall should consider the following:


Shutout by Clemens (17-8) And Reed's Bat Sink Yanks
When Roger Clemens throws a shutout and limits you to three hits, it is almost expected.
You nod to perhaps the best pitcher in the majors and hope you pound him the next time.
But how do you explain it when Jody Reed hits .543 against you for an entire season?
What kind of explanation could there be for any hitter to bury a team with such ridiculous ease?
As with many of the things that have gone awry for the struggling Yankees this season, there really is no explanation.


No Name, Few Clues: The Case of 'Baby Hope'
On a scorching weekday morning in July, Bob Perdue, a highway maintenance supervisor, was working with two of his crew on the southbound lanes of the Henry Hudson Parkway on the skinny northern neck of Manhattan.
Beyond the right-hand shoulder of the road, just north of the Dyckman Street exit, the land falls steeply away to the Hudson River.
There, at the base of a tree, half covered with branches and leaves, he saw it -- an iridescent blue picnic cooler.


Public &amp; Private; Unhappy In Their Own Ways
You don't sass Inez.
That's the kind of woman she is.
She takes her two grandchildren, aged 9 and 10, to church every Sunday and if the younger one, who Inez says is fresh as paint, gives a bit of trouble, Inez will give her a piece of her mind.
Inez is the kind of grandmother who is always threatening to put the fear of God into you.
She can do it, too.
She's also the kind of grandmother who has left a paper trail through courtrooms from Jersey City to Queens, as though she were a habitual felon instead of a school nurse's assistant.
That's because from time to time she has to convince some judge that she is fit to raise this boy and girl.
She rummages through the papers ("Go get my bag, baby -- hurry up, bring Nana's pocketbook") to refresh her recollection.


U.S. Cedes Lead to States On Family Leave Policies
Earlier this year, an obscure Oklahoma law allowed Bill Bryant to duck out of work for nine weeks, board a plane to Sao Paulo, Brazil, and meet the girl of his dreams.
Believe it or not, this is part of a national trend.


Chronicle
EVELYN LAUDER, the cosmetics company executive, and ALEXANDRA PENNEY, editor in chief of Self magazine, were having lunch at the "21" Club in April when Mrs.
Lauder began rattling off ideas for articles about breast cancer.
"I told Alexandra I was really annoyed about how negative everything written about breast cancer is," said Mrs.
Lauder, who is a member of the board of overseers at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
"There is no publication that ever does anything reassuring, that tells you there is a lot of help, a lot of nurturing, support and often cure."


Don't Put Hitler Among the Vegetarians; He Loved His Squab
To the Editor:
Robert Milch writes in "What About Hitler?" (letter, Sept. 2), "Adolf Hitler was a vegetarian all his life." On page 89 of "The Gourmet Cooking School Cookbook" (1964), Dione Lucas, recalling her pre-World War II stint as a hotel chef in Hamburg, Germany, states:


Arabs And Israel Keep Baker at Bay Over Peace Talks
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d ended his week of talks with Syrian, Jordanian, Israeli and Palestinian leaders today, without getting final confirmation from any of them that they would attend the American-proposed Middle East peace conference.
Reporters traveling with Mr.
Baker were told on his flight from Damascus to a refueling stop here that the United States may simply issue invitations to the four parties for a conference in October, if they do not stop "fiddling" over terms for attending talks.


Corrections
A brief television review in Weekend yesterday misstated the networks on which two television movies are to be shown tomorrow at 9 P.M.
"Guilty Until Proven Innocent" is on NBC; "Runaway Father" is on CBS.


Food Lion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 7


Winnebago Unit Being Shut
Winnebago Industries, trying to halt two years of losses, said today that it was closing down its fledgling commercial van business to concentrate on its mainstay -- motor homes.
Winnebago started the delivery truck business in early 1990 to counter cyclical downturns in its recreational vehicle business.
But it never caught on.
"It didn't account for company revenue; that was one of the problems," said a Winnebago spokesman, Robert Cooley.
"The market never developed and during these economic times it probably wasn't going to, to any extent."


Guidepost; A Streetsmart Guide to Biking to Work
Commuting to and from work by bicycle is increasingly popular.
The trip can be made safer and more comfortable with simple equipment that can be bought at most bicyle and sports equipment stores.
The bike itself should be equipped with a rack to hold saddlebags for carrying clothes and other items.
The most important parts of a commuting bike are its wheels and tires.
The wheels should be strong enough to withstand potholes, sudden turns and stops and extra weight.
Rims should be at least 1 1/4 inches wide and have a minimum of 36 spokes a wheel.
Tires made with Kevlar, the material used in bulletproof vests, will reduce the threat of punctures.
And cantilever brakes have superior stopping power.
Here is what the well-equipped commuting biker looks like.


Nasdaq Index at Record; Dow Slips
Blue-chip stocks erased modest gains and fell slightly in choppy trading yesterday while smaller stocks soared to record levels.
Much of the market's volatility, which was compressed in a narrow range, was attributed to the expiration of stock options and index futures, analysts said.


A Quick Fix for Homeless Families
Toward the end of the Koch administration, New York City began an ambitious housing program for poor families.
Now it has been overwhelmed, in part because the prospect of permanent homes has lured many families that had been living doubled up with relatives or friends.
Meeting the demand may be impossible without substantial Federal help.
Until that materializes, however, the problem can be allayed by making it easier for families to remain in shared space.
That could be accomplished by consolidating the grants families receive from welfare.


Rehnquist Opposes Bill That Seeks Shift in Gun Trials to U.S. Courts
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist has urged the members of the House Judiciary Committee to reject Senate legislation that would allow Federal law enforcement authorities to replace local officials in prosecuting crimes committed with firearms.
The legislation, sponsored by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, was included in a broad anticrime bill that passed the Senate this summer.
Under the provisions of two D'Amato amendments, which passed by large margins, Federal prosecutors could seek the death penalty for murders committed with a gun and impose mandatory prison sentences of up to 30 years for using a firearm in a crime.


Unitronix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Immunize Now, Save Later
How much is it worth to immunize every child in America?
It's a $40 million question that Congress must soon face.
Immunizing children is extremely cost-effective.
Every dollar spent on vaccinations saves $10 in later health care costs.
Ideally, all children ought to be vaccinated against diseases like measles, mumps, rubella, polio and whooping cough by the time they are 2 years old.
Yet 30 percent of 2-year-olds are not properly immunized.
In some urban areas, less than 40 percent of minority children are immunized.


Cambodians Reach Accord on Elections
An end to the bitter 12-year Cambodian civil war appeared to move into sight today when diplomats reported that the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh and the three rebel factions opposing it had resolved a dispute over what kind of elections should be held to choose the country's future rulers.
The compromise reached here at talks between all four parties calls for Cambodians to determine their future through an election supervised by the United Nations.
A system of proportional representation would allow each faction to be represented in the national assembly according to its share of the popular vote.


Shipping Out A Walkout: Muller Traded By the Devils
The Devils gave more than enough evidence tonight that they are not forgiving to those who walk out of training camp over contract disputes, even if the player involved is the captain.
The team traded Kirk Muller to the Montreal Canadiens along with veteran goalie Roland Melanson for Stephane Richer and Tom Chorske.
Lou Lamoriello, the New Jersey president, announced the trade at the beginning of the second period of the team's exhibition game with the Rangers at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, and it shocked many of the Devils players.


Review/Television; James Brown Teams Up With M.C. Hammer
Anything Cinemax can do, HBO can modify.
Cinemax had a music series called "Sessions," in which current stars performed alongside their models; now, HBO has picked up the idea for "Influences," a one-on-one version of the same scenario: one current hit maker and one older star perform separately and together.
The premiere of "Influences" is, in effect, James Brown's second comeback special on cable television after his pay-per-view extravaganza, "Living in America," as he and his old band, the JB's (now called Roots Revisited), share the stage with M.C.
Hammer and some of Mr.
Hammer's male dancers.
It was produced by Stephanie Bennett, who also produced some episodes of "Sessions," and will be shown tonight at 10 P.M.
The pairing of Mr.
Brown and Mr.
Hammer isn't balanced.
Mr.
Hammer has only a fraction of Mr.
Brown's capabilities; where Mr.
Brown sings, dances and virtually invented his own music, Mr.
Hammer borrows older music and can't sing, although he can dance up a storm.
Tramaine Hawkins, a gospel singer, also appears as a token of the principals' links to gospel music.


Classical Music in Review
Elaine Comparone  Harpsichordist Weill Recital Hall
That one of the foremost exponents of Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach's keyboard works in this country should be a harpsichordist is slightly ironic.
Though the composer's favorite instrument for personal use was the clavichord, which would make no impact in the concert hall in any case, C. P. E. Bach was quick to take up early pianos, which were plentiful at the court of Frederick the Great during his employ there (1740-67).


A Last Fling for '91: Cone Nearly Gets No-Hitter
There was, with each successive out, a momentous rhythm to the explosions.
David Cone's fastball would detonate in catcher Charlie O'Brien's glove, and Shea Stadium would erupt in roars.
Boom, boom. Boom, boom.


Premier Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Classical Music in Review
Kumi Ogano, pianist
92d Street Y
A New York debut recital is an opportunity for a performer to make a first impression.
But Kumi Ogano, a pianist from Japan who studied in Tokyo and at Indiana University, played a debut concert on Thursday that left one persuaded that first impressions are not always the fairest or most accurate ones.


Oil-Dri Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


News Summary
International 2-5
Secretary Baker got no commitments during a week of talks with Syrian, Jordanian, Israeli and Palestinian leaders that they would definitely attend the peace conference.
He may simply issue invitations.
Page 1


Other Phone Failures Hurt Air Control
Major telephone failures that significantly degrade air traffic control services are far more common than is generally recognized, according to data released today by a Congressional subcommittee.
Although few of them were noticed by the public, there were 114 episodes of "major" telephone failures that disrupted air traffic control in the year beginning in August 1990, the data showed.


Pamida Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


Session Ends In Hartford; Deficit Stays
Connecticut legislators, weary after more than eight months of angering residents over taxes at every turn, found themselves paralyzed late Thursday over a final package of fee increases and technical bills.
So they simply adjourned their session and went home, leaving accounts out of balance and throwing in doubt the future of several dozen government workers and thousands of immature trout.
The $25 million fee package, which was deemed indispensable to the budget only a few weeks ago, would have raised license and permit fees for thousands of people who do business with the state, from those who conduct fireworks displays to those who fish and hunt and own boats.


Review/Music; Dave Frishberg's Moods Reflect Then and Now
"The older I get, the more I'm convinced that everything really used to be better," Dave Frishberg said midway in Tuesday's opening-night show of his six-day engagement at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street.
"I turned off the radio in 1957."
By "everything," the pop-jazz pianist, songwriter and singer seemed to mean many things, but above all the quality of music.
And judging by his own extraordinarily demanding standards of songwriting craft, he was right.


Record Catfish Caught
It's the kind of sensation an angler dreads: a wrist-jarring bump when the rod is flicked back at the end of a cast.
"I thought I had snagged a log," is the way CLARENCE KERR put it.
Then the log began to dip and dive, and 18 minutes later when Kerr reeled it in, he landed what turned out to be a 103-pound blue catfish, an apparent world record and 6 pounds heavier than any ever caught on a 25-pound test line.
Kerr, who caught the big fish in the Missouri River near Brownville, Neb., said that he had used a leopard frog as bait and that the fish, which was weighed by Missouri Conservation officials, was 55 3/4 inches long and 38 3/4 inches around.


Pier 1 Imports reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Massachusetts Is Asked To Ease Abortion Laws
Gov.
William F. Weld introduced legislation Thursday to make it easier to obtain an abortion in Massachusetts, but a number of legislators said the bill would have a hard time winning approval.
The most powerful opponent is expected to be William M. Bulger, president of the Massachusetts Senate, who in the past has blocked attempts to add an abortion rights amendment to the state Constitution.
Senator Bulger, a Democrat, is in Ireland this week and cannot be reached for comment, an aide said.


Product Safety Commission Is Criticized as Too Slow to Act
In November 1989, the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission determined that a popular portable heater might pose a fire risk.
But it did not alert the public until last month, after the manufacturer agreed to fix 3.6 million units.
In those 21 months, while the agency and company investigated and negotiated, eight people died in two fires that may have been started by faulty wiring in the heaters, said David Fonvielle, a lawyer in Tallahassee, Fla., for plaintiffs in some of these cases.
The manufacturer, DeLonghi S.p.A, said the units caused no fires.


'Bad Tip' on Mel Hall Draws Agents' Apology
MEL HALL has never hidden his dislike for Boston, and he said he was given another reason to continue feeling that way yesterday.
Before the Yankees-Red Sox game at Fenway Park, Hall said that he was running through Logan Airport to catch a taxi this afternoon when he was stopped and detained by two men who identified themselves as Federal drug-enforcement agents.
They told Hall he fit the description of a drug dealer they were pursuing.


New Effort in Works On Rights Bill Accord
Senator John C. Danforth said today that he would try once more to meet Bush Administration objections to civil rights legislation by using anti-discrimination standards accepted by the President last year in the Americans with Disabilities Act.
The bill will come up within the next two weeks, Senator George J. Mitchell, the Democratic majority leader, said on the Senate floor.


Copper Tops $1.10 a Pound For First Time in 5 Months
Copper futures prices topped $1.10 a pound for the first time in five months yesterday as industrial users scrambled to lock in supplies.
Copper for delivery in September rose 3.10 cents, to $1.101 a pound, on New York's Commodity exchange.
It was the highest settlement of a near-term copper contract since April 19.


Congressional Inquiry Examines Reports of Bogus Abortion Clinics
Some women looking for an abortion clinic are finding anti-abortion pressure instead, a Congressional report says.
A House subcommittee staff report said as many as 2,000 "bogus clinics" might be operating nationwide.
Representative Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, held a subcommittee hearing today with testimony by women who say they were victimized by deceptive practices by such clinics.


Sports of The Times; The Shape Of Things To Come
Recently, a friend, discussing how rapidly changing technology has altered our concept of time, used a white-water rafting expedition he took this summer to illustrate the challenges facing managers in the 21st century.
The world, he reasoned, is a raft, engulfed in a swirl of shifting events: choppy, fast-moving rapids, tossing the raft to and fro, bombarding its navigators with a steady barrage of challenges that demand swift responses.


Teachers Return To Classrooms Without a New Contract


Austin Graves, 82, New York President Of John Wanamaker
Austin T. Graves, who was president of John Wanamaker, New York, when the Manhattan department store closed in 1954 and who was later president and chief executive of Gruen Industries, died on Sept. 10 at his home in Port St.
Lucie, Fla.
He was 82 years old.
The Port St.
Lucie police said Mr.
Graves and his wife, Mary, 80, were shot to death in their home by their son, Austin T. Graves Jr., 49, who lived with them and who had been appointed their guardian by the State of Florida.
The police said the son then killed himself.
The younger Mr.
Graves apparently could not handle the pressure of family responsibilities, the police said.


Latshaw Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


LTX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Releases May Take Time, U.N. Chief Says
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar said today that he was convinced that hostages in the Middle East would be freed but said he could not predict a time.
Questioned at a news conference , Mr.
Perez de Cuellar said: "I continue to be hopeful that in the days ahead we are going to have some good news. I tell you very honestly I am confident that something will happen, but perhaps it will take time."


Now, When You're Out You're In
A few years ago, it was just about impossible for a fashion newcomer like Byron Lars to get a foot -- let alone a dress -- inside a major store.
Lars?
Who had ever heard of him?
But last winter the 26-year-old designer packed up the eight samples that were his entire spring line, marched into Henri Bendel and walked away with an order for 80 pieces.
Now his second collection, for fall, is in 10 stores around the country, including Bloomingdale's in New York, which put his witty clothes in its Lexington Avenue windows in July.


Salomon Expects to Continue Finding Bidding Violations
Salomon Brothers, in formally disclosing yesterday that its internal investigations showed it had committed two additional violations of the rules governing the Treasuries markets, said that even more violations were expected to be uncovered in the future.
The newly discovered violations, both of which Government officials said occurred in 1990, mean that the firm was violating Treasury rules even earlier than had previously been acknowledged.
The firm submitted bids for Treasury securities in a customer's name without the customer's authorization, then kept the securities awarded in the bogus bids for itself.
It first admitted in August that it had submitted illegal bids in Treasury auctions.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association


Patents; Alarm Gives a Warning of Children in the Pool
In an attempt to prevent drownings of children who fall into swimming pools while no one is looking, an electronics engineer in Colorado has patented an alarm system activated by a small transmitter that children would wear.
The invention was inspired by a Phoenix woman, Karla J. Roffee, who was concerned about the safety of her grandchildren.
Ms.
Roffee said Phoenix already required people to build fences around their pools, but that drownings continued to occur.


Bridge
Some deals have an element of paradox about them, which may be of some slight help in solving the real-life play-or-defend problem shown in the diagram.
It occurred this month at the Bergen Bridge Club in Teaneck, N.J., and was reported by Simon Satanovsky of Brooklyn, who held the West cards.
The two-club bid was in the Precision style, showing club length and opening values.
The jump to three spades was strong, as such jumps are when the opposing bidding has come to a halt, and four spades was reached.
Looking at all four hands, would you choose to play four spades or defend?


About New York
David Frank stood in the sunshine at the top of the City Hall steps.
He wore a bright yellow cap to match his bright yellow pants.
His smile bespoke a man on the way to recapturing a golden fragment of his past.
Minutes earlier, the Mayor had waved to him, a nice start to a nice day.
In 1932, Mr.
Frank, then a 15-year-old high school senior, condescended to take his 12-year-old brother, Lee, on one of his cherished ambulatory adventures.
They had taken the subway from the Bronx to City Hall, where Lee had never been.
They then headed in the direction of the Public Library, had lunch at an Automat, trekked to the Metropolitan Museum and from there to the Museum of the City of New York.


Observer; Twelve Eyes Couchant
Here's a photo of three actresses in a TV sitcom scene.
They are sitting on a couch in a TV sitcom parlor.
This sitcom can be seen later this week.
By tuning in, I can sit on my couch looking at three people sitting on a couch.
Suddenly I absolutely have to see this sitcom.
The idea of sitting on a couch looking at three people sitting on a couch is irresistible.
It is -- what's the word? -- a metaphor? an epiphany? a statement?
That's it: It is a statement.
A statement about the meaninglessness of life.


Climbing to Be More Costly
Stopping the litter piling up on the roof of the world, Nepal announced today that charges for climbing Mount Everest would quadruple beginning on March 1.
The new spring season charge, "in the interests of environmental conservation," will be $10,000 for the first nine climbers, plus $1,200 for each extra member, the Tourism Ministry said.
The current fee is a flat rate $2,300.


Soviets Should Try Henry George Land Plan
To the Editor:
Since the unsuccessful Soviet coup, Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin are accelerating the transition from socialism to the market.


Review/Film Festival; Four Soviet Women, Too Close for Comfort
If ever there was a good argument for family life in close quarters it is "Adam's Rib," a wonderfully wry Soviet comedy about three generations of women living in nerve-jangling proximity to one another.
Sharing a bathroom, some clothes, some onerous chores and a lot more intimacy than any of them bargained for, the heroines of this story manage to make the best of a desperately claustrophobic situation.
Presiding over it all is the silent figure of a matriarch (Yelena Bogdanova), who lies paralyzed in one corner of the apartment while her daughter and two granddaughters bustle frantically about.
The director, Vyacheslav Krishtofovich, eloquently moves his film from the everyday to something much larger by beginning with this silent old woman's memories of a warm family life that is long gone.


Edwards (A.G.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept 21


Is It Time for Hostetler To Cast Pocket Veto?
Jeff Hostetler has become a central figure in two great American sports: pro football and second-guessing.
A year ago, when Phil Simms was the starting quarterback, the Giants won their first 10 games.
This year, with Hostetler the newly anointed starter and Simms his unused backup, the Giants have lost two of their first three games.


Democrats Pass Torch As Bearers Seek Light
After two months of decision making by potential Presidential contenders, the torch has been passed to a new, eclectic and largely unknown generation of Democrats.
As the Democratic National Committee begins its fall meeting here today, its members are surveying, for the first time, a Presidential field that almost no one could have predicted a year ago, when most of the speculation centered on names like Gephardt, Bentsen and Cuomo.
The new candidates, most of whom will be speaking to the national committee this weekend, are, by definition, risk-takers, undeterred by the crushing approval ratings of President Bush.


Hey Broten, Listen Up!
The Minnesota North Stars yesterday took $200,000 out of their base four-year offer to NEAL BROTEN but added $1 million in deferred payments over 10 years.
Dissatisfied with the North Stars' offer of $2.6 million over 14 years -- $400,000 for each of the next four seasons and $100,000 for each of 10 years thereafter -- Broten left his home state recently to play with a German pro club.
He has a clause in his German contract that would allow him to leave as long as he does so by Sept. 30.


AAR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Vestiges of Communism Enmesh Soviet Union's New Entrepreneurs
The problems of starting and running a business anywhere in Russia are still so great, even after the collapse of Communism, that the whole country could still be described as an unfriendly environment for entrepreneurs.
"Biznesmen" would like it if people would stop lumping them together with black marketeers and brigands, but 70 years of Communism still work powerfully against them, even now that the party has been swept away after the failure of the hard-line coup last month.


Traffic Alert
Korean Day Parade: Broadway will be closed today between 23d and 41st Streets from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Steuben Day Parade: Fifth Avenue will be closed today between 61st and 86th Streets from noon to 5 P.M.


Religion Notes
Nontraditional Catholics
With a conservative Pope in Rome who has appointed like-minded bishops, traditionalists are in the ascendancy in the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy.
But the growing number of conservative church leaders is having little effect on the thinking of the laymen, if a new survey is any indiction.


Dollar Continues to Decline While Gold Has Mixed Day
The dollar, weighed down by interest rate concerns, continued its slide against the major foreign currencies yesterday.
Gold prices were mixed, rising in New York after falling overseas.


Moorco International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Teen-Age Girl Dies in Stabbing On the C Train
A 15-year-old student at the Fashion Industries High School was stabbed to death on the subway yesterday by another teen-age girl who wanted to steal her gold earrings, the police said.
The victim, Maribel Feliciano of 188 Lincoln Avenue in the East New York section of Brooklyn, was on her way home from school on a southbound C train at 3:35 P.M. when the stabbing occurred.
She was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital, where she died at 4:20.


Top Salvador Rebel Presses Demands
A top Salvadoran guerrilla commander has strongly defended the guerrillas' demand for incorporation into the Salvadoran armed forces as crucial to the success of any accord to end the 11-year-old civil war.
The commander, Salvador Sanchez Ceren, heads the Popular Liberation Forces, thought to be the largest of the five groups making up the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front.


Kevlin Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
An article last Saturday about the right to privacy incompletely stated the views of Laurence Tribe, a constitutional-law professor at Harvard, and Lynn Paltrow, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union.
They both hold the view that the right to abortion is supported by several provisions of the Constitution, including three different clauses of the 14th Amendment.


Political Memo; Bush Campaigning Fiercely Against Democratic Phantom
As Democrats fret about who will or will not be a Presidential candidate in 1992, George Bush is running hard for re-election, trying to demolish his opponents' arguments even before they are fully articulated.
Mr.
Bush's pre-emptive strategy became clear this week as he hopscotched around the country, putting a veneer of official business on a largely political trip.
The three-day, five-state trip ended here today with a speech to the United States Hispanic Chamber of Commerce.
President Bush has concluded that if he is politically vulnerable at all, it is in the area of domestic policy.
Sensitive on Home Front
Criticism of the President on the ground that he lacks a domestic policy has been rather diffuse and formless -- potshots from Democrats on Capitol Hill and on the campaign trail.
So when he rebuts such arguments, he finds himself in the odd position of having to articulate the criticism himself so he can ridicule and reject it.


Alabama Governor May Face Prosecution
The Alabama Ethics Commission ruled today that there was probable cause to believe that Gov.
Guy Hunt, a Baptist preacher, violated the law by using a state airplane for trips on which he preached to congregations and accepted cash offerings from them.
By a vote of 4 to 0, with one member absent, the commission sent the case against the Governor, a 58-year-old Republican, to Attorney General Jimmy Evans for possible prosecution.
Mr.
Evans is a Democrat whose post is elective.


Democratic Field Takes Shape
Democrats are surveying a field of Presidential Challengers that almost no one could have predicted a year ago.
Page 6.


Intermagnetics General reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25


In Shuffle at Seagate, One Co-founder Quits
In an apparent management shake-up, David T. Mitchell resigned abruptly yesterday as president and chief operating officer of Seagate Technology Inc.
Mr.
Mitchell was one of the five co-founders of the company, which is the largest maker of disk drives.
An ex-marine who once bragged that he managed by intimidation, Mr.
Mitchell was in charge of operations at Seagate from its inception.


I.B.M. Work Station Is Delayed Until 1992
The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that its planned fall announcement of its under-$10,000 RISC work station would be pushed back until sometime early in 1992 because of a design flaw.
The flaw limits the performance of a specialized chip that controls the movement of data between the computer's microprocessor and the peripherals such as disk drives, I.B.M. said.


More Errors Disclosed By A.T.&amp; T.
In a further admission of management error resulting in Tuesday's disruption of telephone service, A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that a key supervisor assumed that crucial alarms would work and that they would alert other workers capable of monitoring an essential power supply for long-distance service.
Some of the alarms did not work, but the company declined to say whether that was because of negligence or tampering.


Review/Television; Portrait of Gorbachev By Those Who Know
For an inside-the-Kremlin account of the rise to power of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, tune in at 9 P.M. tomorrow to the Discovery Channel on cable.
"Enter Gorbachev" is the first hour of "The Second Russian Revolution," a six-part series that is so on top of the news that it is in peril of falling off.
The BBC producers managed to interview Boris N. Yeltsin, Eduard A. Shevardnadze and lesser-known but very well-informed players and observers of the upheaval in what used to be the Soviet Union.
Tomorrow's program, which includes the first two sections, begins with a 1978 visit to Baku by Leonid I. Brezhnev, then the Soviet leader.
There he was impressed enough with Mr.
Gorbachev, the region's agricultural innovator, to call him to Moscow to become the Central Committee's agricultural chief and a central figure in an incipient movement for change.
Brezhnev's death in November 1982 set off a high-level struggle between the old guardniks and the Gorbachevians.


BUSH ACTS TO CALM ISRAEL AID UPROAR
President Bush sent a conciliatory letter to American Jewish groups this week in hopes of calming the uproar over proposed United States loan guarantees for Israel.
But his tough line on the loans and the disclosure that he wants to link them to West Bank settlements continued to str ain White House relations with pro-Israel groups and Congress.
The letter, in which he tried to reassure Jewish groups after his harsh attack last week on the pro-Israel lobby, was described by a senior official as an attempt to "get the issue back into a conventional public policy dispute, as opposed to an unprecedented challenge by a President to the power of the pro-Israel lobby."  [ Text of Mr.
Bush's letter, page 4. ]


EXECUTIVES
*
Guy F. Atkinson Co. of California, South San Francisco, a building and manufacturing company, named Thomas J. Walsh 3d executive vice president of its industrial construction unit, Walsh Construction Co., Trumbull, Conn. *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, named four executive vice presidents: Mark B. Grier, Ernest M. Kruse, Arjun K. Mathrani and James W. Zeigon.


John Hoyt Is Dead; Actor, 86, Played In Films and on TV
John Hoyt, an actor who appeared on stage, on television and in films, died on Sunday at his home in Santa Cruz, Calif.
He was 86 years old.
He died of of cancer, his family said.


Beauticontrol Cosmetics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Zairians Also Struggle To Have Democracy
To the Editor:
As an American, I applaud President Bush for his outspoken support of the Soviet democratic movement; I only wish he would give as much support to people in other countries struggling for democracy.
A movement parallel to that in the Soviet Union is sweeping across Africa.
It will surely topple even the most powerful of dictators such as Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire.
Just as in Red Square, masses of people no longer afraid of putting their lives on the line will claim the right of self-determination for their country.


Solectron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Computer Automation Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Feminists Must Now Build Bridges to Men; Erring on Abortion
To the Editor:
"Why the Fear of Feminism?" asks Susan Jane Gilman (Op-Ed, Sept. 1).
Her definition provides one answer.
She states, "Women have got to follow suit in three areas: equal pay and opportunity, control over our bodies and child care."


Salomon Chairman Pursuing a Tell-All Strategy
One of the biggest problems Salomon Brothers faces in seeking to put its Treasury market misdeeds behind it is the growing mountain of potential legal liabilities, both from civil lawsuits and from the Government.
While Salomon has not enunciated a particular legal strategy, Warren E. Buffett, the interim chairman of Salomon Brothers, said he was pursuing a general strategy of cooperating with the Government and telling the public all he can.


Review/Film Festival; The Loony Love of a Faithful Woman
If the heroine of Francois Truffaut's "Story of Adele H" were to pop up in a Gabriel Garcia-Marquez novel, the result would resemble "Amelia Lopes O'Neill," a beautiful, cracked tale of romantic obsession.
Though Amelia wanders the narrow, shadowy streets of Valparaiso much as Adele trekked through Nova Scotia, it makes all the difference that this story is narrated by a man out of sync with his own mirror image.
He is a magician, a thief, and our most reliable guide to the truth about Amelia and her misplaced passion.
As the Chilean director Valeria Sarmiento constructs the story, every trace of melodrama is replaced by some magical portent or lunatic behavior.
The enticing "Amelia Lopes O'Neill" will be shown at the New York Film Festival tonight at 6:30 and tomorrow at 9:30 P.M.


United Nations Weapons Inspectors in Iraq


Stuarts Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


New Settlement Pace Called 'Foolish' by Israeli Official
Israel's Finance Minister attacked his Government's plans to sharply speed up housing construction in the occupied territories today, calling it "extreme foolishness" that was worsening tensions with the United States.
The official, Yitzhak Modai, made clear that he still believed in increased Jewish settlement of the territories, which Washington has denounced and which remains a bedrock policy of the governing Likud party and its leader, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir.


Cyril Chappellet, 85, A Lockheed Executive
Cyril Chappellet, a senior executive of the Lockheed Corporation for nearly half a century, died Wednesday at his home in Pebble Beach, Calif.
He was 85 years old.
His family declined to give the cause of death.


Little Ferry Teachers Return to Work Without Pact, Bowing to Court Order
Striking teachers returned to their classrooms here without a contract this morning, minutes before a judge's deadline for them to end their walkout or lose their jobs.
After a night of contract negotiations failed to produce an agreement, picketing teachers piled their signs in a stack and walked into Little Ferry's two elementary schools, Washington and Memorial, just before the start of the school day at 8:30 A.M.


Seven Greek Editors Are Freed From Prison
In a move to defuse a clash between the Conservative Government and the press over an anti-terrorism law, seven chief editors of major Greek newspapers were freed from prison today after the money for their release was provided by the unions of publishers and journalists.
The formula was viewed as a compromise, since the Government refused to change the law and the editors, citing freedom of the press, refused to pay fines themselves to avoid five-month jail terms.


Casting Lines, and Faith, in the Harbor
A garbage barge steamed down the Arthur Kill a few hundred yards from where Orlando Lopez was fishing on a bright September afternoon.
Debris floated in the water -- a rotting sneaker, some chunks of wood -- as he cast his lure and waited for his lunch to swim by.
The murky channel, which runs between storage tanks and crumbling warehouses on Staten Island and in New Jersey, was so polluted in the 1960's that scientists tested the water by seeing how long it took fish to die in it.


BILL WOULD ALTER IMMIGRATION LAW
Senator Orrin G. Hatch introduced legislation today to repeal sanctions against employers who hire illegal immigrants, saying the provisions of the 1986 immigration act had resulted in increased discrimination against Asian and Hispanic Americans and unnecessary paperwork for employers.
Mr.
Hatch, a Utah Republican who is one of the Senate's prominent conservatives, was joined as a co-sponsor by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, one of the leading liberals.
In enacting the 1986 law, Senator Kennedy said, "We aimed at illegal aliens, but we hit law-abiding Americans."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.12
5.31
8.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.19
5.21
7.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.24
5.26
7.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.36
7.40
8.83
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.88
7.91
9.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
8.98
10.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.92
6.92
7.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Irish Order Expels Hosts of Gay Group
The division of the Ancient Order of Hibernians that invited a gay Irish group to join them in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade has been expelled by the society's Manhattan branch, members of the order said yesterday.
The division was expelled Thursday in a 17-to-8 vote of the New York County Board of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, which sponsors the annual parade up Fifth Avenue.


BRIEFS
*
Asarco Inc., New York, a lead, zinc, gold and specialty chemicals company, has raised its price for electrolytic copper cathodes 4 cents, to $1.14 a pound, effective immediately. *
Heineken N.V., the Dutch brewing company, has signed a licensing agreement with Molson Cos.
Ltd., Toronto, the brewing company, for the production and distribution of Heineken's Amstel lager and Amstel Light brands of beer in Canada.


Agassi and Courier Win in Davis Cup Play
After a stretch of tennis he described as "hit or miss," Andre Agassi admitted he needed to use this weekend's semifinal Davis Cup contest between the defending champion United States and Germany as personal rehabilitation.
This afternoon at Kemper Arena, Agassi got off to a restorative start by trouncing Michael Stich, 6-3, 6-1, 6-4, in 1 hour 40 minutes to give the United States a welcome and slightly unexpected lead in the three-of-five-match series.


Excerpts From Testimony on Nomination of New C.I.A. Head
Following are excerpts from testimony by Bobby Ray Inman, a former Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, at the hearing of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on the nomination of Robert M. Gates as the Director of Central Intelligence, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription company.
Need for an Organizer
When I came to C.I.A. for the first day in -- the end of January '81 and looked at the chaos in the offices -- Frank Carlucci had already gone to Defense to be the Deputy Secretary -- I decided that we needed someone very bright, knowledgeable and capable to come and organize the two offices and to get them to work together coherently. . . .


Patents; A Computer Resembling A Notebook
A small California company patented a computer this week that it describes as so advanced it harks back to the old-fashioned spiral notebook.
Note pad computers, which are designed like a single sheet of paper and convert notations printed by hand with a pen into computer data, are just beginning to become available commercially.
The new patent envisions a next-generation computer that opens out like a book, with two opposing pages on each of which handwriting can be read and separate programs run.


Recycling Offers a Cleaner, Cheaper Solution Than Incineration
To the Editor:
You report that the administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins is planning to spend $1 billion on building and expanding New York City incinerators (news article, Sept. 5).
The city would be much better served if that $1 billion was spent on developing the markets for recycling.


How to Handle Disputes About Security Deposits
For thousands of tenants across the nation, the prospect of losing the security deposit for a rental dwelling, usually a month's rent, is daunting.
The predicament is the same whether your landlord is a large corporation or an individual.
"It's a huge category of problems," said Ralph Warner, a lawyer in San Francisco and an author of "Tenants' Rights: 1991 Edition" (Nolo Press, $15.95).


Eagle-Picher Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Chronicle
There is nothing unsual about auctioning off the services of celebrities to raise funds for worthy causes.
But no one will be able to call the auction tomorrow for Project Angel Food routine.
Angel Food, which feeds homebound AIDS patients, is a project of the Los Angeles Center for Living.
The benefit is to take place at the Santa Monica Air Center, a 60,000-square-foot hangar, and will include among its offerings a workout with ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER, a party for 32 children at the MICHAEL JACKSON ranch in Santa Barbara, cooking lessons with MARCELLA HAZAN at the Cipriani Hotel in Venice and a cameo appearance in London in "The Phantom of the Opera."


Lawrence I. List, 53, A Real-Estate Lawyer
Lawrence I. List, a senior partner in the law firm of Carter, Ledyard &amp; Milburn, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.
He was 53 years old and lived in Brooklyn Heights and Tolland, Mass.
He died of complications from lung cancer, the family said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Government of Abu Dhabi plans to bring charges soon against the former chief executive and other officials of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, a representative of the emirate said.
Swaleh Naqvi, the former chief executive, is a central figure in the multibillion-dollar fraud by the seized bank.  [ Page 33. ]


FDP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Maxwell's Auction Fails For a 2d Time
An auction of preferred stock in a company controlled by the British publisher Robert Maxwell failed yesterday, the second time that had happened in less than two months.
The failure of the auction, which Mr.
Maxwell had forecast would succeed, led the company, Official Airlines Guides Inc., to announce that it would redeem the $75 million issue.


Jets' Young Can't Wait to Play N.F.C. Foe Again
Lonnie Young has been in the American Football Conference for less than a year and already the Jets' starting free safety is longing for the hard-nosed football that is supposedly more prevalent in the National Football Conference.
"I used to play in the N.F.C. East, and this is what I'm looking forward to," said Young, alluding to the Jets' next opponent, the Chicago Bears.


Patents; Method to Speed Up Compression of Data
In a development that could prove important for high-speed data telecommunications and many forms of information processing, a software development company in California obtained a patent this week on a method for compressing data.
The method was developed by Intersecting Concepts Inc. of Agoura Hills, Calif., which produces software that runs backup storage systems for personal computers.


Orenda Forest Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cars Are Ready, but Buyers Stall
Jeffrey P. Rampinelli, a car dealer in Ann Arbor, Mich., readily ticked off the reasons why the sluggish new-car sales market should be picking up: dealer inventories of new 1992 models are building nicely and consumers' confidence about the future is improving.
Some manufacturers are offering low-interest car loans and rebates on some models.
"Everything is in place for good things to be happening," said Mr.
Rampinelli, who sells Nissans and Chevrolets.
But good things are not happening for Mr.
Rampinelli and thousands of other dealers.
Mr.
Rampinelli's business is off 40 percent so far this year from a lackluster 1990.
Many analysts had predicted that by now car sales would be steadily perking up.


Review/Pop; Diana Ross Adds Family to Glamour
America's pop firmament may be crowded with competing divas, but none plays the role of a benevolent goddess with the conviction of Diana Ross.
At Thursday's opening show of a three-night engagement at Radio City Music Hall, the 47-year-old star, exuding the gracious regality of an Olympian monarch, twice took to the aisles of the theater to bestow her blessings in hugs, kisses and little waves.
A few devotees, including a male Diana Ross impersonator, were also permitted to dance with the star on the stage, and later she brought up all five of her children and introduced them.
The picture-postcard tableau of the singer with her family made a pointed contrast to her celestial glamour.
She may be a deity, the gesture implied, but she is a flesh-and-blood one and a perfect mother to boot.


Quotation of the Day
"People have become positively beastly to one another, and something must be done." -- The Rev.
Ian Gregory, founder and chairman of the Polite Society.  [ 2:1. ]


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Only a Victory in 200


Russ Togs reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Former No. 2 C.I.A. Official Backs Gates
Bobby Ray Inman, a former Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, today gave the Senate Intelligence Committee a spirited endorsement of Robert M. Gates to head the agency.
But one Senator continued to press the issue of whether the agency violated the law in 1986 by sharing intelligence with Iraq in its war with Iran.
Mr.
Inman, a retired Navy Admiral who served for 18 months as Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, the same job that Mr.
Gates later held, told the committee today that Mr.
Gates might have been insulated from important facets of the Iran-contra affair.
He said that William J. Casey, a former Director of Central Intelligence, might have withheld information from Mr.
Gates to protect his protege's career.


Feminists Must Now Build Bridges to Men
To the Editor:
In "Why the Fear of Feminism?" Susan Jane Gilman (Op-Ed, Sept. 1) explains that because women have a dilemma embracing feminism, they have not yet become a political force.
To become politically powerful, women, she states, must focus on the issues of equal pay, equal right to abortion and child care.


Hallmark to Enter Cable TV In $1 Billion Cencom Deal
In its largest diversification effort to date, Hallmark Cards Inc. has agreed to invest about $1 billion in Cencom Cable Association, which has, directly and indirectly, about 550,000 cable television subscribers.
The deal will instantly make Hallmark one of the leading forces in the nation's cable industry.
The investment will be made through a Hallmark subsidiary, Crown Media, which already has a stake in cable systems in Wisconsin that serve 150,000 subscribers.


Tricare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Frustrated Thomas Panel Ends Hearings With Talk of Overhaul
The Senate Judiciary Committee today concluded two weeks of often-contentious hearings on Judge Clarence Thomas's fitness to serve on the Supreme Court with the panel's chairman promising to explore whether the confirmation process itself should be overhauled.
The committee chairman, Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, noted the widespread dissatisfaction and frustration with the hearings, especially among some of his fellow Democrats on the committee and some of those groups opposing Judge Thomas.


Feminists Must Now Build Bridges to Men; Freedom of Adornment
To the Editor:
I was dismayed by Susan Jane Gilman's mention of Florence Griffith Joyner's lace running tights as a perpetuation of sexual stereotypes ("Why the Fear of Feminism?", Op-Ed, Sept. 1).
Of course, Griffith Joyner should be judged on athletic ability (and she was), but there's no reason to forgo embellishment in the name of feminism.
The question is, Why aren't men more free to adorn themselves as they like?


Abu Dhabi Move Due On B.C.C.I.
The Government of Abu Dhabi plans to bring formal charges soon against the former chief executive and other officials of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, a representative of the emirate said yesterday.
The former chief executive, Swaleh Naqvi, is a central figure in the multibillion-dollar fraud that prompted bank regulators in several countries to seize the bank on July 5.
Only after investigators obtained access to Mr.
Naqvi's secret files, held in Abu Dhabi since last year, did they see the full dimension of the shadowy bank's illicit conduct.


Leslie J. Merser, Executive, Wed
Leslie Jennifer Merser, an executive of EMCI, a music-marketing concern in New York, was married in Rye, N.Y., yesterday to Joseph Calise Benway, the chief financial officer and an executive vice president of Burson-Marsteller, the public relations firm in New York.
Justice John Carey of New York State Supreme Court in Westchester County officiated at the Manursing Island Club.
Mrs.
Benway, 34 years old, is a daughter of Herbert B. Merser of Vero Beach, Fla., and Mary Ann Ilse of Rye.
She attended Syracuse University.
Her father is a real-estate consultant and the developer of the Mullet Bay Beach Hotel in St.
Maarten in the Netherlands Antilles.
Her mother is a former mayor of Rye.


Suffolk Executive's Budget Plan Freezes Taxes With Service Cuts
The Suffolk County Executive, Patrick G. Halpin, today proposed a $1.3 billion county budget for 1992 that calls for a freeze on county employees' salaries and no increase in property taxes.
But the budget proposes a $5 surcharge on car registrations, a series of new fees, the elimination of some discounted rates at parks and beaches, and the refinancing of a new court complex in Islip.
Mr.
Halpin said these measures would help pay for the increasing cost of programs mandated by the state.


Bond Prices Are Higher in Active Trading
Bond prices moved higher in active trading yesterday, as participants in the Government securities market pared positions of shorter-term maturities in favor of longer-term issues.
Traders said some of the swapping was done as preparation for next week's auctions of new two-year and five-year notes.
In addition, an article in The Wall Street Journal yesterday may have been responsible for some bond purchases.


Albany Bars Military on Campus Over Gay Bias but Reverses Action
The New York State Division of Human Rights today ordered the State University center at Buffalo to bar all military recruiters from campus because homosexuals are not allowed to serve in the armed forces.
But, only a few hours later, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo called the order unenforceable.
It was one of the more unusual -- and rapid -- exchanges of a political football here in years.
The Governor was forced to choose between backing the division's ruling, which was hailed by gay rights groups and based on an interpretation of a 1983 order signed by Mr.
Cuomo, or renouncing a policy that Republicans immediately seized on as an affront to the United States military.
By the end of the day, the military had prevailed.
Republicans Express Outrage
The back-and-forth began when the order barring the recruiters was issued by the acting director of the division's Office of Lesbian and Gay Concerns, which ordinarily is given broad authority to remedy discrimination against homosexuals in state government.


Your Taxes; Hard Calculations For Mutual Funds
Although mutual funds offer an ideal way for most people to invest -- the main virtues being diversification, professional management and relative ease of record-keeping -- computing tax liability when they are sold is often a headache.
Shares are generally accumulated over many years, with investments and reinvestments of dividends so frequent that many taxpayers find it nearly impossible to calculate their gains or losses.
To make it easier, as part of a bill intended to simplify the tax code, Congress is considering a measure under which mutual funds and brokers would be obliged to tell investors each year the cost basis of any shares sold. (The calculation would mostly be done by the single-category average cost method, under which an average basis is computed for all shares and the holding period is determined by the first-bought, first-sold principle.)


Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a memorandum written by Robert M. Gates, President Bush's nominee for Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, with authority solely over the C.I.A.'S staff of analysts; he was not Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, a position involving day-to-day responsibility for the C.I.A. and other American intelligence agencies.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about plans by the MCI Communications Corporation to take advantage of Tuesday's disruption in long-distance telephone service provided by A.T. &amp; T. in New York referred incorrectly to the type of advertising MCI expects to prepare.
The company said it would probably confine its marketing response to print advertising for now; it is not planning television commercials.


Federal Express Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Miss Steele Marries E. A. Lang 3d
Allison Blake Steele, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Beadle Steele Jr. of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday to Edward Anthony Lang 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lang Jr. of Bayside, Queens.
The Rev.
J.
Douglas McGlynn, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Episcopal Church of the Ascension, assisted by the Rev.
Edward O'Connell, a Roman Catholic priest,
Mrs.
Lang, 33 years old, was until recently a vice president and manager of the consulting services division at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
A graduate of Lehigh University, she received an M.B.A. from the University of Pittsburgh and is studying for a master's degree in public health at the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon associated with Divine Providence Hospital in Pittsburgh.
Her grandfather the late Dr.
Steele, also an orthopedic surgeon, was a dean of the University of Pittsburgh Medical School.


Overall Title Is Good Enough for Bubka
All he did was clear 19 1/2 feet, well below his own world record of more than 20 feet set during the Grand Prix season, but that was good enough for pole vaulter SERGEI BUBKA of the Soviet Union to win the event in the season's final meet in Barcelona, Spain on Friday and to clinch the overall men's title in the Mobil Grand Prix season.
High jumper HEIKE HENKEL of Germany, who won the Barcelona event with a jump of 6 feet 7 1/2 inches, won the overall women's title.
It was the first time a pole vaulter or a jumper had won an overall title in the outdoor season's seven-year history.
The two winners secured their victories by dominating their events, each winning six events, during the season.
Bubka finished with 69 points, 6 points ahead of three other competitors.
Under tie-breaking rules, javelin thrower JAN ZELEZNY of Czechoslovakia was awarded second place, followed by 200-meter sprinter MICHAEL JOHNSON and 1,500-meter runner NOUREDDINE MORCELI
Henkel, declared champion under the tie-breaking formula, finished with 63 points, as did the second-place winner, 200-meter sprinter MERLENE OTTEY of Jamaica, who was followed by 1,500-meter runner NATALYA ARTYMOVA of the Soviet Union and 400-meter hurdler SANDRA FARMER-PATRICK, both of whom also finished with 63 points. (AP)


In Mexico, Fears of Free Trade Melt
AMBIANCE S.A., a small manufacturer of hotel furniture and hand-painted plastic sculptures in this industrial town on the outskirts of Mexico City, was devastated when Mexico agreed in 1986 to open its market to foreign competition.
With the drastic reduction in the tariffs that had protected Mexican industry for seven decades, the country's hotel chains began importing mass-produced American tables, chairs and desks.
Mexican gift shops that had stocked native figurines began filling their shelves with imported steam irons and pocket radios instead.


Miss Van Hoven Weds S. T. Hoyt
Tracy Brinkerhoff Van Hoven, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Emerson Van Hoven of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Sherman Taylor Hoyt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin Sherman Hoyt of Hollis, N.H.
The Rev.
Kandice Joyce, a Methodist minister, performed the Congregational ceremony at the Warren (Vt.) Federated Church.
The couple graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Mrs.
Hoyt, 28 years old, received an M.B.A. from Simmons College.
She is a marketing program manager for Polaroid in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father is a senior vice president of Medi-Promotions, a pharmaceuticals promotion company in Bloomfield, N.J.
Her mother, Sandra Johnson Van Hoven, is the associate executive director of the northwest Bergen chapter of the American Red Cross in Ridgewood, N.J.


Quotation of the Day
"They may be releasing stolen property, but I'm going to use it anyway. Most will regard those who make this material available as Robin Hoods, stealing from the academically privileged to give to those hungry for the knowledge secreted in these texts." -- Dr.
Lawrence Schiffman of New York University, on access to the Dead Sea scrolls.  [ 20:1. ]


U.S. Advisories
To the Editor: Because a warning was issued by the State Department to defer nonessential travel to Tanzania, our company lost close to $94,000 (U.S.) due to cancellation.
We still conducted the tour with three passengers, as we guarantee our departures.
It is indeed disgraceful how the State Department is using travel advisories to punish the poor countries.
LARRY ROSS The writer is marketing director of Wings of the World Travel in Toronto.


Corrections
A report on Aug. 25 about the marriage of Wendy Taylor to James Hoekema misstated the bridegroom's advanced degrees and the location of his business.
He received a master of arts degree and a master of philosophy degree from Columbia University, both in architectural history.
Hoekema Interactive, which he owns, is in Bethesda, Md.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a fireplace on the first floor and another below it in the basement.
When we build a fire in the first-floor fireplace, the smell of smoke is strong in the basement.
The ash pit has been removed, and the chimney flue connected to the basement fireplace has been capped.
It has been suggested that a stainless-steel liner be installed in the first-floor chimney.
Would that solve the problem?
A.
If the two chimney flues are in the same brick chimney structure, if either one or both of the flue liners is cracked or leaking and if there are no flue liners, it could be that smoke will leak from one flue to the other.
That should not occur if the flue being used draws properly, but it could happen if there are down drafts or other defects in that chimney.
Capping the unused flue was probably a mistake.
It will trap smoke that leaks into it, instead of allowing the smoke to escape through the opening at the top of the chimney.
I would suggest removing the cap.
If that does not solve the problem, have an expert check the structure.
It is very likely that lining the flue will be the answer.


Alice D. Rudd, Executive, Wed
Alice Diane Rudd, a daughter of Julia Meade Rudd and O. Worsham Rudd, both of New York, was married there yesterday to Brooks Bernard Elder, a son of Rachel Peckham-Elder of Tiverton, R.I., and Robert E. Elder of Rowayton, Conn.
The Rev.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Elder, 27 years old, is a vice president at Prime Charter Ltd., a New York investment company.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her husband.
Her father is a partner and executive producer at You and Me Productions, a New York music production company.
Her mother is the actress Julia Meade.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a fireplace on the first floor and another below it in the basement.
When we build a fire in the first-floor fireplace, the smell of smoke is strong in the basement.
The ash pit has been removed, and the chimney flue connected to the basement fireplace has been capped.
It has been suggested that a stainless-steel liner be installed in the first-floor chimney.
Would that solve the problem?
A.
If the two chimney flues are in the same brick chimney structure, if either one or both of the flue liners is cracked or leaking and if there are no flue liners, it could be that smoke will leak from one flue to the other.
That should not occur if the flue being used draws properly, but it could happen if there are down drafts or other defects in that chimney.
Capping the unused flue was probably a mistake.
It will trap smoke that leaks into it, instead of allowing the smoke to escape through the opening at the top of the chimney.
I would suggest removing the cap.
If that does not solve the problem, have an expert check the structure.
It is very likely that lining the flue will be the answer.


Grim as Ever, the Thought of Winter Stalks Russia's Spirit
THIS coming winter will be remembered as the one when the Russians, having thrown Communism itself from the ever-fleeing sleigh to the ever-hungry wolves of national myth, could spare nary a pause for celebration by man or wolf.
Psychologically, the Russians are already into their special winter of the mind; they actually began discussing it, fearing it, savoring it, entering it in August, days after the coup collapsed along with Communism.
The fall of Communism was impressive, Russian diplomats argue lately as they beg the watching world for emergency aid, but now comes that far longer running lethal monolith, the Russian winter.
Bolshevism was a swirl of dark conceits from the mind of mortal men; but winter is timeless nature's blinding, impenetrable, inevitable coda to each year's suffering and doubt.


Lee Riffaterre Marries Frank Boyle
Lee Katherine Riffaterre, the daughter of Virginia Olsen Baron of Guilford, Conn., and Michael Riffaterre of New York and Southampton, L.I., was married in Southampton yesterday to Frank T. Boyle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Boyle of Lyndhurst, Ohio.
The Rev.
Dr.
Patrick M. Boyle, a Jesuit priest and brother of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's father and her stepmother, Dr.
Hermine Riffaterre.
Ms.
Riffaterre, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, is a lawyer for The New York Times Company.
A magna cum laude graduate of Barnard College, she received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father, one of four University Professors at Columbia University, teaches semiotics.
He is also the director of the School of Criticism and Theory at Dartmouth College.
Her mother is the publications director of the Life and Peace Research Institute in Uppsala, Sweden.
The bride's stepmother teaches French literature at the University of Pennsylvania.


Judges Giving Women Prison Terms More Like Men's
A YOUNG woman standing before a Nassau County judge in 1985 was convicted of criminal possession of a controlled substance and sentenced to three years' probation.
Another woman in a similar situation before the same judge in 1989 drew a sentence of one to three years in state prison.


Negro Leaguers Not Forgotten
To the Sports Editor:
Recently, the Baseball Hall of Fame opened its doors, albeit temporarily, to a group of distinguished gentlemen who played in the Negro leagues.
There is a growing sentiment within this country and the baseball community to honor the men who played during a time when racism precluded them from displaying their talents on a major league level for all sports fans to admire.


Free Stays At B &amp; B's
A Nabisco Shredded Wheat promotion offers a second night free at one of 1,700 bed-and-breakfast places and country inns.
If you buy two boxes of the cereal, you may send away for a coupon good for a free night's stay, after one paid night at the printed rate, at one of 1,700 places listed in a special directory, which is included in the deal.
The coupon is good until Dec. 31, 1992.
The free directory, published by American Historic Inns Inc., of Dana Point, Calif., was compiled from several B &amp; B guides that are primarily paid listings.
For people who have never tried B &amp; B lodgings, and who eat shredded wheat anyway, the booklet may be useful, differentiating among the small place of one or two rooms which it terms a "homestay;" a professionally run place of 3 to 20 rooms, called a "bed and breakfast inn," and the "country inn," which is defined as a place serving meals other than breakfast.
Availability usually excludes holidays and the high season.


Everybody Here Knows Everybody Here
SWEET ANGEL BAND
By R. M. Kinder. 141 pp.
Helicon Nine Editions, Box 22412, Kansas City, Mo. 64113.
Paper, $11.95.


CAMPUS LIFE: Temple; 2 Reports of Rape Prompt University To Examine Policy
Reports of a gang rape at a fraternity at Temple University and a date rape in a dormitory have raised new questions about about how to prevent such assaults on campus.
The rapes were the first reported on campus since 1989.
Valaida Walker, acting vice president for student affairs, said she believed the rapes were reported "because of the university's efforts to educate its students about rape."


Memories of Revolutions Distant and Near
The world-renowned Moiseyev Dance Company first glided out of the dark, mysterious Soviet Union and across the United States in 1958, in exactly the kind of stirring folk-dance program it will present when it comes to Radio City Music Hall for a three-week season beginning Tuesday.
There will be several pieces new to American audiences, including "Tsam" ("Masks"), a story dance based on an ancient Mongolian legend, "Sirtaki" ("Greek Suite"), created at the request of the Greek composer Mikis Theodorakis, and "Tatarotchka," a humorous, athletic Tatar dance from Crimea.
But the dances will be performed by a familiar contingent of pretty women and handsome men dressed in an array of colorful costumes, who will also dip obligingly into such beloved Moiseyev staples as "The Dance of the Buffoons," "Old City Quadrille," the high-flying "Gopak" and that unfailing show-stopper "Partisans."


For Love of a Green-Eyed Cowboy
THE MAN WHO FELL IN LOVE WITH THE MOON
By Tom Spanbauer. 355 pp. New York: A Morgan Entrekin Book/ The Atlantic Monthly Press.


North Carolina Is Too Strong For Army
The Army hauled out its biggest gun today.
But even with Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf (ret.) in the stands, vainly pointing goalward, West Point's football team produced only two field goals and a late touchdown as North Carolina's swarming defense propelled the Tar Heels to a 20-12 victory.


Calling the Tune
After the final bell in a free-swinging board meeting of the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. last week, Gian Carlo Menotti was the winner and undisputed artistic director.
But the victory was clearly due to the presence in Mr.
Menotti's corner of one Joseph P. Riley Jr., the Mayor of Charleston, S.C., home of the festival.
The flashpoint in the fight at the Spoleto, one of the finest summer arts festivals in the country, was the inclusion of an art exhibition this year without Mr.
Menotti's prior approval.
The 80-year-old maestro subsequently demanded the resignations of Ross A. Markwardt, the festival chairman, and Edgar F. Daniels, the president, saying that if they stayed, he would go.
To help the board make up its mind, Mayor Riley announced that if Mr.
Menotti left, the festival would lose the use of city-owned concert halls.
Some accused Mr.
Riley of inappropriate interference, but in the end, Mr.
Markwardt, Mr.
Daniels and eight more of the 46 board members quit.


First Hits
To the Sports Editor:
In "So Many No-Hitters, So Few Reasons Why" (The Times, Sept. 8) concerning major league baseball's decision to change the rules defining no-hitters, Murray Chass reported that the reason the rules committee had decided not to include games lasting less than nine innings was because the committee found that most no-hitters were broken up in the later innings.
I think a more careful examination of the records will indicate that most no-hitters are broken up in the first inning than in the ninth inning.
MICHAEL ZETTLER  New York


U.S. Advisories
To the Editor: My wife and I just returned from a wonderful vacation in Peru in spite of the strongly worded advisories not to go.
We called various agencies in Washington in an attempt to determine if we were being rash.
Every call was met with precisely the same advice, not to go.We left for the trip anyway, and after seeing what the advisories are doing to a country like Peru, I am furious.
Everywhere we traveled we met smiling people who like Americans.
These people are trying to get through very difficult times and they need our help.
Washington offers nothing but the same old political balderdash.
BURT FALKE  Baltimore


Alumni of 'Taxi' And 'Piano Lesson' Team Up for 'Roc'
On a cavernous Hollywood sound stage, two actors, scripts in hand, run through their lines for their director.
Charles Dutton and Ella Joyce are playing a husband and wife holed up in a hotel room for a romantic weekend, and there is some business with a bottle of lip-pursingly cheap champagne that has caught their director's attention.
"That's a funny picture -- your two faces together," says Stan Daniels, the director, framing the air to simulate a camera lens.
"Hold it there for a minute so I can get you in one shot."The actors dutifully shove their grimacing faces together for an extra beat or two.


Art Need Not Imitate Life
To the Editor:
I was glad to see the article on the Artemisia Gentileschi exhibition in Florence  [ "A Painter of Heroic Women in a Brawling, Violent World," Sept. 1 ] , but disappointed by its sensationalizing emphasis on Gentileschi's life at the expense of her art.


Suit Aims to Halt Hunt of Imperiled Grizzly
The grizzly bear, a creature of myth and mystery in its Rocky Mountain home, is classified by the Federal Government as a species threatened with extinction.
Yet each fall for years, hunters in Montana have paid several hundred dollars to the state for a legal "once-in-a-lifetime" chance to kill a grizzly.
Now, several conservation groups are trying to stop this year's hunt, which is scheduled to begin Oct. 1.
In a lawsuit in Federal District Court in the nation's capital they have raised the question of how the Government can allow a hunt when no one knows for sure how many bears are left.


Soprano Ventures


Currency; Dollar Gains Around World
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
134.20
134.08
136.65
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6850
1.6900
1.5785
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1343
1.1357
1.1533
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7315
1.7297
1.8435
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$348.30
$344.20
$389.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Bahamas Offers Discount Card
As part of its quincentennial celebrations, the Bahamas has introduced a discount card that offers discounts at more than 100 shops, restaurants and attractions for American vacationers.
The blue and yellow Bahamas Treasure Card, which looks like a credit card and carries the islands' quincentennial logo, brings discounts of up to 50 percent at participating merchants on New Providence, which includes Nassau, and Grand Bahama, including Freeport, as well as several other islands.
The program will run through Jan. 31, 1993.
Travel agents can supply the card to their customers, or cards can be picked up at Bahamian airport or casino-hotels in Nassau or Freeport.
With the card, travelers also receive a brochure listing participants.
More information: the Bahamas Tourist Office, (800) 627-7281.


Mayoral Candidates Regroup In Yonkers
ANGELO R. MARTINELLI sees himself as the Lowell Weicker of Yonkers.
Like Mr.
Weicker, who was elected Governor of Connecticut last November as an independent, Mr.
Martinelli is a Republican with more than a decade in public office who is seeking political renewal as an independent.
Mr.
Martinelli, who is 63 years old, would like to return to the office of Mayor, especially in its new, more powerful form as the city's chief executive.
But like the 59-year-old Connecticut Governor, Mr.
Martinelli will have to do it the hard way, running against major party candidates.


Stage Festival Set in Dublin
The 32d Dublin Theater Festival, to be held Oct. 7 to 20, will feature over 60 theater, music, dance, opera and performance events at sites throughout Dublin including the Abbey, Peacock and Olympia theaters.
The festival, sponsored by the Irish Life insurance company, will include 12 new plays by Irish writers; 19 international productions from 8 countries ranging from a Japanese kabuki production of "Hamlet" to French circus theater, and two Irish language productions.
Productions of Irish classics will include a Sean O'Casey play, "The Shadow of a Gunman" directed by his daughter, Shivaun.
All 19 of Samuel Beckett's plays will be presented at the Gate in a festival cosponsored by Trinity College, his alma mater.


Bridge
The impact of current events in the Soviet Union on bridge-playing there, as on many other aspects of life, is hard to predict.
The only good bet is that the 1992 world championships in Salsomaggiore, Italy, will see teams from Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, which all have strong bridge traditions.
One can hope for the presence of the players from Moscow, who did so well by finishing seventh in the European Championships in Killarney, Ireland, in June.
But will they be representing Russia, or some federal successor to the Soviet Union?
If the Ukraine does become independent, there are enthusiasts in Kiev who will want to compete in Italy.


How a Star Is Born, And Grows Up
A great popular singer is to a large degree born, not made.
Sweetness of timbre, accuracy of pitch, clarity of diction, sensitivity to lyrics and rhythmic subtlety are qualities that can be learned, and none is an absolute requirement.
The one essential is something more primal: an ability to make a song become a physical embodiment of the range of human drives, from the celestial to the monstrous.
Barbra Streisand -- like Frank Sinatra, Billie Holiday, Ray Charles and perhaps two or three other American singers -- has the mysterious ability to personify the fullness of human experience when she sings.
Instantly recognizable, her voice, at once beautiful and emotionally exacerbated, has always conveyed an innate imperiousness and an intense yearning that make a neutral reaction to her next to impossible.
And this sense of importance, almost of fate, permeates "Just for the Record . . ." (Columbia 44111; CD and cassette), a new four-disk retrospective album whose material spans more than three decades. (It will be followed early next month by the soundtrack to "The Prince of Tides," her forthcoming movie adapted from Pat Conroy's best-selling novel. The movie opens on Dec. 20 in New York and Los Angeles.)


Group Buys Private Land in Putnam County for a Public Park
In the first major acquisition of private land for public use since the 1990 defeat of a bond act intended to buy park land, a nonprofit conservation group announced today that it had bought 3,798 acres here for a wilderness park.
The land, in hilly country three miles east of the Hudson River in Putnam County, was bought from two private owners for $10.5 million by the Open Space Institute, an Ossining group.
"The people of New York will immediately gain access to almost 4,000 acres of land without spending any taxpayer money," said Peter Borrelli, vice president of the institute.


Scrapbooks of a Black Heritage
WILLIAM DORSEY'S PHILADELPHIA AND OURS
On the Past and Future of the Black City in America.
By Roger Lane.
Illustrated. 483 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press.


Meet Me in St. Louis, Says Stevens
It took Scott and Donna Stevens most of his first season with the St.
Louis Blues to find a house they wanted to call home.
They say they won't willingly give it up to move to New Jersey.
The Stevenses, both 27, carefully planned their last move, from the Washington Capitals to the Blues for the 1990-91 season.
Yes, the five-year, $5.2 million contract offered by the Blues was a good business deal, but choosing the right environment for their young family was as important, they say.


Jeanne Valente Has Wedding
Jeanne Renee Valente, a daughter of Lieut.
Col. and Mrs.
Raymond Valente of San Diego, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Justin Bruce Starren, a son of Mrs.
Byron G. Starren of San Diego and the late Mr.
Starren.
The Rev.
Paul Theiss, a Lutheran minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the officers' club at the Marine Corps Recruit Depot.
Mrs.
Starren, 32 years old, is a vice president of Dentsu, Young &amp; Rubicam Partnerships, a joint venture of American and Asian advertising agencies in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father, who is retired, was a Marine Corps officer and a probation officer for San Diego County.


CARVING OUT A GREATER SERBIA
In "Carving Out a Greater Serbia" (Sept. 1), Stephen Engelberg notes correctly that current internal borders in Yugoslavia were drawn arbitrarily by Tito (himself "part Croat and part Slovene"), that Tito severed the provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo from Serbia and that the recent boundaries left about three million Serbs outside of a much reduced Republic of Serbia.
Engelberg confirms that Tito's purpose was to diminish the importance of the Serbs within Yugoslavia, in which they account for almost 40 percent of the total population.
The return of Vojvodina and Kosovo to the Serbian Republic cannot thus be regarded as a "grab." After all, Novi Sad, Vojvodina's capital, has been a longtime Serbian intellectual center, while Kosovo is the birthplace of the Serbian state and culture.


Streetscapes: The Farm Colony; 'Historic' or Not, It's a Jungle in There
IT could be the "lost city" in some theme park.
In the jungle-like overgrowth a visitor can see only 10 or 20 feet.
Every 100 feet or so stone ruins loom.
But there are no guides and admission is free: This is the Farm Colony, Staten Island's early-20th-century charitable complex.
A 1988 project by the Department of General Services to sell the site for housing has been set back and this unusual group of buildings seems headed more towards archeology than to restoration.


NONFICTION
UNTIL JUSTICE ROLLS DOWN  The Birmingham Church Bombing Case.
By Frank Sikora.
University of Alabama, $22.95.


Spain's Nationalists Press for Independence
Emboldened by independence drives in the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, nationalist groups in the northern regions of Catalonia and the Basque country are pressing the central Government for greater autonomy if not total independence from Spain.
Politicians in the region assert that recent events in the Soviet Union, where the Baltic republics won independence from Moscow, and Yugoslavia, where Slovenia and Croatia have declared independence, underscore the right to increased self-government in what they call distinct "nations" within the 500-year-old nation of Spain.
Opinion polls show that only a minority, though a significant one, of Catalans and Basques support total independence.


Surprise! Princeton Over Cornell
On opening day in the Ivy League, usually a day of shocks and surprises, Princeton's cookie jar proved to be almost full and Cornell's almost empty today.
The Tigers upset the Big Red, 18-0, and thus put a new perspective on the Ivies because Cornell had been just about everybody's favorite to win the championship.


Clare Francesca Russo, Consultant, Marries Seth Jackson Atlas, Lawyer
Clare Francesca Russo, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Geatano J. Russo of the Bronx, was married last evening to Seth Jackson Atlas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony H. Atlas of Rego Park, Queens.
Justice Jeffrey M. Atlasof the New York State Supreme Court, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Fountainhead in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride, 33 years old, is a senior personnel consultant with Digital Equipment Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Queens College and received an M.B.A. from Iona College.
Her father, who is retired, was a manager with Consolidated Edison in New York.


Of Elephants, Social Comedy And Indian Life
For those who care about Indian art, a considerable excitement has been generated by the beautiful (and on occasion hilarious) exhibition at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery in Washington of "Indian Paintings and Drawings From the Collection of Howard Hodgkin" (through Jan. 12, 1992).
The show is neither conventional nor comprehensive.
It has vast lacunae, and makes no attempt to close them.
Gods and goddesses play a minimal part in it.
Religion in almost all its aspects is politely shown the door.
The labyrinthine storytelling that is familiar to those who have seen Peter Brook's "Mahabharata" in any of its various forms does not need to be disentangled, because it is largely absent.


Tragic Hero, in Brief


Gail Hoggard Weds
Gail Janette Hoggard of New York and Guy Norton of London were married yesterday at the Chateau Palluau-sur-Indre in Palluau, France.
The Rev.
Jonathan Foster, an Anglican priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Norton, 35 years old, is the administration director and art director for Kouri Capital Inc. in Greenwich, Conn.
A graduate of the University of Massachusetts, she is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
John Henry Hoggard.
Mr.
Norton, 51, graduated from Oxford University and is president of the London Bottle Company and the Liquor Bottle Corporation in New York.
He is the son of the late Sir Evan and Lady Norton.


Data Bank/September 22, 1991
Business Inventories
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
--0.3
--0.3
--0.6
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$35.2
$34.9
$40.0
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$41.1
$38.7
$40.1
Industrial Production Index
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.6
0.8
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
80.0
79.9
79.6
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,065
1,059
1,040
Cash Wheat Price
Sept. 20
Sept. 13
Sept. 6
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$3.37
$3.34
$3.24
Electric Power
Sept. 14
Sept. 7
Aug. 31
Millions of kilowatt hours
61,996
58,520
65,905


CARVING OUT A GREATER SERBIA
The dangers inherent in Milosevic-like leaps from Communism to ultranationalism should be a lesson of paramount importance for leaders in all the republics seeking freedom from Soviet central control.
Fledgling democracies can be nurtured only if the rights of all peoples are to be guaranteed, respected and codified by constitutional laws.
The leaders should at all costs avoid substituting Communist Bolshevism with a nationalist Bolshevism.
Otherwise, the terrible reality could become "a series of small fascist states, culturally limited and fighting each other" -- stretching from the Balkans to the Central Asian steppes.
R.
CHEPULIS
New Haven


Men's Style; IN THE DARK
IN "JOCKS AND NERDS," an entertaining treatise on the link between men's clothes and their social identity, Richard Martin and Harold Koda observe: "When black enters the male wardrobe, it arrives with arresting authority and with a social goad."
Black is indeed the badge of the provocateur.
So familiar is the image -- exemplified by hard guys like Marlon Brando, William S. Burroughs and Arnold Schwarzenegger -- that it borders on cliche.
Yet it still retains the power to attract a younger generation.
Ethan Hawke, the 20-year-old star of "Mystery Date," styles himself in James Dean's heroic mold, donning black in homage to his idol.


Hard Up for a Plot? Get With the Program.
FADE IN: It is a dark and stormy night.
Streaks of lightning rip through the sky, casting shadows against a weather-beaten Victorian house.
The camera pans up over its rain-battered walls, zooming in to focus on an attic window.
Strips of light peek through the slats of Venetian blinds.
Inside sits a bleary-eyed music critic staring at a computer screen.
Surrounding him are empty coffee mugs, mounds of doughnut crumbs and crumpled papers.
A Bartok string quartet is playing on the stereo.
The critic is writing a screenplay and realizes, with some dismay, that he has no ideas, no plot and no characters.


Scott Ulm Weds Pamela Wilton
Pamela Bradley Wilton, the daughter of Pamela Matthews Falge of Bethesda, Md., and the late Edward Craig Wilton, was married last evening to Scott Jeffrey Ulm, the son of Audrey Barnum Ulm of Highland Park, Ill., and George Edward Ulm of Northbrook, Ill.
The Rev.
William Holcomb officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in Salisbury, Conn.
Mrs.
Ulm, 32 years old, is an assistant vice president at Merrill Lynch in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. in finance from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father was in the insurance business in Washington.
Her stepfather, Raymond Louis Falge, who is retired, was a physicist with the National Bureau of Standards in Washington.
Her mother is an antiques dealer in Bethesda.


Perspectives: Freddie Mac Loans; Workouts Under Way in New York City
THE Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac, is now working to resolve the problems of the many apartment properties on which it made loans during its credit splurge in the mid-80's.
About 200 of its loans in New York City have slipped into default and some of the buildings have already gone into foreclosure.
Historically, Freddie Mac's business was in buying mortgages on one- to four-family homes for resale in the secondary market.
The multifamily initiative, at least for older properties in big cities, was a departure.


Love and Learn
I HAD A CRUSH THIS spring.
The object of my affections was a kind, intelligent, good-looking man, a talented writer, an athlete, a lover of children.
I have reason to think he was attracted to me.
There was just one problem: he was my student, 22 to my 37.
Sixteen years ago, I had a crush on one of my professors.
Since the attraction was returned, the result seemed inevitable: a student-teacher affair.
His being married, like my being married now, doesn't enter this particular equation; I believe he loved his wife, as I love my husband.
He was considerably older than I, but since we weren't entering into a lifelong alliance, the difference in our ages only enforced the attraction.
So did our respective roles as mentor and student: the passion of learning keeps a ready pace with that of Eros.


Notre Dame Nets 650 Yards
Rick Mirer passed for three touchdowns, including a 55-yarder to Derek Brown, and brothers Tony and Reggie Brooks rushed for one each today as Notre Dame beat Michigan State, 49-10.
Mirer passed for 208 yards on 11 completions as Notre Dame (2-1) rolled up 650 yards and got scores from seven players.


OFF COURSE
Your article brought to mind this vignette from the early days of airline deregulation and the hub-and-spoke system.
The place was Terminal B of People Express, in Newark, where several planes were discharging passengers simultaneously, with hundreds inching their way down a narrow corridor.
Behind me, I heard the voice of an unruly teen-ager, urging those around him to "move, move." His words were picked up by the other travelers and turned into a spontaneous chorus: "Mmmooo . . . mmmooo . . . mmmooo."
With terms like "yield management," am I wrong in thinking that the airlines treat passengers like cattle?
BRUCE LEVY
New York, N.Y.


On the Street; Cowboy Style Goes to Town
For the last half-century, blue denim has dominated the American clothing scene, occasionally stepping into high fashion.
Now that durable Old West fabric has become a look of well-scrubbed simplicity for the 90's.
The look depends upon mixing many shades of prewashed blue denim shirts, jackets and jeans into a nonchalant ensemble.
The effect is a lightening of fit, color and political agenda.
Gone are the gimmicks of the rebellious jean revolutions of the past.


The Art of the Heart in Swiss Folk Craft
The international interest in American folk art has sparked a new curiosity in the European crafts that influenced it.
Now, the exhibition "Swiss Folk Art: Celebrating American Roots" presents examples of both lavishly embellished Swiss artifacts and their sparsely decorated American counterparts, offering an opportunity for a rare comparison between the two approaches.
The show, at the Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street, opens Thursday and remains through Jan. 1.
Organized to mark the 700th anniversary of Switzerland's confederation, the exhibition is the museum's most ambitious attempt to focus primarily on foreign folk art.
Of the 180 items on view -- furniture, wood carvings, metalwork, painted documents, embroideries and pottery -- 130 are Swiss, produced between the 16th and mid-20th centuries; the rest are American from the 18th and 19th centuries.
The Swiss objects were lent by five museums and a few private collectors; the American pieces come from public and private collections.


Sarah Geithner Wed in Maine
Sarah Geithner, the administrative officer of a Government agricultural development project in Banjul, Gambia, and Andrew Thomas Adam, a consultant to the Gambian Finance Ministry, were married yesterday at the Hockamock Head lighthouse on Swans Island, Me.
The Rev.
Thomas B. Keehn, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Adam, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and has a master's degree in public affairs from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Deborah M. and Peter F. Geithner of Larchmont, N.Y.
Her father is the director of Asia programs for the Ford Foundation, and her mother is a pianist.
Mr.
Adam, 29, graduated summa cum laude from Duke University and has a master's degree in public policy from Harvard.
He is the son of Judy E. and William T. Adam of Swans Island and Landaff, N.H.
His father retired as a partner in the accounting firm of KPMG Peat Marwick.


Authority Analyzes Jet-Noise Rules
"Jet Noise: A New Battle Looms"  [ June 23  ]  included scant reference to the position of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey on the issue of local noise rules.
To complete the record, I would like to add the following:
We totally agree with the views of Patrick Russell of the New Jersey Coalition Against Aircraft Noise as to the legality of local restrictions on the operation of noisy Stage 2 aircraft.
The Airport Noise and Capacity Act of 1990 (ANCA) makes clear that while local regulations affecting Stage 3 aircraft must now be reviewed and approved by the United States Department of Transportation, Stage 2 regulations can be adopted by airport operators, provided that 180 days' advance notice is provided and that the economic impact and the noise benefit of the rules are determined.


Gary Lawrence Weds Ms. Rodriguez
Maria Teresa Rodriguez, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Fernando O. Rodriguez of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Gary Edward Lawrence, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn E. Lawrence of Hickory, N.C.
The Rev.
Louis Jerome, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Immaculate Heart of Mary Church.
Mrs.
Lawrence, who is 25 years old and is known as Teresa, is an associate in the New York law firm of Paul K. Rooney.
She graduated from Amherst College and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a pediatrician in Corona, Queens.
Her mother, Belkis Rodriguez, is a microbiologist at Mount Sinai Hospital Services at the City Hospital Center in Elmhurst, Queens.


Political Talk
War Over, Battles Continue
Now that he has claimed victory in Connecticut's bruising battle over an income tax, is there any chance that Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. might retreat into nonconfrontational geniality?
Well, no.


William &amp; Mary's Passing Sinks Navy to 0-3 by 26-21
William &amp; Mary used the pinpoint passing of quarterback Chris Hakel and two long touchdown plays to defeat Navy, 26-21, today.
Hakel completed 15 of 20 passes for 209 yards, including a 67-yarder to tailback Al Williams in the second quarter that put the Indians ahead to stay.
Navy led by 7-3 when Williams took a pass from Hakel behind the line of scrimmage, eluded two tacklers around the 40 and outran several Navy defenders to the end zone.


When a Cellar Was the Place to Be
INTIMATE NIGHTS
The Golden Age of New York Cabaret.
By James Gavin.
Illustrated. 406 pp.
New York: Grove Weidenfeld.


Justice Thomas: On What Basis?
Given the sympathetic impression he conveys as a man who has made it the hard way, and given the political sentiment running in his favor in the Senate, it would be gratifying to report that Clarence Thomas is well qualified to serve on the Supreme Court.
In fact, two weeks of Senate Judiciary Committee hearings have displayed a candidate with the slimmest qualifications of any recent Court nominee.
His testimony disclosed little in the way of coherent judicial philosophy.
If anything, it deepens anxiety over the future of rights the Court has long protected.
If the Thomas nomination is to be judged on the merits, it fails.


JoAnne Crisalli Has Wedding
JoAnne Marie Crisalli, a vice president at Campbell-Mithun-Esty Advertising, and Richard Charles Zellers, a financial analyst for Weiss, Peck &amp; Greer, both in New York, were married yesterday in Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Francis Nash officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Joseph's.
Mrs.
Zellers, 34 years old, graduated from LeMoyne College and received a master's degree in public relations from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony P. Crisalli of Boca Raton, Fla.
Her father is chief operating officer of Mitel Systems in Kanata, Ontario.


Carolyn Osteen Marries Alex Ward
Carolyn Willingham Moore Osteen, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Tilden Osteen of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married yesterday to Joseph Alexander Ward, a son of Virginia and Joseph U. Ward of Randallstown, Md., at the Apponagansett Friends Meeting House in South Dartmouth, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas B. Kennedy, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Ward, 24 years old, is a student at American University's law school.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is a surgical oncologist and the vice chairman of surgery at Brigham &amp; Women's Hospital in Brookline, Mass.
Her mother, Carolyn M. Osteen, is a partner in the Ropes &amp; Gray law firm in Boston.


Airhitch
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler column of June 30 dealt in part with how on one occasion our Airhitch system interacted with the public; we think it would be of value to tell potential Airhitchers what our service can and cannot do.
You stated that the Airhitch vouchers purchased by Mrs.
Bakun for her children "guaranteed only to get  [ them ]  on some airline going someplace in the United States within an eight-day period chosen by the passengers."


Crystal Jewelry Unlike Its Forerunners
When Steuben commissioned Angela Cummings to design crystal jewelry, she decided to do something unlike the glass jewelry of the past.
Although she is a trained goldsmith and gemologist, working with crystal turned out to be more challenging than she had anticipated.
"Historically, glass had been treated like a stone," she said, "but I wanted to do something that hadn't been done. No pendants or pins. I came up with some designs, then went to the Steuben factory to see how the glass was made and came back and threw away all my designs. I had to learn a lot."


For Masur, A Hard Road Still Ahead
When the audience in Avery Fisher Hall rose to its feet in ovation as Kurt Masur walked on the stage on Sept. 11, it was more than just an ordinary welcome for a new music director of the New York Philharmonic.
So troubled has the reputation of the Philharmonic been in recent years, and so far from the center of New York's musical life has the orchestra drifted, that the ovation was an outpouring of affection and hope.
The orchestra, in its playing, offered the same: cooperation, commitment and an eagerness to follow Mr.
Masur's musical plans.
And Mr.
Masur, in his attentiveness to quality of sound, his forthright energy and his focus on detail, returned the compliment.
But as the mixed musical results of the concert showed, success in this enterprise cannot be taken for granted.
Mr.
Masur is embarking on an extensive corrective project, an attempt to undo and redo.
Once the aura of excitement and anticipation has faded, this will be a long and sobering task.


Illustrators' Fantasies Of Tomorrow's World At Discovery Museum
IN the 1980's a traveling show about fantasies of progress hit the Whitney Museum's branch in Stamford.
It was called "Yesterday's Tomorrows," and it had everything: illustrations for Jules Verne novels and science-fiction magazine covers, robots, a model of a Boeing cargo plane that was all wing, photographs of World's Fair futuramas designed by Raymond Loewy and Norman Bel Geddes, and so on.
From Popular Mechanics came an illustration of a 1950's woman hosing down a waterproof living room promised for the year 2000; from Frank Lloyd Wright, the Mile High Skyscraper, visualized by somebody else.
And who could forget Buckminster Fuller's 1927 scheme for housing?
It required a Zeppelin to drop a bomb then lower a Dymaxion skyscraper into the hole.
All this and a Buck Rogers rocket pistol, too.
In "Yesterday's Tomorrows" utopianism proved itself the great leveler, striking down great architects and tinkerers alike.
In "Other Realms," at the Discovery Museum in Bridgeport, Vincent di Fate and Murray Tinkelman are doing the leveling.
The guest curators, who are also science-fiction illustrators, are blending their own genre with high Surrealism, as if to suggest the two are flowers on the same plant.


The Last of the One-Man Shows
When Joseph Papp announced last month that he was appointing JoAnne Akalaitis to succeed him as artistic director of the New York Shakespeare Festival, he also announced, almost incidentally, that he would retain the title of "producer." It remains to be seen whether the post will prove honorary or real, but there has been nothing symbolic about Mr.
Papp's identification with the role of producer until now.
Joseph Papp has been the most important producer in the New York theater, period, for most of his 35-year-long career.
In recent seasons, as the other most significant producers of his generation stopped producing altogether (Harold Prince), left New York (Roger Stevens), died (Richard Barr) or reduced their output to a trickle (David Merrick), Mr.
Papp has been the only giant left on the field.
This is why his illness-induced departure at age 70 has thrown the already reeling New York theater community into a deeper funk.
There is much love for the man himself, a famously impossible character whose stormy, larger-than-life personality is the very essence of theater.
There is much uncertainty about the future of the New York Shakespeare Festival, the institution Mr.
Papp created in his own image and built into the most influential theatrical organization in the United States.
But Mr.
Papp's semi-retirement also baldly dramatizes the increasing decline and possible extinction of the theatrical tradition, that of the impresario, which he represents.


Dual-Fuel Setups
To the Editor:
Your story on Aug. 25, "Flipping Between Gas and Oil," was particularly relevant to consumers since it effectively highlighted many benefits of upgrading to dual-fuel systems in large apartment buildings.
However, the article had a serious omission.
Very often, the first step in the process is free.


Challenge to Recruiter Ban Surprises Gay Group
An organization of lesbian and gay law students at the State University center at Buffalo expressed surprise yesterday that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's office had challenged an order by a state human rights unit that barred military recruiters from the campus because homosexuals are not allowed to serve in the armed forces.
"I find it very surprising because Governor Cuomo has always been a supporter of gay and lesbian civil rights," said Terri Mayo, a spokeswoman for the Lesbian and Gay Law Students Organization at the State University of New York at Buffalo.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Waived Doug Lloyd, running back, from the practice squad.
Activated Marcus Wilson, running back, from the practice squad.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Placed Ferrell Edmunds, tight end, on injured reserve.
Activated Charles Henry, tight end, from the practice squad.


Mr. Love's Lament
IT IS A SUMMER MONDAY IN CHICAGO, AND Luther Vandross, in town to promote his latest album, "Power of Love," has been staring at the sun-bathed skyline from his 20th-floor hotel room.
Suddenly, he conjures the image of Tiny Tim -- not the Dickens character from "A Christmas Carol," but rather the ukulele-strumming androgyne who made a blip on the pop music scene in the 1960's.
"Look at the 60's," he says.
"You had fabulous acts in the top five on the charts. It would be the Beatles, the Supremes, Aretha Franklin, Elvis and Dionne Warwick.  And then a record like 'Tip-Toe Thru the Tulips With Me' would come along. It's a painful thing to realize sometimes." Though Tiny Tim was primarily a novelty act, Vandross sees a connection between him and many of today's chart-toppers.
"It's just a time when mediocrity is very hip. It's a groove set by a younger group of people who want to dance and not really listen very hard."


Cruise Ship Can't Complete Arctic Voyage
Impenetrable ice has prevented the Frontier Spirit from completing an eastbound voyage through the Arctic Ocean by way of the so-called Northwest Passage.
The ship, chartered by Salen Lindblad Cruising, had to turn back earlier this month at Point Barrow, 1,000 miles from Dutch Harbor in the Aleutians, where the voyage began.
On board the ship, rated super ice class because of her reinforced hull, were 126 passengers.
This year there was more ice on the route than ever before, a spokeswoman for Salen Lindblad said.
"Even a Canadian icebreaker could not get through," she added.


Miss Caceres Is Wed
Cecilia V. Caceres, a pianist studying for a master's degree at the Brooklyn College of Music, and John J. Kella, a violist with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, were married yesterday at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
Kenneth O. Jones officiated.
The bride, 27 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Guillermo Caceres of Buenos Aires.
She is a graduate of the Universidad Nacional de La Plata in Argentina.
Mr.
Kella, 42, graduated from the Juilliard School and received a Ph.D in music from New York University.
He is a son of Polly Jane Kella of Honolulu and the late John J. Kella.


Correction
A chart on Sept. 8 with an article about San Francisco carried outdated references to taxi fares.
The initial fare is $1.70, each additional mile is $1.80, and the fare downtown from the airport is about $26.


AT Stake at the Gates Hearing: How to Reincarnate the C.I.A.
A WEEK of submicroscopic study by the Senate Intelligence Committee and the press has produced a clear portrait of Robert M. Gates, President Bush's choice to lead American espionage into the post-Soviet era: He is a cold warrior, smart, politically supple, upwardly loyal, largely unreconstructed.
Less clear is what kind of person the committee and the American people want to run the Central Intelligence Agency and the other spy agencies these days.
That, more than Mr.
Gates's credentials or his five-year-old brush with Iran-contra, is what is making the debate over his confirmation such a protracted and occasionally corrosive affair.


Sunday Menu; Orange Orzo With Pork
There seems to be such urgency to making dishes with fresh local tomatoes and local corn before the frost gets them.
At the same time, the cooler weather of the fall beckons and so does slightly heartier fare, like pork.


Sally Munson and Jack Bohman Are Married
Sarah Cook Munson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larom B. Munson of Santa Fe, N.M., was married yesterday to Jack Duncan Bohman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raynard Bohman of Chatham, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas Truscott officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Santa Fe.
The bride, who is 31 years old and is known as Sally, is the director of the Munson Gallery in Chatham, which her father owns along with another gallery in Santa Fe.
In January, she and Mr.
Bohman opened the Munson Gallery in Vero Beach, Fla.
She graduated from the Emma Willard School.


Threat to Veto Israeli Guarantee Imperils Talks; No Emigration Choice
To the Editor:
In "Bush vs. the Jews," Leslie H. Gelb's Sept. 15 column, he writes that Soviet Jews "cannot go to Israel, which is where the United States wants them to go, without United States financial help." However, the Israeli Government actively lobbies the governments of the United States and numerous European countries to constrain the flow of Soviet Jewish emigrants, and in effect, force Soviet Jews to immigrate to Israel.


U.S. Advisories
To the Editor: Instead of fulfilling its alleged goal of informing Americans of dangerous situations around the world, the State Department instead pressures Americans to avoid travel to certain countries.
In the Middle East, this is clearly visible.
The State Department warns that Americans with Arab surnames have been subjected to long delays at border crossings into Israel, including strip searches.
Yet there is no parallel warning that the presence of a Jewish name or an Israeli visa in an American passport can block entrance to any number of Arab countries.
Also, the State Department continues to warn about the danger of disturbances in East Jerusalem.
They support this by mentioning an incidentthat took place in October 1990.
ASHER SAMUELS Bronx


Old Pests, New Pots and Soil Mixtures
SOMETIMES house plants have to be discarded.
This is what happened to a beautiful Boston fern that was looking rather sad the last few weeks with many yellow or, worse, dead fronds.
Since it was hanging in a strategic place, closer inspection was needed to determine the trouble.
The elegant Boston fern hanging next to it didn't need a sad partner.
So down from its hook came the yellow Boston fern.
The first thought was that it just needed repotting, as it had been rather crowded in its hanging container.
But upon close inspection, the source of the problem was revealed: scale insects.
These oval hard-backed insects were adhering to the backs of the oldest fronds in huge numbers.


BUSH WEIGHS MOVE ON ZIONISM EDICT
President Bush, who will make his annual appearance before the United Nations General Assembly on Monday, is weighing whether to use his address to call for repeal of the assembly's 1975 resolution equating Zionism with racism, officials said today.
Mounting such an effort would clearly be intended to help heal the rift in American-Israeli relations over Mr.
Bush's demand for a delay in Congressional consideration of $10 billion in loan guarantees for Israel.
The Bush Administration considered a campaign to repeal the so-called "Zionism-is-racism" resolution a year ago but postponed it as it sought to sustain Arab support in the Persian Gulf conflict.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 22, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
2
4
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
3
5
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon, from Nazi Berlin to London and New York, and his relationships with five women.
4
2
HARVEST, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $5.99.) Turmoil in a Jewish family during the turbulent 1960's.
5
5
TIME BOMB, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.99.) A child psychologist tracks down the perpetrators of crimes spawned by hatemongers.
6
3
BATTLEGROUND, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.95.) The Marine Corps in the struggle for Guadalcanal; the fourth volume of "The Corps."
7
4
UNDER SIEGE, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $5.95.) Chaos in Washington when the kingpin of the Medellin drug cartel is brought there for trial.
8
12
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
9
3
INTO THE DARKNESS, by Barbara Michaels. (Berkley, $5.50.) An inheritance brings a woman eerie experiences and romance.
10 *
8
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop on the trail of a Florida con man.
11
35
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
12 *
2
THE ROWAN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Ace, $4.95.) The coming of age of a young woman in a universe governed by telepathy.
13
4
PRIME DIRECTIVE, by Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens. (Pocket, $4.95.) The former crew members of "Star Trek" 's Enterprise try to discover why their careers were ruined.
14 *
18
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
15
8
THE FIRST MAN IN ROME, by Colleen McCullough. (Avon, $6.95.) The rivalry of two men in the Roman Republic in 110 B.C.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
13
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
2
18
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
3
10
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
96
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5 *
5
THE DOCTOR, by Edward E. Rosenbaum. (Ivy, $4.99.) A physician's experiences as practitioner and patient; originally published in 1988 as "A Taste of My Own Medicine."
6
11
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
7 *
411
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
8
27
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
9
17
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
10 *
19
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
60
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
6
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
40
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
19
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
128
CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/HarperSanFrancisco, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for other people.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Embattled Florio Defends His War on the Insurers
AFTER the Allstate Insurance Company announced last week it was leaving the state, Gov.
Jim Florio found himself in a familiar position, standing almost alone defending one of his major initiatives.
Automobile insurance reform topped Mr.
Florio's agenda in 1989 when he campaigned for governor, and the Democratic Legislature passed his insurance bill, along with a $2.8 billion tax program and legislation to increase school aid for the state's poorer districts, within six months of his inauguration.


Sunday Dinner; Places to Go for Steaks That Truly Satisfy
This country is blessed with perhaps the finest beef in the world, and when it comes to preparation one thinks of the classic New York steak.
The term actually refers to a strip steak that is broiled until crispy outside and juicy within.
There has been much talk about how Americans are eating less beef and more fish and poultry.
That may be true, but you could never prove it by visiting the elbow-to-elbow steakhouses in New York City.
Here are three places where you can get a satisfying steak.
Cafe Un Deux Trois
123 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 354-4148 -- This 14-year-old French restaurant in the theater district resembles many timeworn brasseries in Paris, although it is not one in practice.
The vast open dining room is a visual pun of sorts, with its marblelized columns, mustard-colored walls painted to look as if they are peeling, sky murals wrapped in trompe-l'oeil frames, deliberately chipped moldings and playfully mismatched colors.


Class, in a Garden-Variety Wagon
For years, friends have been kidding me about rating cars on the basis of their ashtrays.
And I plead guilty.
Whether you smoke or not, it seems reasonable to expect that if the buggy is going to have any ashtray at all, then it ought to be designed so it can be used.
Now, though, I think I have another test for good design.


An Ambitious Menu Plus Funky Style
SWEET PEA'S in Shelton is a low-key, funky little restaurant with several good things going for it: a limited, inventive menu, daily specials written on wall blackboards, trained and upbeat servers, and an atmosphere that is simple and sprightly with an edge of wit.
You have to have some humor to put a 1929 Glenwood gas stove in a room and dub it the Glenwood Room.
Even the restaurant's name suggests an offbeat personality at work.
Sweet Pea's has two storefront dining rooms, side by side and similar, with exposed brick walls, mismatched white chairs and hunter-green tablecloths under glass tops.
The first room features a white piano as centerpiece, the second has the stove.
There is nothing fancy about the decor, but it is serviceable and has a certain charm.


Making a Difference; High-Stakes Licensing Deal
Last week Silicon Graphics Inc. announced it would make its IRIS Graphics Library available for general licensing, a move akin to Coca-Cola offering its syrup recipe to every soda bottler.
A set of software descriptions of geometric shapes, shadings and textures, the library is one of Silicon Graphics' crown jewels, and key to the company's lead position in manufacturing work stations and other computers that can display three-dimensional images.
"Clearly this was a very tough decision," said Thomas J. Jermoluk, Silicon Graphics' 34-year-old executive vice president and the main proponent of the licensing program.
Opening up the library to competitors "was talked about within the company for the past three years," he said.


Alissa Riker Has Wedding
Alissa de Bonneval Riker, a project director for the Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice in San Francisco, and Ray Edmond Murphy 2d, a writer there, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Nativity in Fair Haven, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard C. Brietske officiated.
Mrs.
Murphy, 27 years old, graduated from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Robert Johnson Riker Jr. and Diane de B. Riker of Rumson, N.J.
Her father owns RJR Transportation Consultants in Rumson; he retired as the director of engineering for ferry services at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Her mother is a freelance writer and editor.


Purchase Theater Entices Stapleton
SOME performers do a showcase in the suburbs as a tryout for Broadway or Off Broadway.
Others get an act together in New York, and then take it on the road.
But it is not often that an actress comes to the county for a weekend of performances just two days after her Off Broadway opening and then resumes playing in Manhattan.
But, then, very little is predictable about Jean Stapleton's appearance in a one-woman double bill, "The Italian Lesson" and "Bon Appetit!" at the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase next weekend.


World Markets; The Safest Bet for Uncertain Times
It has been an uncertain September for stock market investors, and analysts are still divided over the outlook.
It is an on-the-one-hand, on-the-other-hand story, but it appears that the safest bet is in countries where interest rates are expected to fall and economic recoveries look ready to begin.
On the one hand, the stock markets in Britain and Hong Kong, where the key equity indexes repeatedly reached record highs this summer, have lost their momentum.
The market in Germany is stuck in a narrow range.
Norway is declining.
Italy has faded.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Cornwall, Conn. 430,000
Hall Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 200-year-old colonial; 3 barns, 3,500 square feet of newly renovated space, 10 acres; taxes $2,800.
Litchfield, Conn. 615,000
South Street  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 190-year-old Federal colonial; 5,000 square feet, in historic village area, 2 acres; taxes $11,179.
Rocky Hill, Conn. 208,000
94 Parish Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old split level; h/w floors, fireplace in family room, end of cul-de-sac, 0.67 acre; taxes $3,374.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 414,000
37 Westorchard Road
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 36-year-old split-level; 2 fireplaces, family room, library, eat-in kitchen, 1 acres; taxes $8,537.
Scarborough, N.Y. 400,000
12 Beechwood Way  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old town house; atrium, breakfast nook, wet bar, fireplace, patios, sitting room; taxes $7,200.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 640,000
9 Dickel Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, playroom, terrace; taxes $13,000.
OTHER AREAS Farmingdale, L.I. 158,000
108 Cherry Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement; taxes $4,000.
Fair Lawn, N.J. 186,000
2-10 30th Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; bath with Jacuzzi and skylights, deck, full basement; taxes $3,602.
Ramsey, N.J. 250,000
34 East Oak Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; oak kitchen cabinets, fireplace, h/w floors, porch; taxes $3,683.


Theresa Saphia Has a Wedding
Theresa Saphia, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Saphia of New Hyde Park, L.I., was married there yesterday to Michael Francis Barry, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Barry of Port Washington, L.I.
The Rev.
Warren Gress officiated at Notre Dame Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Barry, 28 years old, is a registered nurse at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
She graduated from Adelphi University.
Her father is a retired American Telegraph and Telephone Company electronics technician.
Her mother, Nancy Saphia, is a secretary at Crossland Savings Bank in New Hyde Park.


Social Events
For the Ms.
Foundation  Sept. 23 -- The New York premiere of the film of Jane Wagner's "Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe," starring Lily Tomlin, will be at Cinema One, 60th Street at Third Avenue.
Ms.
Tomlin and Gloria Steinem will introduce the film at 7:30 P.M. on behalf of the Ms.
Foundation for Women, a national organization that raises money for education and research programs about women.
A champagne reception at Alo Alo, Third Avenue at 61st Street, will follow.
Tickets, $100 for the screening, $250 for the film and reception; (212) 353-8580.
At Carnegie Hall


Now the Good News Is . . .
To the Editor:
To add some information to "Negotiating a Severance Package" (Your Own Account, Aug. 25): in our executive search practice, we've run into executives who've been fired as many as three or four times through mergers, downsizing and corporate reorganization.
These executives have managed to obtain comfortable severance payouts several times and have become millionaires as a result of their having been terminated so often.


Lageman Appears to Discover How to Make His Presence Felt With the Jets
How does a 6-foot-5-inch, 265-pound defensive end get lost in the shuffle?
Ask Jeff Lageman of the Jets, who has such a reputation for disappearing from a room without anybody noticing that he is known to his teammates by the nickname Spook.
Ever since the Jets shifted from a 3-4 defensive alignment to a 4-3 last season -- converting Lageman, the Jets' first-round pick out of Virginia in 1989 from a linebacker to a down linemen -- he has been having trouble making his presence felt.
Now he is being sent after the passer through bigger and stronger offensive linemen from a 3-point stance.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Yorktown
DURING the Bicentennial, some people phoned Doris E. Auser, town historian and director of the Town of Yorktown Museum, to ask if they could use the museum as headquarters for a re-enactment of the Battle of Yorktown.
"I told them they were welcome," she said, "but that the battle took place in Yorktown, Va."
This northern Westchester town's only Revolutionary claim to fame is that Major John Andre, the British spy, ate breakfast on Sept. 23, 1780, in the Underhill house, still at the corner of California and Hanover Streets.
Later that day, he was captured in Tarrytown.


Social Gatherings of the Soggy Sort
A marathon of social events began on Thursday at Wave Hill, a gem of botanical charm on the banks of the Hudson River in Riverdale in the Bronx.
Guests carried umbrellas to a picnic supper and plant sale that benefited the John Nally Horticultural Apprenticeships.
Later on Thursday, 700 guests led by Brooke Astor walked through a rain-soaked tent to climb aboard the New Yorker, a yacht tied up for the evening on the East River at 70th Street opposite the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
The evening of dining and dancing raised funds for the hospital.
Also on Thursday, Princess Stephanie and Prince Albert of Monaco were hosts at the Princess Grace Foundation-U.S.A.
Junior Endowment Benefit at Country Club, a new supper club on East 85th Street.
The party benefited young artists in American theater, dance and film.


Ann B. Hayes Is Married to Randall R. Stiles
Ann Bittner Hayes, an administrative aide in the mortgage department at the Boston Company in Boston, was married yesterday to Randall Robert Stiles, a senior electrical engineer for the Raytheon Corporation in Sudbury, Mass.
The Rev.
Judith L. Hoehler, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the First Parish in Weston, Mass.
The bride, a graduate of Trinity College in Hartford, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Hayes of Weston.
Mr.
Stiles, a graduate of Dartmouth College, is the son of Mrs.
Robert Stiles of Marblehead, Mass., and the late Mr.
Stiles.


Rural Towns Trying to Lure Retirees to Bloster Economy
Using advertising, videos, toll-free hot lines and booths at recreational vehicle conventions, small towns from Idaho to Alabama are fighting decline by marketing themselves to retirees.
Many of the most aggressive towns are inland places far from the sunny retirement belt of Florida and the Southwest, like Guntersville, Ala., Hot Springs, Ark., and Chewelah, Wash.
And they are having success, luring significant numbers of older people who find traditional retirement meccas overbuilt, crime-ridden and unaffordable.


CARVING OUT A GREATER SERBIA
I do not believe that historians of World War II events in Yugoslavia should speak of the massacres of Serbs by the Axis-installed Croatian Government in the same breath as Serbian reprisals against Croats.
The first involved a systematic genocide of hundreds of thousands, while the latter -- however regrettable -- involved a relatively small number, who fell mostly in guerrilla actions.
Certainly, these were unplanned except by the few who were directly involved.
ALEX N. DRAGNICH
Bowie, Md.


Callused Hands Replace Joggers' Injured Knees
ROWING, long considered an elite sport for students at Ivy League colleges and prestigious preparatory schools, is booming these days among other kinds of athletes.
In the past 10 years new clubs have been formed in Connecticut, while old ones were rejuvenated and rowing programs initiated by community and high school groups.
And participants say the competition has become much keener.
"It's a great alternative to running," said Susan Fisher, former president of the Chelsea Rowing Club in Norwich.
Joggers became disillusioned by injuries, especially to the knee, she said.
But rowing hand gives a full-body work out without any jarring, she said, although it can be hard on the hands.


A la Carte: A New Fish Star on the Horizon
AT the Fulton Fish Market in Manhattan, unknowns and bit players become overnight stars faster than on Broadway.
According to the Poll brothers, who own the Riverbay Restaurant in Williston Park, the next culinary superstar will be the trigger fish.
Although some restaurateurs may say they buy their seafood personally at the market, not all do.
The Polls, and their father before them, have been fixtures at the market for decades, and they try to take advantage of going to the market.
That is how they came upon the trigger fish in the late 80's.
They sensed similarities between the trigger fish and the monkfish, or lotte in French.


Traffic Alert
Muslim World Day Parade: Lexington Avenue will be closed today between 23d and 33d Streets from 1 to 3 P.M.
Muslim World Day Street Fair: Madison Avenue will be closed today between 23d and 26th Streets from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Third Avenue Festival: Third Avenue will be closed todaybetween 68th and 96th Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.
George Washington Bridge: There will be many lane closings until 3 P.M. Monday.
President Bush Visit: Gridlock alert in mid and lower Manhattan tomorrow and Tuesday because of Presidential visit.


'The Fisher King' Is Wise Enough to Be Wacky
According to Parry, a homeless man who once taught medieval history, the Holy Grail is "God's symbol of divine grace." Anne, a video-store owner in leopard-print leggings, thinks the Grail is "Jesus's juice glass." His answer is sacred, hers profanely cute, but together they show how "The Fisher King" pulls off its improbable success.
The film carries its redemptive legend into the late 20th century with a healthy dose of irreverence.
Buried inside the film is a nightmare version of what it might have been.
A television executive pitches "a weekly comedy series about the homeless" that shows them as "wacky and wise." "The Fisher King" isn't that series, but its plot is so overdone and its central idea potentially so mawkish that Terry Gilliam's film sounds as if it were from the touchy-feely school of movie making.


Chinese Dissident, Freed After Western Pressure, Speaks Out Despite Risk
The punches, the accusations that he was an American spy and the electric shocks that left him groveling and sobbing on the floor, broken, admitting to anything so long as they would stop -- all that is over now.
Li Lin has been out of the Chinese prison for two months now, thanks to a plea by former President Jimmy Carter and an international campaign on his behalf, and soon he will begin a new life in New York.
But as the Chinese authorities have none too delicately reminded him, his wife and 4-year-old son remain in China, and so he agonizes over a decision as painful as any of the beatings he endured: Should he tell about his experiences even if that goads the authorities into punishing those he loves?


U.S., in No Surprise, Will Go With the Best
After a selection process that featured more controversy than suspense, 10 National Basketball Association players were named today to be members of the 1992 United States Olympic men's basketball team.
As expected, the 10 players invited were Charles Barkley, Larry Bird, Patrick Ewing, Magic Johnson, Michael Jordan, Karl Malone, Chris Mullin, Scottie Pippen, David Robinson and John Stockton.
Two additional players will be named next year to complete the 12-man roster: at least one collegiate player and probably one more from the N.B.A.


Ms. Schwartz Is Wed
Melissa Joan Schwartz, a lawyer who is to join the law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke next month, and David Eric Muenzer, a senior consultant for Arthur Anderson Consulting, both in New York, were married last evening in Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Myron Fenster officiated at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center.
The couple, both 24 years old, graduated from Cornell University.
The bride received a law degree from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Ann Schwartz of Roslyn and the late Robert Schwartz.
Mr.
Muenzer is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis Muenzer of Marlboro, N.J.


No Headline
John H. Gutfreund sought the unusual audience, and on the hot and humid afternoon of Monday, June 10, the chairman of Salomon Brothers Inc., the most powerful firm on Wall Street, was ushered into the imposing third-floor office of Robert R. Glauber, with its heavy, Victorian-style furnishings and dark oil portraits of unsmiling, bygone financiers.
More than anyone at the Treasury Department's headquarters in Washington, Mr.
Glauber, the Under Secretary for Finance, is responsible for regulating the monthly auctions at which the Treasury sells billions of dollars in securities to finance the Government's huge debt.
Evidence had been piling up that Salomon might have broken the rules -- particularly the rule aimed at preventing any one firm from hogging too many of the securities at a given auction.
Mr.
Gutfreund had come to Washington to try to head off an investigation that Mr.
Glauber's team had quietly initiated.


Elizabeth Flint and John L. Donahue Are Wed
Elizabeth Rolig Flint, an associate with the law firm of Wilson, Sonsini, Goodrich &amp; Rosati in Palo Alto, Calif., was married yesterday to John Lewis Donahue, an associate in the San Francisco law firm of Pillsbury Madison &amp; Sutro.
The Rev.
Charles Anderson, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony aboard the Papagallo II in San Francisco Bay.
The bride, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
A cum laude graduate of Duke University with a law degree from New York University, she is the daughter of Mrs.
George M. Flint Jr. of Bethesda, Md., and the late Mr.
Flint.
Mr.
Donahue, 33, graduated cum laude from Harvard University, from which he also received a law degree.
He is a son of Mrs.
John L. Donahue of Mahwah, N.J., and the late Mr.
Donahue.


A New Prenatal Clinic Opens for Teen-Agers
A NEW prenatal clinic to serve pregnant teen-agers in the county has just been opened by Planned Parenthood of Westchester/Rockand.
The program, at the Planned Parenthood Center in White Plains, accepts patients from 16 through 21 years old.
The prenatal clinic is an outgrowth of Planned Parenthood's seven-year-old Adolescent Pregnancy-Impact Program, a counseling service for pregnant teen-agers and teen-age parents.
The case managers working with pregnant adolescents had complained that they were running into increasingly frustrating delays when they tried to get their patients into existing local prenatal programs.


NONFICTION
THE IGNORANT PERFECTION OF ORDINARY PEOPLE  By Robert Inchausti.
State University of New York,  Paper, $12.95.


Georgian Crowds Step Up Pressure to Oust Leader
Protests against President Zviad Gamsakhurdia of Georgia accelerated today, as two opposition leaders entered his government compound to demand a meeting with him while thousands clamored outside for his resignation.
One protester set himself afire to protest the detention of other opposition leaders in the separatist southern republic.
Local journalists said people doused the flames and the man was taken to a hospital with serious burns.


PASS THE JACK BENNY EPISODE, PLEASE
At the Museum of Television and Radio's new 17-story building in Manhattan, visitors may sample more than 40,000 television and radio episodes.
The key to this service is the Sony VLCS-800 Video Hi8 Library System -- actually, three of them at a cost of more than $200,000 apiece.
Each VLCS-800 can play up to 32 tapes simultaneously and store some 800 eight-millimeter tapes.
Each has a robotic delivery system to move cassettes from the storage area to one of its 32 tape players.
Cassettes that are not among the 800 stored internally are manually selected, then loaded by the robotic device.


POSTINGS: Coming to 5th and 42d; A Cigar Store That Recalls The 30's
The ubiquitous corner cigar store is a thing of the distant past.
But in the case of one corner -- Fifth Avenue and 42d Street -- it is coming back with considerable flair.
Nat Sherman, where one can buy 6 1/2-inch-long pink cigarettes, pouches of "Mocha Ice" tobacco, $110 boxes of Pleiades cigars and meerschaum pipes in the form of Sherlock Holmes, is moving out of the Coca-Cola Company Building, 711 Fifth Avenue, at 55th Street, and into the corner store at 500 Fifth Avenue.
It is scheduled to open next month, under a lease that runs 16 years, with a total value of $6 million.


Widening of Road, Once Highly Desired, Is Now Uncertain
THE long-running saga of the widening of Ratzer Road has finally been officially resolved.
At least for now.
Maybe.
After 11 years of engineering studies, traffic counts, Federal grants and official about-faces, a mounting public outcry against turning a mile-long section of the busy two-lane road into a busier four-lane highway has finally taken its toll on the project.


U.S. Already Lining Up Support for Zionism Move
As President Bush considers calling for a repeal of the resolution equating Zionism and racism in his address here on Monday, American diplomats have already begun seeking support for such a move at the General Assembly session now under way, officials involved in the effort say.
But they add that it is uncertain whether a repeal move would succeed.
The 12 European Community countries told the United States they would support such an effort, but warned that securing a convincing repudiation of the resolution at the current session would be difficult and carried political risks.


The Arithmetic of Help: Israeli Loan Guarantees
The tense battle between the United States and Israel over loan guarantees began here months ago with a mixture of sober economic projections, dry market analyses and more than a bit of raw, seat-of-the-pants flying.
Israeli officials knew that a huge number of Soviet Jews would be heading their way over the next few years, and a million people seemed like a reasonable forecast.
It also had the advantage of being a neat, round figure -- one easy to digest.


Talking: Foreclosure; Protecting Tenants' Interests
DURING the 1980's it became increasingly common to buy condominium units and one-family houses as investments and rent them to tenants to cover monthly carrying costs while waiting for the property to appreciate.
Often, the rent was below monthly overhead, which was not a drawback while the investor was still making money from other ventures and values were soaring.
But with the slump in the economy and a decline in property values a growing number of small investors are becoming delinquent in their mortage payments, bankers report.


Neighbors Challenge New York's Tax Reputation
Recently approved changes in Connecticut's taxes, which will be phased in starting on Oct. 1, are the latest in a series of regional tax increases that could change the competitive dynamics of the New York metropolitan area, accountants and relocation specialists say.
Not only does Connecticut now have an income tax, but last year, New Jersey, which had been relying more heavily than most other states on property taxes, raised its income tax and imposed a surcharge on its business tax.


A Look at the New South Africa
THERE is a country of sunshine, sandy beaches, verdant mountains, flaming sunsets and star-blanketed night skies, a land of friendly people and exotic wildlife as marvelously diverse as Creation itself.
It is a place where the dollar stretches twice or three times as far as it does on Cape Cod or in the Bahamas, where a good dinner can cost less than $20, a bottle of vintage wine $5 and an air-conditioned B.M.W. sedan rents for hardly more than a Volkswagen at other vacation destinations.
Before you rush to book a trip, there is one more detail you need to know -- the place is South Africa.


Toni Denton to Wed Thomas King
Toni Carole Denton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis Denton of Muskogee, Okla., is to be married in December to Thomas Lawrence King, the son of the late Thomas King and Mozella King of Medina, Ohio.
Professor Denton, 38 years old, graduated from Oklahoma State University and earned a master's degree in psychology from Ohio State University and a doctorate from Case Western Reserve University.
She is an assistant professor at the State University of New York at Binghamton.
Her father was a horticulturist and her mother, Ottissey Denton, retired as a teacher in the Muskogee elementary schools.


Abandoned Housing Site Leads to Suit Over Pollution
BY some accounts, Graig Arcuri, a housing developer, simply ran into a string of bad luck trying to build 140 luxury town houses on 40 acres of waterfront property here.
By other accounts, no amount of ill fortune justified the erosion and pollution left behind when Mr.
Arcuri, faced with mounting debts and a failed project, apparently abandoned his plans and walked away.


He'd Rather Be Right Than Foreign Minister
THE FUTURE BELONGS TO FREEDOM
By Eduard Shevardnadze.
Translated by Catherine Fitzpatrick. 237 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.


'Please Call Home'
"THERE'S one message," my father said.
" 'Call Betsy.' That's all she said." Betsy had the key to our house.
While we were vacationing at my parents' home in upstate New York, Betsy picked up our mail and checked on our house in New Jersey.
Neither my parents nor my husband and I were home early that day when she had called, so she had left a message on my parents' machine.
The terseness of the message lent itself to the sort of anxious speculation that keeps psychotherapists employed.
If blind messages cause a hell of anxiety, then the telephone truly is the instrument of the Devil.
What did she
mean
, "Call Betsy"? The imperative tone opened up all sorts of possibilities:
The house burned down. (Why didn't we make that last-minute outlet inspection before we loaded the car?)


Ties That Bind
In a milieu warped by drugs, love may look at first glance like anything but.
So it took a while to sort out the story of 15-year-old Linda Marrero, who police found chained to a radiator pipe in her family's Bronx apartment last weekend.
Despite Eliezer and Maria Marrero's plea that it was the only way they could keep her away from drugs -- at 12 she had begun disappearing on crack binges for days at a time -- they were charged with unlawful imprisonment.
But the authorities found Linda uninjured, and it emerged that in her "imprisonment" she had all the comforts of home, except the option of leaving at night, when she was chained.
Furthermore, her parents had repeatedly sought social agency help for her.
Charges against the Marreros were reduced and were expected to be dropped, and the two were released for a tearful reunion with their daughter.
But Mr.
Marrero let it be known that he stood ready to buy a new chain.


Deciphering Ins and Outs Of Wood and Metal Files
FILES are usually thought of as tools for smoothing and shaping metal, but they also are useful for woodworking.
In fact, certain files are meant just for wood.
Files intended for use on metals are called mill files, and those designed for cutting wood are called wood-, cabinet- or patternmaker's files.
Mill files can be used on wood, but files for wood will dull quickly on metal.


George Baldwin Wed to Nancy Hollingsworth
Nancy Hollingsworth, the chief executive of Human Service Options, a social-services agency in Quincy, Mass., was married yesterday to George R. Baldwin, the chief executive of Kaler Carney Liffler &amp; Company, an insurance brokerage in Boston.
The Rev.
Daniel C. Cronin officiated at St.
Ignatius Roman Catholic Church in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Mrs.
Baldwin, a graduate of Purdue University, has a masters degree in rehabilitation counseling from Boston University and an M.B.A. from Northeastern University.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Thomas Hollingsworth 3d of Barrington, Ill., and the late Mr.
Hollingsworth.
Mr.
Baldwin, a graduate of Georgetown University, is the son of Mrs.
Bernard Baldwin of Weston, Mass, and the late Mr.
Baldwin.


Corrections
A report on Sept. 8 about the marriage of Christine Johnson to John Hall omitted the bridegroom's education.
He graduated magna cum laude from Temple University and received a master of science degree from the London School of Economics and Political Science.


Butler Waits for the Commissioner
One judge has had her say.
Now KEVIN BUTLER is waiting to see if the other ax will fall.
Butler, the Chicago Bears' kicker, was fined $1,000 and sentenced to 200 hours of community service on Friday after he pleaded guilty to a drunk driving charge stemming from an Aug. 6 arrest in suburban Lincolnshire, Ill.
Judge BARBARA GILLERAN-JOHNSON, who passed sentence in Lake County Circuit Court in Waukehan, also ordered Butler to take a drivers' education and counseling course, something his lawyer said Butler had already done.
Next to be heard from is Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE, who will decide whether to suspend Butler up to four games, as the National Football League rules allow, as a result of the conviction. (AP)


Advocate for the Defense
TO find a good doctor, the advice says, pick one other doctors go to.
But to find a good lawyer pick one police officers use.
On Long Island that lawyer is Stephen P. Scaring of Lloyd Harbor.
Mr.
Scaring has had more police officers as clients than some villages have on their forces.
But neither he nor police officials like to hear him referred to as "the policeman's lawyer."


Rotisserie Leagues: Fans in the Land of Oz
When the Atlanta Braves play the Dodgers in Los Angeles today, David Justice will hit a home run in the ninth inning for a Braves' victory, and a lifelong Dodgers fan somewhere will shriek ecstatically.
That's the way it goes with many alleged baseball fans these days.
That's what Rotisserie, or fantasy, baseball has done to them.
It is happening to football fans, too.
Giving details about a new fantasy football game, the man on the television commercial says, "Enter and you'll never watch football the same way again." He's right.
A few million baseball fans can attest to that.


Friend Says Girl Killed on a Train Resisted Robbery by Other Girls
The gang of girls who killed another teen-age girl on a subway on Friday attacked her after she refused to be cowed at knifepoint into handing over her earrings or running away, a friend who was with the victim on the train said yesterday.
The girls wanted to scare Maribel Feliciano, 15 years old, but "she was very brave," the friend, who gave her name only as Yvette, said at Miss Feliciano's Brooklyn home yesterday.


Seurat: The Enigma Behind the Luster
A century after his death from diphtheria at the age of 31, Georges Seurat remains a mystery.
In his personal affairs he was so intensely private that even his closest friends were surprised to discover when he died that he had had a child by a mistress, Madeleine Knoblock.
The paintings and drawings he left behind in the so-called scientific style of brilliantly colored dots and dashes proved perplexing to mainstream French audiences and his death went largely unnoticed in the press, his works fetched only a few hundred francs, and it took until this year for his native city of Paris to honor him with the sort of major retrospective he deserves.
That exhibition has now arrived at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, where it opens in a revised form to the public on Tuesday, after a dozen days of members' previews.
It is nothing short of ravishing, a provocative, thoughtful show, far more coherently and elegantly displayed than it was in the difficult spaces of the Grand Palais.
It remains on view through Jan. 12.


Corrections
A report on Sept. 8 about the wedding of Leyla Turkkan and Alexander Smallens misstated the nature of the ceremony.
It was nondenominational.


McHale May Be Getting His Reward
After running the state authority that financed the new team's planned stadium, JOHN MCHALE JR. is apparently about to get his personal reward, the job as the top business and financial executive of the Denver Rockies, one of the two National League expansion clubs.
According to The Denver Post and The Rocky Mountain News, McHale, a Denver lawyer whose father was a top executive of the Montreal Expos and the Atlanta Braves, will be named to the post this week.
The papers also said the team's owners had narrowed the choice of general manager to MIKE PORT, a former general manager of the California Angels, and BOB GEBHARD, the Minnesota Twins' vice president for player personnel. (AP)


Tracy Cooper, Producer, Wed
Elizabeth Tracy Cooper, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William C. Cooper of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Andre Drippe, a son of Patricia Gibney Drippe of Indianapolis and the late Theodore R. Drippe Jr.
The Rev.
Richard R. McKeon Jr. performed the ceremony at Zion Episcopal Church in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Mrs.
Drippe, who is 30 years old and is known as Tracy, is a television producer for Titansports Inc., a sports entertainment company in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
Her father is an ophthalmologist at New York Hospital and a professor at Cornell University Medical College.


For the Fruits of Autumn, Cobblers and Compotes
WITH the advent of autumn a new list of ingredients tempts the cook.
This is especially true when it comes to fruit.
Summer's tender fresh peaches, plums and berries are replaced by pears, apples, cranberries and dried fruits.
The fall fruits withstand longer cooking and are delicious when baked into old-fashioned bread puddings, cobblers, crisps, compotes, and the like.
These kinds of desserts do not require painstaking pastry-making skills.
Like cooking a pot of stew, they can easily be improvised by buttering a baking dish, adding fruit and a topping and placing the mixture in the oven for about an hour.


For Mario Cuomo, All Roads Lead to Home
IN eight-and-a-half years as Governor of New York, Mario M. Cuomo has generated a significant body of political folklore.
There are the legendary Wednesday night basketball games with his staff, in which the 59-year-old Governor uses sharp elbows to compensate for his age and chronically bad back.
There are the solitary walks around Albany's Lincoln Park, where dressed in a jogging suit he ponders the events of the day.
There are the pre-dawn telephone calls from an aide in New York City, who reads Mr.
Cuomo the headlines from the morning papers.


Joan Whelan, Executive, Wed
Joan Whelan, a vice president of Citicorp Select Investments, and Lawrence Kasanoff, a movie producer and president of Lightstorm Entertainment, both in Los Angeles, were married yesterday at Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn.
David Howland, a justice of the peace, officiated.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from Lafayette College.
She and her husband, a Cornell University graduate, received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.


Chicago Treats 47 in Congress to a Free Weekend
At a reception for influential out-of-town guests on Friday, with the ting of wine glasses filling the room, Mayor Richard M. Daley chuckled at how well things were going during this city's first "Congressional Weekend."
A few months earlier, the Mayor had invited the entire United States House of Representatives here for an all-expenses-paid weekend to show off Chicago and to push his Federal spending wish list.
All the lawmakers had to do was show up; the city was paying for everything with hundreds of thousands of dollars in donations from local corporations.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a fireplace on the first floor and another below it in the basement.
When we build a fire in the first-floor fireplace, the smell of smoke is strong in the basement.
The ash pit has been removed, and the chimney flue connected to the basement fireplace has been capped.
It has been suggested that a stainless-steel liner be installed in the first-floor chimney.
Would that solve the problem?
A.
If the two chimney flues are in the same brick chimney structure, if either one or both of the flue liners is cracked or leaking and if there are no flue liners, it could be that smoke will leak from one flue to the other.
That should not occur if the flue being used draws properly, but it could happen if there are down drafts or other defects in that chimney.
Capping the unused flue was probably a mistake.
It will trap smoke that leaks into it, instead of allowing the smoke to escape through the opening at the top of the chimney.
I would suggest removing the cap.
If that does not solve the problem, have an expert check the structure.
It is very likely that lining the flue will be the answer.


Technology; Measuring How Fast Computers Really Are
In the world of scientific and technical computing, everyone agrees that computer speeds are increasing at a geometric rate.
But measuring that speed is a vexing task.
Rival supercomputer and work station manufacturers are prone to hype, choosing the performance figures that make their own machines look best.
"It's like the Wild West," said David J. Kuck, of the Center for Supercomputing Research and Development at the University of Illinois.
"They say whatever they want to."


Jan Zavislan Wed to Jane Feldman
Jane Thomas Feldman, a daughter of Janet Cutting Feldman and Justin N. Feldman, both of New York, was married yesterday in Denver to Jan Michael Zavislan, a son of Rita E. Zavislan of Lakewood, Colo., and the late Thomas Zavislan.
Chief Judge Sherman G. Finesilver of Federal District Court in Denver officiated at the Brown Palace Hotel.
He was assisted by Judge Robert L. Carter of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The couple, both 35 years old, are assistant Attorneys General for the state of Colorado in Denver.
The bride graduated from Wesleyan University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.


Corrections
A "Venice Journal" from California last Sunday, about the cloudy weather that afflicted Los Angeles's beaches this summer, misattributed a quotation.
It was Richard A. Nutting of the All One People clothing shop, not Yong No of the Mr.
No Poster Shop, who said: "We sell clothes. And people need clothes year round, right?"


Allison Kalish Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Ladd Fraternale of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., have announced November wedding plans for her daughter Allison Leslie Kalish and Joseph Robert Schwartz, the son of Eugene Schwartz of Del Mar, Calif., and the late Betty Freedman Barson.
Ms.
Kalish, 30 years old, is a vice president and project director of Corporate Graphics International in New York.
She graduated from the Atlanta College of Art.
Her father is a graphics designer in Hastings-on-Hudson.
Her mother, Marion Fraternale, is a corporate vice president at R. H. Macy in New York.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Meadow 195,000
184 Vincent Drive
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old split level; fireplace, two dens, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,500.
Farmingdale 158,000
108 Cherry Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $4,000.
Hempstead 132,000
222 Elmwood Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $3,600.
Islip 157,000
18 Woods Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 28-year- old ranch; fireplace, basement, in-ground pool; taxes $4,200.
Massapequa Park 300,000
55 Kings Walk  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old split level; dining room, eat in kitchen, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $6,800.
Westbury 230,000
1111 Bernard Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old split level; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
OTHER AREAS Rocky Hill, Conn. 208,000
94 Parish Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old split level; h/w floors, fireplace in family room, end of cul-de-sac, 0.67 acre; taxes $3,374.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 414,000
37 Westorchard Road
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 36-year-old split-level; 2 fireplaces, family room, library, eat-in kitchen, 1 acres; taxes $8,537.
Fair Lawn, N.J. 186,000
2-10 30th Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; bath with Jacuzzi and skylights, deck, full basement; taxes $3,602.


Amy L. Lewis Has Wedding
Amy Lynn Lewis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Lewis of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Elliot Montgomery Scott, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Montgomery Scott of Wayne, Pa.
The bride's 92-year-old grandfather Judge Albert Fiorillo, who is retired from the Family Court of Westchester County, performed the ceremony at Maxime's restaurant in Granite Springs, N.Y.
Mrs.
Scott, 34 years old, is an account executive with Lewis Advertising, a division of Miller Advertising Agency in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Hunter College.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is president of Lewis Advertising.
Her mother, Alberta Lewis, is a former supervisor of music in the Yonkers public school system.


40's War Fever Spurs Claims in Hawaii
Asher Ota was only 7 years old at the time, but he is still bitter about that day in the spring of 1942 when the men came to order him and his Japanese parents off their farm.
The little farm, where they raised beans and tomatoes, was near a military radio tower in a remote valley on the island of Oahu.
Now, in an odd footnote to World War II, Mr.
Ota and more than 400 other people of Japanese ancestry are coming forward to assert that their civil rights were violated by the military.
Although they were not interned, they say they should be paid redress by the Federal Government, like the people of Japanese ancestry, both citizens and aliens, who were put into detention camps as security risks on the West Coast.


Intruders in the Skies
To the Editor:
This is a comment on "It's a Bird. A Plane! A Blimp?" (Sept. 1) I find that the amount of advertising that already assails me simply overwhelming: newspapers, magazines, radio, television, billboards, in public transportation, on the backs of shopping carts, printed on bags, sound systems in stores and elevators, plus all the unwanted flyers and letters in my mailbox.


The Clock Ticks for a Patriot Buyout
The National Football League is trying to help the New England Patriots' owner, Victor Kiam, find banks willing to help him raise the $38 million he needs to buy out his partner, Francis W. Murray, by Oct. 10.
Murray owns 49 percent of the Patriots and Kiam owns 51 percent.
Under their ownership agreement, Kiam must come up the money to buy Murray's share upon demand.
Murray is part of a group trying to get one of the two N.F.L. expansion teams in St.
Louis, and now wants the money to help finance his new venture.
Murray refused to say just what his share of the proposed St.
Louis team would be.


Q and A
Broker's Fee on Mortgage  Question: Is it legal for a mortgage brokerage fee to be split with a real estate salesperson? . . .
Mitchell Friedman, Bayside, Queens Answer: It depends.
There is no specific law that prohibits the practice.
However, New York State law says that as a fiduciary, a real estate broker or salesperson is required to act solely for the benefit of the principal, who can be either the buyer or the seller, in all matters connected with the transaction.
"If the broker or salesperson breaches his or her duty of loyalty to the principal in order to receive a benefit like a commission for arranging a mortgage," said Maureen F. Glasheen, who serves as general counsel to the New York State Department of State, "then the law has been broken."
The agency has the authority to order refunds on commission or improper profits or to revoke or suspend the licenses of brokers involved in cases where the law has been violated.
If a buyer or seller suspects a broker or agent is not acting in his best interest he can file a complaint with the Division of Licensing in the Department of State.
The address is 162 Washington Avenue, Albany, N.Y. 12231.
Access to Apartments  Question: Some years ago I purchased an occupied apartment in a co-op complex.
Because the original tenant continues to occupy it I have not inspected the interior.
As the owner of the unit, do I have the right to inspect the apartment? . . .
George Ponte, Manhattan Answer: Yes.
You would need to give the tenant notice, in writing, at least one week in advance of the visit, just as any landlord would be required to do.
The tenant would have the right to require you to make the inspection between the hours of 9 A.M. and 5 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Emergencies would permit exceptions to this requirement.
Default of Maintenance  Question: I am a rent-stabilized tenant who chose not to buy when the building was converted to a co-op.
Because of the sponsor's default on the maintenance payments on unsold shares, I have received a court summons in connection with the claims from the co-op corporation against him.
The summons, which was delivered to my apartment, shows the name of the shareholder and lists me as "John Doe."
I have always made timely payments of my rent and do not understand the implication of this request for a court appearance.
Can I be evicted because the owner has failed to make maintenance payments? . . .
William Kornfeld, Brooklyn Answer: No.
There are specific state laws, including the Martin Act, which give rent-regulated tenants the right to remain in apartments in buildings that have been converted to co-ops or condominiums, regardless of ownership of the building or unit.
However, there is currently a challenge to the state law.
It has been filed by the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency set up to sell properties taken from failed lenders.
Last August, the agency informed eight tenants in a Manhattan building that their leases would be terminated and that they faced eviction unless they agreed to buy their apartments.
The agency took control of the co-op shares for those apartments from a failed bank.
The R.T.C., which filed suit in Federal Court, has taken the position that the Federal laws, which give it the right to sell assets of defunct banks, is superior to New York State law.
The Attorney General filed a countersuit in March.


Why We Should Limit Terms of Office
To the Editor:
You call limiting terms for legislators "suicidal" (editorial, Sept. 10).
To use a President Bush word, the idea seems "prudent" to me.


Maren Burke Wed To P. S. Sugarman
Maren Louise Burke, an actress, and Paul Sophian Sugarman, an actor, both 1983 graduates of New York University, were married yesterday at the First United Methodist Church in Westfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Philip R. Dietterich officiated.
The bride, 30 years old, is the daughter of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
William A. Burke Jr. of Westfield.
Her father is rector of St.
Stephen's Anglican Catholic Church in Plainfield, N.J.
Mr.
Sugarman, 31, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Sugarman of Shaftsbury, Vt.
His father teaches English at Southern Vermont College.


The 'Narcotic' of Crime on Wall Street
MEMO to Wall Street chief executives: One way to detect wrongdoing is to look for high-level employees doing work that is beneath them.
As a rule, that is not a problem.
The sense of hierarchy is strong, and it is young associates who do much of the real work in many a Wall Street firm, although they are never the ones who get the credit.


A Long, Painful Road for Expos
Dave Dombrowski and the Expos have left Montreal.
The Expos should return next season.
Dombrowski won't.
The Expos returned to Montreal last week after an unexpected road trip to New York and Philadelphia.
They had planned on playing Chicago at Olympic Stadium this weekend, but they took another unexpected trip -- to Chicago.
In fact, they will be on a road trip the rest of the season, traveling from Chicago to St.
Louis to Pittsburgh to St.
Louis to Pittsburgh.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BILL OF RIGHTS RUN
The 200th anniversary of the Bill of Rights will be celebrated today with a 10-kilometer run from Tom Paine's Cottage in New Rochelle to St.
Paul's National Historic Site in Mount Vernon, where a daylong festival will be in progress.
Runners may sign up from 8:30 to 9:45 A.M. at the Paine Cottage at 983 North Avenue for $11.
The race begins at 10 A.M.


Wall Street; Don't Bet on Easy Changes at Chock Full O'Nuts
It might be wise to add a few grains of salt to the brew at Chock Full O'Nuts, which soared last week on big volume after Business Week reported that two shrewd investors were bullish on the company.
One is Mark Boyar of Boyar Asset Management, with a 5 percent stake, who told the magazine he might wage a proxy fight if he were not offered a board seat.
The other is Mario Gabelli of Gabelli &amp; Company, with about 9 percent, who recommended the stock in a report last month.
Hopes for a management shift or a takeover abound.


Dr. Darlene LeFrancois Weds Warren Haber Jr.
Dr.
Darlene A. LeFrancois, a resident at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital in Boston, was married yesterday to Warren H. Haber Jr., a product manager in investment services at the Bank of Boston in Boston.
Judge Robert Pirraglia of the Rhode Island District Court officiated at the Blithewold Gardens and Arboretum in Bristol, R.I.
The bride, 26 years old, received B.S. and M.D. degrees from Brown University.
She is a daughter of Ronald M. and Judith S. LeFrancois of Tiverton, R.I.
Mr.
Haber, 25, also a Brown graduate, is a son of Warren H. and Suellen Haber of New York.


Why We Should Limit Terms of Office
To the Editor:
"Robbing Voters of Their Rights" (editorial, Sept. 10), strongly condemning term limits for public officials, is mistaken.
Term limits further democracy, not lessen it.


TEHERAN CONVICTS NINE IN OPPOSITION
Nine members of Iran's only internal opposition party have been convicted in secret trials of seeking to undermine the Islamic republic, Iranian officials and human rights organizations say.
The fate of these men, a number of whom are elderly and infirm members of the so-called Freedom Movement, is rapidly becoming intertwined in the struggle between human rights organizations and the Government of President Hashemi Rafsanjani over the pace of fundamental reforms in Iran's 12-year-old revolutionary regime, which still engages in secret arrests, trials and executions ordered by revolutionary courts.


Big Troop Movements Alarm Bosnia
Economic hardship and nationalist propaganda, combined with dramatic video footage of war-torn Croatia and surprise troop movements, have brought the Yugoslav republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to a high state of tension.
As the fighting from Croatia spilled over Bosnia's borders today, the Defense Ministry of the republic issued a statement tonight condemning the huge sweep of Serb and federal army troops through the republic.
It warned that such measures could involve Bosnia and Herzegovina in the growing Yugoslav civil war.


Some Things Are More Vital Than Money When It Comes to Creating the World Anew
THE United States, the world's one remaining superpower, also has the world's biggest hole in its pocket.
The national debt, just $1 trillion a decade ago, is now $3.5 trillion.
The Federal budget deficit is expected to swell the national debt by $362 billion in the fiscal year 1992, which begins Oct. 1.
And the net foreign debt -- foreigners' assets in this country minus Americans' assets abroad, measured at their current replacement value -- swung from a surplus of $364 billion in 1982 to a deficit of $412 billion in 1990, a $776 billion plunge that is still going on.
Bush calls a new world order while maintaining the world's largest military budget and tackling (or, his critics would say, neglecting) America's own social, economic and environmental problems.


Style Makers; Howard Sheffey, Golf-Club Doctor
Howard Sheffey, who repairs and makes custom golf clubs, says it's a golfer's "sentimental attachment" to a club that brings the golfer to him.
And, he says, he doesn't mind attempting the "impossible" repair job.
"A client once brought me a wooden head in four pieces, and after suggesting a price he wanted to pay, told me to take my time," he said.


Favorites Emerge to Replace Helmick
As senior officials of the United States Olympic Committee prepare to select a president to succeed Robert Helmick, two candidates have emerged as the leading contenders, one to complete Helmick's term, the other for the subsequent four years.
Helmick, the Des Moines attorney who resigned last Wednesday, had more than a year left to serve.
The favorite for the interim period appears to be William Simon, the 63-year-old former United States Secretary of the Treasury who served as the U.S.O.C. president from 1981 through the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics.


At Many Papers, Competition Is At Best an Illusion
IN a sad reflection of the hard economic times for newspapers, four venerable afternoon papers, in Richmond and Roanoke, Va., San Diego and Charleston, S.C., have recently announced that they will soon join the legion of departed afternoon dailies.
The afternoon paper in Newport News was merged into the morning paper in late August.
Their demise is illustrative of a newspaper landscape that is being steadily transformed by decades of pressure from rival media and a national life style that has altered reading habits.
Some of the changes are evident in figures that show a drop in the total number of newspapers.
But some important breaks with the past are concealed by statistics: in a signficant number of cities, for instance, what seem to be two separate newspapers are actually products of the same reporting staff, with minimal differences in news content.
The most dramatic change in the last two decades is the decline in the number of communities with competing papers.


CAMPUS LIFE: SUNY-Buffalo; Student Group Will Patrol Area To Reduce Crime
The University at Buffalo's Student Association, concerned about the crime rate in a neighborhood where many students rent apartments, has established a community-watch program that includes volunteer student patrols.
Starting tomorrow, a two-student team is scheduled to drive through the area, known locally as University Heights, between the hours of 8 P.M. and 3 A.M. in a Student Association van equipped with a CB radio and possibly a cellular phone.
The patrol is expected to operate each day the first week and on Thursday, Friday and Saturday nights thereafter.


Lucy Kindred Weds S. M. Galbraith
Lucy Wharton Kindred, a daughter of Mrs.
Philip George of New York and Thomas Wharton Kindred of Dallas, was married yesterday to Steven Matthew Galbraith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew White Galbraith of New York and Barrington, R.I.
The Rev.
Donald Dearborn Marsden Jr., a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Flagler Memorial Chapel in Millbrook, N.Y.
Mrs.
Galbraith, 28 years old, is an assistant vice president at the Swiss Bank Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her mother, Gail George, an interior designer, and stepfather, an industrial and architectural designer, work together in their own company in New York.
Her father is a general contractor and real-estate developer in Dallas.


Threat to Veto Israeli Guarantee Imperils Talks; Never Defaulted Yet
To the Editor:
In "Cut Aid Now" (letter, Sept. 10), on the loan guarantee requested by Israel, Glenn Bering's reference to "the almost inevitable default on this loan" is baffling to anyone familiar with Israel's record on loan payments: Israel has never defaulted on a loan, even during times of great crisis in its economy and threats to its security.
The guarantees are likely to cost the United States taxpayer not the ridiculous figure Mr.
Bering suggests, but nothing at all, aside from negligible administrative costs.


Turning The Lens Inward
To make a picture of oneself is a complex act, fraught with psychological and emotional significance.
It can hardly be carried out with the dispassionate attention associated with the modernist notion of the artist as visual scientist.
With notable exceptions -- among them work by Francesco Clemente, Cindy Sherman and John Coplans -- self-portraits have occupied a minor place in contemporary art.
"Le Corps Vacant," a new show at the Musee d'Art Contemporain in Montreal (through Oct. 27), provides a brief survey of recent representations of the self in photography.
What is most striking about this ambitious but decidedly mixed show, organized by a group of photographers and critics who call themselves Vox Populi, is the way it compounds self-portraiture with another theme that has received wide attention lately, that of the body and its meanings.


Rutgers Manages To Survive
All week long, Doug Graber, the second-year Rutgers head coach, warned his players to ignore the odds printed on the sports pages that listed them as 16-point favorites this afternoon in their game against lowly Northwestern, a program that hasn't had a winning season since 1971.
The Knights apparently chose to believe the clippings.


Taking the Sizzle Out of Summer in Stuyvesant Town
AN unwelcome reprise of summer's steamy weather sent the fans whirling again last week throughout Stuyvesant Town, the plain red-brick, moderate-income complex on the east side of Manhattan where old wiring makes air-conditioners strictly against the rules.
"Fans are all we have," said Chris Bush, a resident who had eight going last Monday.
"Fans don't really make it cooler in the apartment, but they do push the air around."


NONFICTION
"HALF BROTHER, HALF SON"  The Letters of Louis D. Brandeis to Felix Frankfurter.
Edited by Melvin I. Urofsky and David W. Levy.
University of Oklahoma, $55.


A New Chance for a Fractured Land
ADDIS ABABA, A ramshackle capital of damp mists and gangly eucalyptus groves, has changed little since the British writer Evelyn Waugh arrived here in 1930 in his topee and white suit to report on the coronation of Emperor Haile Selassie.
The low buildings of concrete and iron remain, decrepit and rusted.
Donkeys, laden with wood and charcoal, still compete with rickety cars on potholed roads.
Soldiers from the imperial days, in their crisp uniforms with polished brass buttons, have long vanished, but armed men still stride along the streets, lacking only the "slave boy walking behind with a rifle," as Waugh had noted.
Today's armed men -- mostly unkempt, their chests crisscrossed with bandoleers -- are youthful fighters from the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (E.P.R.D.F.), which now rules the country.
After 17 years of battling Africa's most hard-line Marxist regime, in late May they swept into the capital and in a couple of hours overwhelmed the presidential guard of Lieut.
Col.
Mengistu Haile Mariam.
One of Africa's most loathed rulers, Mengistu had fled to Zimbabwe a week before.


The Sacking of Croatia
Yugoslavia's civil war is claiming lives -- and also the cultural birthright of Croatia.
As many as 116 churches, castles and historic districts have reportedly come under mortar and air attacks by Serbian militias or units of the Yugoslav Army.
A respected private group, the World Monuments Fund, says these are calculated assaults on another people's treasures.
It is a credible charge that shames the Serbian cause.
Among the cultural casualties are the great dome of St.
Jacob's Cathedral in Sibenik, old Baroque buildings in the former capital city of Varazdin, the castle and museum in Vukovar (see photo) and the historic center of Karlovac.
On the Dalmatian coast, a magnet for tourists, recent aerial and naval skirmishes near Split airport imperiled the adjacent classical ruins of Salona, known to Croatians as "our Pompeii."


THE SCHWARZKOPF FILET
Here is one wartime veteran who is unimpressed by the accomplishments of Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf ("The Schwarzkopf Filet," by Alex Heard, Aug. 11).
I can't help wonder how he would have made out if he had taken his all-volunteer army into a real war against a real enemy who put up a real fight and inflicted sizable numbers of casualties.
Who knows, under those conditions he might even have been partly responsible for a real victory.
The fiasco in the Persian Gulf just might be the only war in history in which the "winners" inflicted more human and material damage on themselves than the "losers" did.
On the other hand, if our national orgy of hypocrisy has to have a focal point, Schwarzkopf is probably as good a point man as any other.
TOM MUNSON
Glastonbury, Conn.
ILS&gt;Drawing: Cartoon of Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf


A House Made of Rubber
Anyone can make a mistake balancing a checkbook.
But 8,331 bounced checks?
In one year?
With no penalties for the overdrafts?
Is this any way to run a bank?
Yes -- if it's the House bank, the private financial institution run primarily for the benefit of members of the House of Representatives.
A startling audit just released by the General Accounting Office shows that many Congressmen don't manage their own money any better than they manage the country's.


Miss Alford, Banker, Weds
Elizabeth Robertson Alford, a daughter of Mrs.
George E. Alford of Saddle River, N.J., and the late Mr.
Alford, was married yesterday to Jedediah Kuusk Hogan, the son of Mrs.
Werner Ostberg of Easton, Pa., and the late Donald W. Hogan.
The Rev.
Donald A. Brevet officiated at the Saddle River Reformed Church.
Mrs.
Hogan, 27 years old, is an assistant treasurer in New York for Societe Generale, the French bank.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College, as did her husband.
Her father was the chairman of the Citizens National Bank of New Jersey.


Anne Hepting Has Wedding
Anne de Lavolette Hepting, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Carleton Hepting of New York, was married yesterday to Steven Flegenheimer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Flegenheimer of Saginaw, Mich.
The Rev.
Gary Miller, a Congregational minister, and the Rev.
John S. Rogers, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in the chapel of St.
George's School in Newport, R.I., where Father Rogers is the chaplain.
The bride, 28 years old, is the assistant general manager of the Ann Taylor store on 57th Street in New York.
She graduated from the Foxcroft School and George Washington University and was a member of the 1981 New York Junior Assembly.
Her father is the president of Jeane Eddy Ltd., a women's clothing shop in New York.


New &amp; Noteworthy
DISCOVERING: Inventing and Solving Problems at the Frontiers of Scientific Knowledge, by Robert Scott Root-Bernstein. (Harvard University, $15.95.) Measured in terms of money spent or papers published, 20th-century science is undergoing an explosion of growth.
So, the author asks, why are there so few truly astounding discoveries?
Last year our reviewer, Marcia Bartusiak, said this book, which is written in the form of a conversation among six voices, is "sometimes frustrating, chaotic and, in several places, obscure, but it is also surprising and thought-provoking."
MARY SHELLEY: Romance and Reality, by Emily W. Sunstein. (Johns Hopkins University, $15.95.) Though she was best known for writing "Frankenstein" at age 19 and for her brief marriage to Percy Bysshe Shelley, Mary Shelley's life was far from over when he died.
This book "promises to be the definitive biography," Carolyn Heilbrun said in The Book Review in 1989: "Ms. Sunstein is to be praised for looking anew at so misunderstood a life." Johns Hopkins University has also republished THE GODWINS AND THE SHELLEYS: The Biography of a Family ($16.95), in which William St.
Clair brings to life the political and cultural world of Mary Shelley's father, William Godwin.
"The reader comes away with the feeling that he has witnessed a panorama of intellectual history," Leslie A. Marchand said here in 1989.


FEW ARE TALKING IN QUEENS KILLINGS
The investigation into a Queens cabaret shoot-out that left four people dead last week has been hampered because some potential informants regarded one of those killed as a bully and believed that the gunman did the community a favor, police officials have said.
Inspector James Courtney of the Queens detective command said on Friday that the police had received reports before the shooting that the man, Carlos Arias, 29 years old, had sexually abused women at gunpoint.


The Poet and Her Family
To the Editor:
Applause for Katha Pollitt's astute comments in her Aug. 18 review of Diane Wood Middlebrook's "Anne Sexton" and for Linda Gray Sexton's moving and courageous statement in the same issue ("A Daughter's Story: I Knew Her Best").


Syracuse Puts on a Top-10 Homecoming
Homecoming against the Florida Gators?
After 101 years in the football business, it seemed as if the Syracuse Orangemen would have known enough to choose a more suitable (that is, beatable) homecoming opponent than the fifth-ranked team in the country.
But as one of the leaders of the new Big East football conference, the Orangemen slapped those red and blue conference patches on their arms and figured they could take on the world.
To the players, there was nothing shocking about their 38-21 victory over the Gators.
The surprise was in the forcefully imaginative way they managed to control the team ranked No. 5 in The Associated Press poll and No. 7 in The New York Times's preseason rating.


New Yorkers, etc.
There's no way to tell the truth in certain circumstances, at least not the whole truth.
And although we have all been taught not to lie, there are occasions when if not a lie, at least fudging the truth is a kindness.
There's a real art to fudging and it's an art at which theater people are particularly adept.
This talent isn't inherent in the profession, it's something that's acquired, developed of necessity.
It comes in handy more frequently than it should, when a backstage visit is called for after a play or performance that has been less than memorable.


Gorbachev Enjoyed Maneuvering, Shevardnadze Says
A month after the taming of the coup, former Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze looks upon his mentor, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in almost elegiacal terms, as the President who "enjoyed maneuvering too much."
"This is the root of his constant fluctuations and indecision," Mr.
Shevardnadze said in an interview this week with foreign journalists in which he remained unforgiving of Mr.
Gorbachev's failure to see the reactionary threat looming all about him at the hands of Communist careerists he trusted to excess.


Sheila Elise Gallagher Is Married
Sheila Elise Gallagher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Terence Joseph Gallagher of New Vernon, N.J., was married there yesterday to Matthew Littell, a son of Walter P. Littell of Cambridge, Mass., and the late Penelope Littell.
The ceremony was performed at the Church of Christ the King by the Rev.
Giles Hayes, a Roman Catholic priest who is a cousin of the bride's father.
Mrs.
Littell, 25 years old, is the assistant to the chairman of the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts in New York.
She graduated from Milton Academy and cum laude from Connecticut College.
She was a 1989 Thomas J. Watson Fellow.
Her mother, Natalie Gallagher, is the assistant director of the Somerset Hills Handicapped Riders Association in Bedminster, N.J.
Her father is a lawyer in Morristown.
The bridegroom, also 25, is a theatrical set designer and architectural illustrator in New York.
He graduated from Phillips Academy and Columbia University.
His father is the acting associate vice chancellor for external relations at the University of Massachusetts at Boston.


Paying by the Can For Garbage Pickup
Yes, as the Aug. 18 article "Garbage: Per-Can Fees Yield Benefits" indicated, there are indeed short-term monetary benefits to charging for household garbage pickup on a per-can basis.
However, the hidden, indirect costs of such a system are tremendous.
The black trash bag left by the roadside and dumped in parks has become so ubiquitous that it should be put on our state flag as a symbol of the lost sense of community in the Garden State.


Lynne Mallory Is Wed on L.I.
Lynne Myers Cushman Mallory, a daughter of Mrs.
George B. Mallory of Old Brookville, L.I., and Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was married yesterday to Steven Eugene Winter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene W. Winter of St.
Paul and Richmond.
The Rev.
Frederick W. Thayer officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Winter, 31 years old, was until recently a vice president of the Industrial Bank of Japan in New York.
She graduated from Friends Academy in Locust Valley, L.I., and Georgetown University.
Her father, the late Mr.
Mallory, was an investor and a founder of Mallory Restaurants, a holding company for Burger King restaurants on Long Island.


4 Officers Are Beaten at Festival
The manager of the Ravenite Social Club, long regarded as the Manhattan hangout of the Gambino family of the Mafia, was arrested on Friday night after a fight with four off-duty police officers that left one of them in serious condition.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann, said the incident occurred about 9:30 P.M. in the Little Italy neighborhood at the corner of Mulberry and Spring Streets at the Feast of San Gennaro.
She said a child of one of the off-duty officers, Anthony Penzone, complained that a concession game in which water is shot into a balloon was not working properly.


The Poet and Her Family
To the Editor:
While writing in support of Dr.
Martin T. Orne's release of his patient Anne Sexton's taped therapy sessions, both Linda Gray Sexton and Katha Pollitt inadvertently bring to light a curious omission from the debate thus far.


The View From the Periphery
EDGE CITY
Life on the New Frontier. By Joel Garreau. Maps. 546 pp. New York: Doubleday. $22.50.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Arts Budget: Vote on an amendment to an appropriation bill for the Department of the Interior that would cut 10 percent from the National Endowment for the Arts budget.
Rejected 67 to 27, Sept. 19.
2.
Arts Grants Limits: Vote on an amendment to an appropriation bill for the Department of the Interior that prohibits the National Endowment for the Arts from awarding grants that would be used to promote materials that depict "sexual or excretory activities or organs" in an "offensive way." Approved 69 to 28, Sept. 19.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
N
Y
Lieberman (D)
N
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
N
N
Lautenberg (D)
N
N
New York
D'Amato (R)
N
Y
Moynihan (D)
N
N
House
1.
Unemployment Benefits: Vote on passage of a bill to provide extra unemployment benefits for people who have been out of work at least half a year.
The bill would waive budget act requirements than an emergency be declared to permit the necessary deficit spending.
Approved 283 to 125, Sept. 17.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
2. Gejdenson (D)
Y
3. DeLauro (D)
Y
4. Shays (R)
N
5. Franks (R)
Y
6. Johnson (R)
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Y
2. Hughes (D)
Y
3. Pallone (D)
Y
4. Smith (R)
Y
5. Roukema (R)
Y
6. Dwyer (D)
Y
7. Rinaldo (R)
Y
8. Roe (D)
Y
9. Torricelli (D)
Y
10. Payne (D)
Y
11. Gallo (R)
Y
12. Zimmer (R)
Y
13. Saxton (R)
A
14. Guarini (D)
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner(D)
Y
2. Downey (D)
Y
3. Mrazek (D)
Y
4. Lent (R)
N
5. McGrath (R)
Y
6. Flake (D)
Y
7. Ackerman (D)
Y
8. Scheuer (D)
Y
9. Manton (D)
Y
10. Schumer (D)
Y
11. Towns (D)
Y
12. Owens (D)
Y
13. Solarz (D)
Y
14. Molinari (R)
Y
15. Green (R)
N
16. Rangel (D)
Y
17. Weiss (D)
Y
18. Serrano (D)
Y
19. Engel (D)
Y
20. Lowey (D)
Y
21. Fish (R)
Y
22. Gilman (R)
Y
23. McNulty (D)
Y
24. Solomon (R)
N
25. Boehlert (R)
Y
26. Martin (R)
Y
27. Walsh (R)
Y
28. McHugh (D)
Y
29. Horton (R)
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
Y
31. Paxon (R)
Y
32. LaFalce (D)
Y
33. Nowak (D)
Y
34. Houghton (R)
Y
KEY Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
BY now nearly everyone who lives within 100 miles of New York City has heard of Danny, the schnook from Hoboken who sells Hondas without trying.
Danny, forlorn Danny, never has the chance to sell because people yell "I'll take it" before he says a word.
He is successful anyway and when, on one of the television commercials he stars in, he is shown outside his modest Hoboken home, Hoboken turns out to look an awful lot like Fanwood, or Cedar Grove, or any of the hundreds of mild-mannered, front-lawned, attached-garage, quarter-acre suburbs around the state.


Design; The Black Market
AS BRIGHT COLORS return to the home, black takes on a new function.
"It's a foil," says John Hutton, the design director at Donghia.
"Black furniture enhances everything around it." Arrangements of fruits and flowers in deep, almost black tones are also in demand.
Stunning rather than macabre, these neo-Victorian bouquets are redefining the "pretty" arrangement.


POSTINGS: New Co-op/Condo Group; Door-to-Door Recruiting
At a time when co-ops and condominiums are banding together over property taxes, utility costs and other shared concerns, the founders of a new group on Manhattan's East Side have found that getting started can require shoe leather.
To simply identify board presidents, Jacqueline Watkins Slifka and Leatrice Gochberg, founders of the Association of Cooperative and Condominium Boards, said they approached doormen and residents at 50 buildings in May.
Forty-three of the presidents attended the group's first meeting on May 20, and those at 200 additional East Side buildings between 50th and 98th Streets have been invited to the next meeting, at 5 P.M.
Wednesday at the Hunter School of Social Work, 129 East 79th Street.
Peter F. Vallone, the City Council Speaker, is to attend.


Jackson Fills a White Sox Need
Bo Jackson's long rehabilitative road back to the major leagues has taught him a lot about sacrifice, and those lessons are serving him well.
With the Chicago White Sox, Jackson has had to adjust to not being in the lineup every day.
It bothers him, but he can accept the situation for two reasons: First, he is willing to do whatever is necessary -- even sit out a game -- to win a pennant; second, he knows that even in a limited role he has the potential to make a big contribution.


Martha Poillon Marries Francis Ambrogio 2d
Martha Marie Poillon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Poillon of Cos Cob, Conn., was married yesterday to Francis John Ambrogio 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Ambrogio of Greenwich, Conn.
Msgr.
Thomas Guinan officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Michael the Archangel in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Ambrogio graduated from Villanova University and is a sales representative for Appleseed's, a women's clothing store, in Greenwich.
Mr.
Ambrogio, a graduate of Dartmouth College who has an M.B.A. from Pace University, is a financial analyst with Lerner New York, a women's retail chain.


Amy Seigal and Andrew Soskin Are Married
Amy Lynne Seigal and Andrew Franklin Soskin were married last evening at the Preakness Hills Country Club in Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Israel Dresner performed the ceremony.
The bride, 26 years old, is an associate at the law firm of Wolff &amp; Samson in Roseland, N.J.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stuart Seigal of Wayne, where her father is an obstetrician-gynecologist.
A cum laude graduate of Tulane University, she received a law degree from George Washington University.


Ms. Mohr Weds Gregory Gomez
Susan Joan Mohr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Mohr of Hatboro, Pa., was married yesterday to Gregory Basile Gomez, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Vincent Gomez of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Msgr.
R.
Emmet Fagan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Mary in Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
The couple, both 36 years old, are securities traders in New York.
She is an associate vice president with Prudential Securities; he is a vice president with Kemper Securities.
Mrs.
Gomez attended the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was founder of Mohr Brothers, a landscape and contracting company in Hatboro.
The bridegroom graduated from Ithaca College.
His father is the founder and chairman of the American Book Center, a publishers' book distribution company in Brooklyn.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Fortunate Faxon Holds Onto the Lead


A Pair of Proclamations Heralds Opera Programs
SEPTEMBER has been declared Opera Awareness Month in Bridgeport by Mayor Mary C. Moran.
The Mayor of Stamford, Thom Serrani, issued a similar proclamation, calling opera "the grand collective of the performing arts." Several programs are under way in schools, with library displays, cable television interviews, even operatic fashion shows heralding the occasion as well.
"Introduction to Grand Opera" courses, open to the public, are being offered by the Stamford Continuing Education program and the University of Bridgeport; the Stamford course begins at 7 P.M. tomorrow at Rippowam High School, and the Bridgeport course at the same hour on Wednesday at the university.
The twin proclamations also serve to salute Connecticut Grand Opera, which offers its staged performances at the Stamford Palace and at Klein Auditorium in Bridgeport.


Premature Putdown?
To the Editor:
I was particularly distressed to read the section of the season preview devoted to "The Prince of Tides"  [ Annotated Calendar, Sept. 8 ] .


U.S. Cancels Mexico Alert
A State Department travel advisory warning Americans to exercise caution when visiting Mexico, because of bombings in Mexico City, has been canceled.
The advisory, issued Aug. 21, cited bombings in mid-August at a Citibank building, an I.B.M. office building, a Sanborn's restaurant and a McDonald's.
No injuries and only minor damage was reported, and the advisory noted that the attacks were believed to have been directed at "high-profile physical locations and not at individuals."
In canceling the advisory on Sept. 6, the State Department said it had "conducted an ongoing review of the situation in Mexico, and has determined these incidents no longer warrant a caution to American citizens traveling or residing in Mexico."


Miss Polcyn Is Wed
Elizabeth Ann Polcyn and Kevin Ambrose McMahon were married yesterday at Our Lady Queen of Peace Roman Catholic Church in Boothbay Harbor, Me., by the Rev.
Marcel Chouinard.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from Babson College, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is a daughter of Edward and Julia Polcyn of Vestal, N.Y.
Mr.
McMahon, 34, is a vice president and a director of the Credit Suisse First Boston Corporation in London.
He is a cum laude graduate of Boston College with an M.B.A. from Pace University.
His parents are Robert and Mary McMahon of Syracuse.


New Mexico's Mysterious Anasazi Ruins
THE blinding sun searches deep into the crevices of rocks that were hewn, dressed and arranged centuries ago.
The patterns and placement of the broken walls stand in perfect harmony with the surrounding land forms.
A lizard scurries out, then freezes on a stone that was darkened ages since by the soot of ceremonial fires.
If it wasn't for the pinon pines, the scrub juniper and the sheer canyon cliffs, one might almost imagine oneself at some remote Greek ruin hidden away in Thessaly or the Pelopennesus.
But this is New Mexico, and these are the ruins of great towns built by the prehistoric Anasazi people.
For 1,000 years, from about A.D. 500 until their dispersal around 1500, the Anasazi, whose name is a Navajo word that means "the ancient ones," lived in pueblos and cliff dwellings built in the canyons and high mesas of the Four Corners region (where Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona and Utah meet).
Visitors to northern New Mexico will find no better introduction to the beauty and the enduring mysteries of Anasazi culture than the 34,000-acre Chaco Culture National Historic Park and the 32,000-acre Bandelier National Monument.


Throwing Shade
The old black was discreet.
It was flattering to every figure, the perfect background shade.
The new black is something else.
Sleek and aggressive, it says; "Look at me!" This season, designers are using black to shape their most provocative silhouettes.
They can be sharp or sinuous.
Either way, they spell out their sexy attitude clearly.


New Cafes: Tradition Without Smoke
In the 1950's, cafes were dark places filled with cigarette smoke and bohemians.
In the 80's, they were soaring, noisy spaces inhabited by black-clad women and baby vegetables.
Now, cafes are flourishing in yet another form.
A number of small cafes concentrating on coffee, tea, desserts and a few salads and sandwiches have opened in the last year or so, particularly in downtown Manhattan.
They're not restaurants calling themselves cafes but small, relaxed meeting places, although not usually dark and smoky.


U.S. Advisories
To the Editor: Your Practical Traveler column on "What's Behind U.S. Advisories" (July 28) examined the process by which the State Department decides which destinations are slapped with travel advisories.
The piece contrasted Mexico, which received no strong travel advisory despite 139 crime incidents involving Americans between June 1989 and February 1991, with Kenya, which received an advisory in 1989 a few days after an American tourist on safari was shot by bandits.
During the time period in question, 11.9 million Americans visited Mexico.
Those figures are not available for Kenya, but according to its Tourism Board, Kenya received 84,300 American tourists in 1989 and 69,500 in 1988.


In New York City, Catholic Clout Wanes
THE Board of Education's refusal to allow parents any say in whether their children can get condoms at school revealed much about New York City's changed sociology and politics as well as its sexual mores.
The chief loser in the battle was the Roman Catholic Church, once so forceful a player in New York's political life that the archhbishop's residence on Madison Avenue was known, with some exaggeration, as "The Powerhouse."


It's Art, but Is It Theft as Well?
COLOR the puppies bright blue.
And those are daisies in the ears of the woman on the left.
But otherwise, a Federal court agreed, the sculpture by Jeff Koons is so derivative of the photograph by Art Rogers that Mr.
Rogers's copyright was infringed.
But the judge could not rule on whether Mr.
Rogers should get any of the $367,000 Mr.
Koons made selling three copies of his sculpture, "String of Puppies," and both sides have appealed.
Mr.
Koons found the photograph in an airport gift shop and had the statues carved for him at an Italian workshop that usually does work for churches.
Better-known porcelain or wood pieces by Mr.
Koons have used better-known images, like Michael Jackson, Playboy bunnies, stills from Buster Keaton movies and details of da Vincis.
His lawyers argue that his work is a critical comment on mass culture and that "transformative reinterpretation" of other artists' work, appropriating images for satire, is fair.
Mr.
Koons, 36, a former mutual fund salesman and museum publicist, has made a nice living at this, charging $50,000 and up per piece.
But other copyright owners have other ideas, and some have deeper pockets than Mr.
Rogers, a photo columnist for a small California newspaper.
Mr.
Koons also faces suits over his use of images of Odie, Garfield's cartoon nemesis, and of the Pink Panther.


Kids on the Road
To the Editor: Vicki Koestler's article, ("Touring With the Young and Restless," Aug. 18) certainly rang true.
On the way to an overnight stopover at a brand-new Holiday Inn, my husband jokingly pointed out to the children a rundown motel and said, "there's the motel we're staying at tonight." My son, Avi (then 4) exclaimed happily, "Hurray! It has a Coke machine!"


BEST SELLERS: September 22, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war, and a floundering President may not be able to cope.
2
2
2
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
3
4
3
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older brother.
4
3
28
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
7
3
FLOWERS IN THE RAIN, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $20.) A collection of short stories, many of them set in Scotland and dealing with family relationships.
6
5
13
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
7
12
2
RUSSKA, by Edward Rutherfurd. (Crown, $25.) Eighteen centuries in the lives of four families of different cultures residing in a Russian village.
8
6
18
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
9
8
78
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
10
9
20
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
11
11
9
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
12
10
8
MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) A woman probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck Florida judge. (LP)
13
1
EXCEPTIONAL CLEARANCE, by William J. Caunitz. (Crown, $20.) A New York police detective on the trail of a dexterous serial killer.
14
13
3
THE GARDEN OF RAMA, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $20.) For the third time in the 23d century, astronauts from Earth contend with alien forces.
15
14
13
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
1
4
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
3
4
44
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures through the centuries.
4 *
2
14
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the workings of the Federal Government.
5
6
19
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
6
7
12
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
7 *
5
14
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
8 *
3
9
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
9
1
LA TOYA, by La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski. (Dutton, $19.95.) Growing up in a leading show business family, as experienced by Michael Jackson's sister.
10
9
3
ANNE SEXTON, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The life of a gifted poet who was hampered by mental illness.
11
11
2
HARD COURTS, by John Feinstein. (Villard, $22.50.) A journalist's behind-the-scenes look at a year of professional tennis.
12
10
12
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
13
8
12
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
14
14
3
THE MANSIONS OF LIMBO, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) A collection of pieces about currently celebrated people.
15
12
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events and machinations that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
4
11
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
3
2
125
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice.
4
49
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
5
3
45
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE SWEET HEREAFTER, by Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $20.) The author of "Continental Drift" coolly but generously engages an appalling theme: a town's need to fix the blame for a dreadful school bus accident so the world will make sense again.
J.
EDGAR HOOVER: The Man and the Secrets, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) A journalist who is a master of detail and description tells us at length what Hoover said and did in his remarkable career, leaving judgment mainly to us.
FROM THE SECRET FILES OF J. EDGAR HOOVER, edited by Athan Theoharis. (Ivan R. Dee, $24.95.) A notable collection of documents that show the kind of information and misinformation Hoover's F.B.I. collected, from the sensational to the trivial.
MAKING HISTORY, by Carolyn See. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Terrible things happen in this intelligent novel to a man who tries to engineer a better country, without suffering, evil or original sin.
A TERRIBLE LIAR: A Memoir, by Hume Cronyn. (Morrow, $23.) Not quite an autobiography by the distinguished actor; a self-investigation into what makes him go and how seriousness and industry transformed him from a Canadian patrician into a star.
THE DREAM AT THE END OF THE WORLD: Paul Bowles and the Literary Renegades in Tangier, by Michelle Green. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A carefully researched life and times of Tangier's most famous resident and the circles that moved around him: outlaws, socialites, highly advanced fun seekers.
ELECTRIFYING AMERICA: Social Meanings of a New Technology, 1880-1940, by David E. Nye. (MIT, $29.95.) A deep historical probing into the everyday significance of utility-provided electricity and the changes it has wrought.


Dr. Carter Wed To D. R. Moretti
Dr.
Susan Redfield Carter, an ophthalmology resident at the University of California's San Francisco Medical Center, and Didier Rene Moretti, the director of research and development at Ungermann-Bass Inc., a Santa Clara, Calif. computer company, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Donald G. Cunningham officiated at the First United Methodist Church in Burlingame, Calif.
Dr.
Carter, 27 years old, graduated summa cum laude and received her M.D. from Yale University, where she was a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Priscilla D. Carter of New York and Richard E. Carter of Nahant, Mass., and Tetbury, England.
Her father is a yacht designer with Carter Offshore Inc. in Nahant.
Her mother is an associate in the New York law firm of Dimas &amp; Johnston.


Miss Nelson Has Wedding
Elizabeth Price Nelson, a daughter of Joan D. Nelson and Geoffrey W. Nelson, both of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to James DeWitt Pratt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John DeWitt Pratt of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
James Blanning officiated at the First Church, a Congregational church in Cambridge.
Mrs.
Pratt, 25 years old, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Connecticut and until recently was a financial analyst at Fidelity Investments in Boston.
Her father is a partner in the Hartford law firm of Murtha, Cullina, Richter &amp; Pinney.
Her mother is the assistant to the medical director of Connecticare Inc., a health maintenance company in Farmington, Conn.


All About/Batteries; Keeping a Gadget-Mad Nation Charged Up -- and Safe
From boom boxes to camcorders, Walkmen to cordless drills, portable power means batteries -- lots and lots of them.
Americans now consume 2.7 billion of these household batteries a year.
Most end up as trash in landfills and incinerators.
But many environmentalists and governmental officials are concerned that the metals used in batteries will get into drinking-water supplies as landfills leak or as incinerator-stack emissions fall to the ground.
All dry-cell batteries -- different from car batteries, which have a liquid electrolyte -- store electricity through chemical reactions that usually involve two different and often toxic metals.


Bess Weatherman Has Wedding
Elizabeth Hendren Weatherman, a daughter of Mrs.
Romulus T. Weatherman of Lexington, Va., and the late Mr.
Weatherman, was married yesterday in Bedford Hills, N.Y., to Peter Lagrange Watrous, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Livingston D. Watrous of Nantucket, Mass.
The Rev.
Anne E. Tyndall, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur T. Whitney.
Ms.
Weatherman, who is 31 years old and known as Bess, is keeping her name.
She is an associate in the New York investment banking firm of E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company.
She graduated summa cum laude from Mount Holyoke College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
Her father was the director of publications for Washington and Lee University.
Her mother, Clara Belle Weatherman, who is retired, was an editor of The Lexington News-Gazette.
Mr.
Watrous, 33, is a contributing rock and jazz critic for The New York Times.
He is an alumnus of the Kent School and the Guitar Institute of Technology in Hollywood, Calif., and he graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts.
His father, who is retired from the Foreign Service, was a Consul General in Cape Town.


Bucknell Hands Fordham Another Loss
After spotting Fordham a touchdown at Jack Coffey Field in the Bronx yesterday, Bucknell roared back for a 21-14 Patriot League victory.
It was Bucknell's first victory of the season in three games.


Mary Ann Riley, Banker, Weds
Mary Ann Riley, a vice president of Manufacturers Hanover Trust, and Christopher Douglas Kirsten, a vice president of Nomura Securities International, both in New York, were married yesterday in Bedford, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
William R. Foley performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Kirsten graduated from Georgetown University, and she and her husband received M.B.A.'s from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray Thomas Riley of Garden City, L.I.
Her father is the marketing vice president for ATS Money Systems, a computer company in Englewood, N.J.


It All Started With Minerals
THE State Museum is reinstalling its collection, and the drawing shown here, Bill Traylor's "Brown Spotted Dog," is one of the many works on display.
It dates from circa 1940 and is a fairly recent acquisition.
This is a young collection, but the museum, or rather the acorn from which it grew, dates to 1832.
This was the year that the mineral samples gathered by surveyors for the Morris Canal were deposited at the State House, forming the nucleus of a natural sciences collection.


The Great Temples of Bhubaneswar
INDIA, for many centuries, made it its main occupation to house the gods: there could never be enough temples to receive them, it seemed, or enough carvings to tell their story.
Then, the Muslim invaders came sweeping in during the 12th to 15th centuries, ravaging and destroying.
In many cases, they replaced masterpieces with their own uninspired shrines.
Luckily, however, they never reached vast areas of the subcontinent: in the south, around Madras, architectural wonders abound and, farther to the northeast, about 150 miles south of Calcutta and just inland from the Bay of Bengal, Bhubaneswar has kept much of its earlier glory.
Part of India's charm is that it constantly presents unexpected pleasures: lush tropical landscapes are more often associated with sunbathing and swimming than with great architecture; yet, in and around Bhubaneswar, some of the most beautiful temples ever rise among gently swaying palm trees while, just a short distance away, white sand beaches stretch endlessly.


Q and A
Motorcycling in Europe
Q.
I am planning a journey through Europe and interested in renting a motorcyle.
Do you know of rental sources?
Any tips on riding there? -- Ashbury Dobeons, New York, N.Y.


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
I want to say thank you for Elizabeth Swados's article "The Story of a Street Person" (Aug. 18).
I know that each time I see a street person, I will think of Elizabeth's brother.
There are many out there.
LINDA MANDLER
Larchmont, N.Y.


Squelched Cartoonist Turns to Painting
LOU MYERS considers himself "the best kind of misfit." Whatever bothers him goes right on the drawing boards so the world can laugh.
His wordless cartoons, lampooning neurosis and its fixers, have appeared in magazines like The New Yorker, The Nation, Esquire and Playboy for more than 40 years.
Mr.
Myers also contributes to The New York Times and The Washington Post and is the artist responsible for the well-known poster for the film "La Cage Aux Folles" of two men wearing a single polka-dot dress.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
RIDE 'EM, BUS DRIVER
JOSEPH P. SLEVIN Jr. of Bethpage loves driving his Nassau County bus.
Driving a bus load of Long Islanders to the Queens subways presents challenges not to be found anywhere else, he said.


Making a Difference; Chrysler's New Option for Parents
About 10 years ago, Ronald S. Zarowitz grew frustrated weaving belts through the back of his baby daughter's safety seat to strap it into his car.
"It was a constant struggle," he said.
A rear-seat arm rest gave him a better idea: a seat whose back cushion folds down to form a child seat, with the belts neatly stored behind the cushion.
Now Mr.
Zarowitz, who is Chrysler's car and truck safety manager, and a team of engineers have turned his old sketch for an "integrated" child seat into a popular feature on Chrysler's 1992 minivans.
What the engineers came up with is a pair of seats built into the middle passenger bench.
A quarter of all vans are being ordered with the $200 feature, nearly double the anticipated demand.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Aberdeen 123,900
170 Cliffwood Avenue
5-bedroom, 2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; 1-car garage, wrap-around enclosed porch, h/w floors; taxes $2,819.
Fair Lawn 186,000
2-10 30th Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; bath with Jacuzzi and skylights, deck, full basement; taxes $3,602.
Hopatcong 260,000
12 Oakdale Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old raised ranch; dock, lakefront property, patio; taxes $6,839.
Millstone 220,000
Stillhouse Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old custom colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, family room, porch; taxes $1,497.
Oakland 180,000
22 Monhegan Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; new roof, fireplace, workshop, new furnace; taxes $4,472.
Ramsey 250,000
34 East Oak Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; oak kitchen cabinets, fireplace, h/w floors, porch; taxes $3,683.
OTHER AREAS Rocky Hill, Conn. 208,000
94 Parish Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old split level; h/w floors, fireplace in family room, end of cul-de-sac, 0.67 acre; taxes $3,374.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 414,000
37 Westorchard Road
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 36-year-old split-level; 2 fireplaces, family room, library, eat-in kitchen, 1 acres; taxes $8,537.
Westbury, L.I. 230,000
1111 Bernard Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old split level; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.


Lived Fast, Died Young
ALEXANDER OF MACEDON
356-323 B.C.: A Historical Biography.
By Peter Green.  617 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press.


Susan Jacobs, Student, Weds
Susan Dorothy Jacobs, an architecture student, and Stephen Douglas Apolinsky, a lawyer, were married yesterday evening at Congregation Bet Ha'am in South Portland, Me., by Rabbi William L. Berkowitz.
Mrs.
Apolinsky, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Yale University and is studying for a master's degree at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas D. Jacobs of Portland, Me.
Her father is a retired senior vice president of the Irving Trust Company in New York.
He and the bride's mother, Hilary Jacobs, own the West End Inn in Portland.


How to Revive Housing Starts
In past recessions, housing construction jumpstarted the economy.
That isn't happening now.
There was a modest upturn earlier this year, but construction is sluggish in much of the nation.
This year, new housing starts are projected to tumble to the lowest level since 1945.
Housing is not leading the economy out of recession because, despite declines in interest rates and prices, only 43 percent of all American households can afford to buy a median-priced home in their region.
In much of the East Coast and California, affordability figures are worse.
In greater New York, for instance, only 22 percent of households can buy a median-priced home.
In San Francisco, the figure is a dismal 9.2 percent.


Girl Scouts Don't Just Imitate Boy Scouts
I would like to compliment you on "Scouting Is Flourishing by Emphasiing Old Values"  [ Aug. 4 ] .
It points out the true importance of scouting; fathers and sons working together to gain a deep mutual respect.
My own son is a First Class Scout and hopes to make Eagle some day.
He has gained a great deal from Scouts.
I am also the mother of a Girl Scout and have been a troop leader for five years.
Relegated to the back page, Girl Scouts has been reduced to a mere list of camps, prices and numbers.
The message to girls is clear: their program is not worthy of particular note.
I cannot allow that to go unchallenged.
Girl Scouting is not second-rate imitation Boy Scouting.


Review/Film; 'Showdown In Little Tokyo'
"Showdown in Little Tokyo," which opened at theaters here on Friday, is a violent but spiritless martial-arts movie about Japanese gangsters who attempt to muscle in on the Los Angeles drug trade.
To the extent that the movie equates the gangsters' efforts with those of legitimate Japanese investors in this country, "Showdown in Little Tokyo" might qualify as Japan-bashing.


MR. SOFTWARE
Fred Moody's article on Bill Gates captures the real spirit of the man and his machine.
It is equal parts technological sophistication, competitive spirit and burning enthusiasm.
No wonder Gates has succeeded and continues to succeed.
He has discovered a model for post-industrial leadership and management that is a winner in a highly competitive global market.
How unfortunate that he is seen as a figure to be attacked rather than emulated.
DANA PECK
Portland, Ore.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Dahlia Disaster
Q.
For 12 years I grew a bed of dahlias with great success and profuse bloom, storing the tubers indoors over the winter.
But three years ago a disease appeared: yellow margins on the lower leaves, which withered and died, with progressive deterioration.
This year has been a disaster.
The plants are severely stunted and there are almost no blooms.
Please advise.  -- George H. Schneller, Devon, Pa.


CAMPUS LIFE: Trenton State; Housing Program Draws Union Ire And State Inquiry
A house-buying program set up to make the cost of living more affordable for faculty members coming to Trenton State College is being investigated by the State Department of Higher Education.
At issue is whether the program, begun in 1989, is legal and whether the involvement of some college administrators is ethical.


For Present Imperfect Mets, Past, a Day and Future Glow
The past, the present and the future collided at Shea Stadium yesterday afternoon, and at least for one shiny September day, things did looked bright on all fronts.
The past was personified by Cleon Jones, a hero of the World Series in 1969.
The present -- represented by the 1991 Mets, a team that stopped promising miracles months ago -- still showed that on any given day, it, too, can put together a crisply played, well-pitched game or two.
The latest display came yesterday, as the Mets defeated the St.
Louis Cardinals, 5-3, on the strength of solid pitching from Pete Schourek (4-4) and the power of Howard Johnson, who stands poised to become the club's career leader for runs batted in for a season.


Potholes on Road to Breeders' Cup
Six weeks from now, 60 or 70 strong, champions and contenders alike, they will step onto the track at Churchill Downs and shoot the works in seven races with total rewards of $10 million and a chance for the highest honors that thoroughbred racing can bestow.
They will be the stars of the cast in the final act of the racing year, the Breeders' Cup series of championships.
And they are heading that way this weekend from different points of the compass and with strikingly different twists of fortune.


Making a Difference; Riding Out Solly's Storm
In the three years since Donald S. Howard came out of retirement to join Salomon Brothers Inc. as its chief financial officer, he has led a rather quiet, behind-the-scenes professional life.
But no more.
Mr.
Howard, the former chief financial officer of Citicorp, has emerged as one of the most significant people working to keep Salomon afloat as it struggles to deal with the ever-widening Treasuries market scandal that began in August.


Ms. Gosoff Wed To Dr. J. B. Turk
Carolyn Sue Gosoff, a television news reporter in Woodbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jon Branden Turk, a senior resident in head and neck surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
Rabbi Stanley Platek and Cantor Sol Sadowsky performed the ceremony at the Old Westbury (L.I.) Country Club.
The bride, 28 years old, works for News 12 Long Island, which is owned by Cablevision.
A graduate of Cornell University, she received a master's in journalism from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald M. Gusoff of Woodmere, L.I.
Her father is a dentist in Lawrence, L.I.


Correction
An article on Sept. 8 about the effects of the commercial real estate glut on the economy included an erroneous generalization about loans causing problems for five large banks.
Problem loans of all types exceed half the adjusted net worth of each bank -- Citicorp, Security Pacific, Chemical, Chase Manhattan and Bankers Trust -- but the proportion of such loans committed to real estate varies widely among them.


Noriega Trial, Week 1: Hints of a Drama to Come
There have been tantalizing hints of dramatic disclosures yet to come.
But the first week of the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega offered more in the nature of historical detail than startling new facts about any involvement of the deposed Panamanian dictator in cocaine trafficking, money laundering and racketeering.
Prosecutors set that tone early by calling a political scientist who has written extensively on Panama, Stephen C. Ropp of the University of Wyoming, as the first of their 75 or so witnesses.
Since then, the bulk of the testimony heard has been instructional, with the jury of nine women and three men assiduously jotting down a multitude of unfamiliar names, places and dates in the loose-leaf notebooks and shorthand pads issued to them.


Presidential Name Lore
To the Editor:
I didn't think much of the Presidential chances of Gov.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia until I noted in your Sept. 14 profile of him that he has a first name, Lawrence, that he doesn't use.
That boosts his chances, because no fewer than three in the relatively small pool of our Presidents -- (Stephen) Grover Cleveland, (Thomas) Woodrow Wilson and (John) Calvin Coolidge -- also went by their middle names.  (PHILIP) GARA LAMARCHE Brooklyn, Sept. 16, 1991


Milestone Musical Retains a Chilling Hold
IT has been six-and-a-half years since Connecticut's Broadway Theater, then the Darien Dinner Theater, tackled "West Side Story." The milestone musical, which opened on Broadway 24 years ago, retains a chilling hold on an audience.
It is a masterful, enduring theater work, and one needs to be reminded of its importance.
That the ethnic and racial schism reflected in 1957 has deepened and violence escalated attests to the instructive and prophetic power of art and the regressiveness of human nature.
The Darien production, though newly cast and directed, is as erratic as ever.
To its credit are the potency and precision of the dance sequences, "Cool" and "Somewhere" in particular.
The statements they make -- how to handle hostility defensively, how to dream your way out of it -- emerge with startling lucidity.


Feeling the Heat?
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican, is not widely regarded as a visionary, but friend and foe alike credit him with a sharp eye for publicity opportunities.
He drew chuckles once when he donned a leather jacket, and, trailing camera crews, made a televised "undercover" drug buy.
But he got his picture on TV.
Addressing another issue last week, Mr.
D'Amato found himself not just in the glare of camera lights, but of criticism.
In an attack on Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Senator said the Mayor had refused to condemn "racial racketeers" and suggested that if Mr.
Dinkins made a planned trip to South Africa, he might consider staying there.
The Mayor, who is black, condemned this as "race baiting." Others said Mr.
D'Amato was trying to bolster his support among white voters as re-election time nears.
They noted that since a Senate ethics panel slapped his wrist recently, his approval rating had fallen to less than 40 percent.


Corrections
The Connecticut Q&amp;A column last Sunday, about the state income tax, rendered a sentence incorrectly in a discussion of confusing aspects of the tax by Allan A. Crystal, the State Commissioner of Revenue Services.
The affected sentence should have read, "Those people who itemize deductions on their Federal income tax returns get the benefit of a tax credit for the state income tax they pay, so that there is a net decrease, the actual cost, that people are not focusing on."


Dr. Heather Drucker To Wed Jeffrey Fitter
December wedding plans have been announced for Dr.
Heather Drucker, the daughter of Cecilia Drucker of Delray Beach, Fla., and Marcel Drucker of Fort Lee, N.J., and Jeffrey Fitter, the son of Ana Fitter of Glen Rock, N.J., and the late Morris Fitter.
Dr.
Drucker, 28 years old, is a researcher at George Washington University.
She is a graduate from Goucher College and George Washington Medical School.
Mr.
Fitter, 26, is a computer consultant to the Mobil Oil Company in Alexandria, Va. and a graduate of George Washington.


INSIDE
Hopefuls on Parade
The 1992 Presidential race began in earnest as Democratic contenders gathered in Los Angeles.
Page 26.
Cheering the Knicks


For the Fruits of Autumn, Cobblers and Compotes
WITH the advent of autumn a new list of ingredients tempts the cook.
This is especially true when it comes to fruit.
Summer's tender fresh peaches, plums and berries are replaced by pears, apples, cranberries and dried fruits.
The fall fruits withstand longer cooking and are delicious when baked into old-fashioned bread puddings, cobblers, crisps, compotes, and the like.
These kinds of desserts do not require painstaking pastry-making skills.
Like cooking a pot of stew, they can easily be improvised by buttering a baking dish, adding fruit and a topping and placing the mixture in the oven for about an hour.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a fireplace on the first floor and another below it in the basement.
When we build a fire in the first-floor fireplace, the smell of smoke is strong in the basement.
The ash pit has been removed, and the chimney flue connected to the basement fireplace has been capped.
It has been suggested that a stainless-steel liner be installed in the first-floor chimney.
Would that solve the problem?
A.
If the two chimney flues are in the same brick chimney structure, if either one or both of the flue liners is cracked or leaking and if there are no flue liners, it could be that smoke will leak from one flue to the other.
That should not occur if the flue being used draws properly, but it could happen if there are down drafts or other defects in that chimney.
Capping the unused flue was probably a mistake.
It will trap smoke that leaks into it, instead of allowing the smoke to escape through the opening at the top of the chimney.
I would suggest removing the cap.
If that does not solve the problem, have an expert check the structure.
It is very likely that lining the flue will be the answer.


Deciphering Ins and Outs Of Wood and Metal Files
FILES are usually thought of as tools for smoothing and shaping metal, but they also are useful for woodworking.
In fact, certain files are meant just for wood.
Files intended for use on metals are called mill files, and those designed for cutting wood are called wood-, cabinet- or patternmaker's files.
Mill files can be used on wood, but files for wood will dull quickly on metal.


Complex Mob Bid-Rigging Trial Is Winding Down
After five months of trial, both sides have rested in a racketeering case involving charges that the Mafia rigged bids on millions of dollars of window-installation contracts in New York City.
There was testimony from more than a dozen witnesses, one of whom testified for two months, in a complex trial that included some 50 hours of tape-recorded conversations, hundreds of documents and more than 10,000 pages of transcript.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending Sept. 7 MANHATTAN Greenwich Village 990,000
60 Horatio Street  2-family brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, 6 fireplaces in primary triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, fireplace in other; pumpkin-pine floors, historic distict; 19- by 50-ft. lot; taxes $6,229 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  TriBeCa 300,000
160 Chambers Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a converted firehouse; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 12-foot ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $800, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates/Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper East Side 1,107,500
40 East 83d Street  2-bedrooms, 3-baths, 2,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maids' rooms, dining room, library, wine cellar, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,002, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 455,000
590 West End Avenue (89th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, dining area, fireplace, wrapped-terrace; maintenance $1,130, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  West Village 800,000
302 West 12th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, butler's pantry, Hudson River view; common charge $779, taxes $5,500 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia/Silverman Group)  BRONX  Riverdale 255,000
302 West 259th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, house; eat-in kitchen, finished attic and basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 130-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  Soundview 225,000
544 Taylor Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; new windows, 2-car garage, 50- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Gravesend Bay 276,000
2540 West Third Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,300 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope 390,000
478 First Street  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, 4-story, brick house; dining room, oak details, south garden, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,517 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty Group)  Prospect Heights 97,500
10 Plaza Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining el; maintenance $320, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  QUEENS  Douglaston Manor 415,000
311 Forest Road  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, center-hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage, 100- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Rego Park 335,000
63-52 Ellwell Crescent  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, stucco house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Meier's Corner 140,000
69 Bradley Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 30- by 140-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  Oakwood 190,000
2957 Amboy Road  2-family, detached, frame and brick house; 3-bedrooms, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath in each; 1-car garage, 40- by 99-ft. lot; taxes $1,936 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


On Language; When Putsch Comes to Coup
IN THE TUMULT OF what has come quickly to be called "the Second Russian Revolution" (soon to be shortened to RR II), the most memorable line spoken by the deposed and reimposed Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev was to the Parliament Speaker, Anatoly Lukyanov.
When that fellow traveler of the failed coup's plotters came to try to explain away his perfidy, Mikhail Sergeyevich snapped: "Don't hang noodles on my ears."
"Not quite 'Et tu, Tolya,' " wrote Serge Schmemann of The New York Times in Moscow, "but it made the point." He reported that the phrase was an "earthy Russian saying" drawn from Mr.
Gorbachev's agrarian childhood.
A check with local Russian speakers confirms that the figure of speech means "Don't hand me any of that guff" or, more precisely, "Don't try to make a fool of me."


Mutual Funds; Where Prospectuses Fall Short
Ask ordinary investors what they think of mutual fund prospectuses, and be prepared to duck.
"They're generally not readable," said Loretta Nolan, manager of financial planning for Clarfeld &amp; Company, an accounting firm.


Correction
The artist's credit was omitted from the illustration accompanying the review on Sept. 15 of Lucinda Franks's "Wild Apples." The illustration was by Rob Selwyn.


Diane M. DePatie Is Wed to Victor S. Consoli
Diane Michelle DePatie and Victor Scott Consoli, graduates of Trinity College in Hartford, were married yesterday at the Watch Hill Chapel in Watch Hill, R.I., by the Rev.
James Joseph Gilhooley, a Roman Catholic priest.
The bride, 24 years old, is a Northeast regional sales executive at Anne Klein II for Lord &amp; Taylor in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Clark DePatie of Quonochontaug, R.I.
Her father retired as an educational consultant for I.B.M. in Palo Alto, Calif.
Mr.
Consoli, 25, is a vice president of Angelo Gordon &amp; Company, a risk arbitrage concern in New York.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ben Consoli of Methuen, Mass.
The father is an information systems manager for the Raytheon Corporation in Andover, Mass.


Russia's American Master
VLADIMIR NABOKOV
The American Years.
By Brian Boyd.
Illustrated. 783 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.


A SHOP RAT'S TALE
True, the assembly line is monotonous, stultifying, a trap.
Hence, everything we do to escape it is justified.
But our bosses, sneaky capitalists that they are, had the nerve to pay us too much!
This way, we are trapped into coming in and doing their dirty work.
Well, we'll show them.
We'll go out and get drunk, have two lunches, raise
their
production costs.
If it means becoming totally uncompetitive and handing over our buying power to other countries, all we have to do is hit on the politicians.
Well, here's the problem.
You can't ask politicians to protect your job when you yourself describe it as not worth protecting.
If you think society owes Mr.
Rivethead not only decent pay, but also job-induced fulfillment and fun, you ought to come and visit the word-processing pool, the sales floor, the hospital.
You'll meet people who don't have the time, during their workday, to demand more than what they have in order to prove that the more they get, the more trapped they become.
JANE DANTES
New York, N.Y.


Rachel Walker Wed in Virginia
Rachel S. Walker, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
T.
Dennis Walker of Staunton, Va., was married yesterday to Sean Adam Deery, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Deery of Marblehead, Mass.
The bride's father, the pastor of the Second Presbyterian Church in Staunton, performed the ceremony there, assisted by the Rev.
Woodrow Morris.
Mrs.
Deery, 27 years old, was until recently an associate in the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from the University of Virginia.
Her mother, Suzanne Walker, teaches English in the Staunton public school system.
The bridegroom, 31, is an associate in the Moscow office of the New York law firm of Coudert Brothers.
He graduated from the University of Vermont and studied at the Pushkin Institute in Moscow and Leningrad State University.
He has a master's degree in foreign affairs and a law degree from the University of Virginia.
His father retired as a real-estate consultant in Marblehead.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Federal budget deficit
-$40.8
-$42.0
Tuesday
Auto sales, annual rate in millions
5.5
6.0
Consumer confidence index
76.2
77.0
Wednesday
Durable goods orders, percent change
10.7
-5.7
Thursday
Initial jobless claims, in thousands
402
420
Friday
Personal consumption, percent change
0.4
0.2
Monday: Canadian retail trade  Tuesday: Two-year Treasury auction  Wednesday: Five-year Treasury auction  Thursday: Bundesbank council meeting  (Sosurce: I.D.E.A.)


THE STORY OF A STREET PERSON
On June 14, my family held a quiet memorial service for my brother, John, a schizophrenic who committed suicide at the age of 24.
He was two years older than I, and as a young child was sensitive and loving.
I looked up to him, and it was confusing and painful to witness the progression of his illness as we grew older.
I never knew, until after his death, what his illness was, or even that he was afflicted with something specific.
I sometimes think that it would have helped if I had understood what I could or could not expect from him.


Devils' Message: No Room For Rebels
The upheaval rocking the Devils reached its most violent point with the dispatch of Kirk Muller to Montreal Friday night in a move that clearly accentuated management's intent to exert control over its players.
Muller, 25 years old, was the captain and leading career scorer for the Devils and played with an unmatched devotion, but he walked out of camp Monday morning over a contract dispute.


Begging Your Pardon, But Aren't We Rivals?
Baseball's grandest rivalries barely flicker now. Somewhere, they vanished.
The Dodgers and the Giants, whose rivalry included arguably the sport's greatest moment -- Bobby Thomson's pennant-winning home run in 1951 -- once wore their disdain for each other like a prideful badge.
But they seem to have lost it.
Same with the Yankees and the Red Sox.
Gone.


Virginia Van Vranken Is a Bride
St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Virginia E. Van Vranken, a planning analyst at the Case Credit Corporation in Racine, Wis., to Peter W. Ziobro, a vice president of the First Boston Corporation in Chicago.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee officiated, assisted by a cousin of the bride, the Rev.
Robert Gibbens, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Ziobro is a daughter of Nancy and J. Frederick Van Vranken Jr. of Laurel Hollow, L.I.
She was a member of the 1978 Junior Assembly.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


U.S. Advisories
To the Editor: During the past year, many travel advisories have appeared in your section involving travel to India.
While ethnic and religious antagonisms do indeed exist there, they have been limited for the past several months to the Punjab and to Jammu and Kashmir and have affected tourists only in these areas.
To discourage travel to other Indian states, as the advisory which appeared in The Times on July 7 did, seems unwarranted.
I have just returned from a monthlong stay in India and experienced none of the travel delays and disruptions (other than those endemic to Indian Airlines) that various sources have said to be common in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.
I felt safer walking alone at night in India than I do in most Manhattan neighborhoods.


Korean Parade in Midtown Celebrates U.N. Admission
The admission of North and South Korea into the United Nations was the dominant theme of the 12th annual Korean Parade in Manhattan, which drew thousands of onlookers and marchers yesterday to Broadway.
The sentiment that the United Nations' decision to admit the countries would lead to an eventual reunification of the once-warring nations seemed almost unanimous among the thousands of people who lined Broadway from 41st Street to 23d Street for the traditional procession of dignitaries, bands and fan-dancers.


The Outrage Index Rises; Wall St. Feels the Heat
SINCE the mid-80's, the nation has been swept by a seemingly endless wave of scandals from the world of finance.
Defining the era are figures like Dennis Levine, with his briefcase full of insider-trading cash, Michael R. Milken, the junk bond billionaire whose machinations led to the demise of Drexel Burnham Lambert, and John H. Gutfreund, the head of Salomon Brothers Inc., who turned a blind eye on wayward Treasury bond traders.
The cumulative weight of all this turpitude raises the question of whether American business has suffered a moral collapse.
But the people who carefully monitor such trends seem to believe that business is no more or less ethical than it was a decade ago, or two or three.
"These things don't change that much," said District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan, who should know.
Today he heads a sweeping investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the rogue financial institution.
As a young Federal prosecutor in the 1960's, he helped convict a head of the New York Stock Exchange.
Easy money no doubt bred looser morals during the


RECORD BRIEFS
Bartok: Violin Sonata No. 1; Janacek: Sonata; Messiaen: Theme and Variations
Gidon Kremer, violin; Martha Argerich, piano. Deutsche Grammophon 427 351-2; CD.


Chess
The more openings you have in your repertory, the more headaches lie in store for your opponents.
It is hard enough to study thoroughly one single branch of the Sicilian Defense, but what if your opponents are forced to digest a great collection of diverse Sicilians, Caro-Kanns and a number of defenses to the Ruy Lopez, including the Marshall Gambit, the night before they have to face you?
The only cheering thing they can think of is that it must have cost you an awful lot of work to master so many weapons.
And, with so much effort required, it ought to be possible for you to forget your analysis from time to time.


'A Dreadful Picture'
To the Editor:
Ken Shulman gave Artemisia Gentileschi's life and works concise and sympathetic treatment.
To that I must add the famous opinion of Anna Jameson in 1822 upon seeing "Judith Decapitating Holofernes." (In "The Obstacle Race," Germaine Greer describes Mrs. Jameson as the "mother of art criticism.") She called it "a dreadful picture," and certainly "a proof of her genius and its atrocious misdirection."


Commercial Property: 135 East 57th Street; Distinct, Well-Sited, 90% Leased -- and in Bankruptcy
WELL situated.
Architecturally distinct.
And, most remarkably for an office tower of recent vintage, about 90 percent occupied.
What could be wrong with 135 East 57th Street?
Enough that the owners, unable to pay interest on the mortgage, are seeking to reorganize under a bankruptcy proceeding.
Although they would not discuss the matter, it is apparently a case of a project that was successful, but not successful enough, with margins so slim that the almost simultaneous loss earlier this year of three retail tenants -- the Louis, Boston clothing store, the D. F. Sanders housewares store and the Toyamaya art gallery -- spelled disaster.
Their rent was about $2 million a year.


OFF COURSE
An executive of an airline trade group states in your article, "When you have 20 people from a small city going to 20 different destinations, you can put them all on one plane, fly them to a hub like Pittsburgh and then scatter them," and the author notes that this is a "wonderfully efficient setup" for the airlines.
I would add that the traveler also benefits from the hub system in the convenience of departing from a local airport, thus avoiding a trip to a major airport and the expense of car service.
SEYMOUR MARMOR
Centereach, L.I.


Tennessee Escapes Mississippi St., 26-24
Andy Kelly passed 10 yards to Mark Adams with 1 minute 50 seconds left to rally Tennessee to a 26-24 Southeastern Conference victory over Mississippi State.
Kelly, under pressure from a blitz, lobbed the winning pass to Adams to cap an 88-yard drive in 9 plays that took just under 4 minutes as Tennessee (3-0 over all, 1-0 S.E.C.) thwarted a spirited comeback by the Bulldogs (3-1, 0-1).


Texas Soul
In the early 1950's, when Houston was the home of this country's most vital rhythm-and-blues scene, Benny Joseph was hired by Don Robey to photograph the rising stars of his two record labels, Duke and Peacock.
Artists such as Bobby (Blue) Bland, Clarence (Gatemouth) Brown, Johnny Ace and Junior Parker (whose "Mystery Train" inspired a young Elvis Presley) were making a new kind of Southern blues that would strongly influence subsequent pop, soul and gospel sounds.
THE EARLY YEARS OF RHYTHM &amp; BLUES: Focus on Houston (Rice University, $24.95) is a guide to their universe.
As the text by Alan Govenar, a writer and film maker, explains, Mr.
Joseph's black-and-white photographs also documented the beginnings of the civil rights movement in Houston's black community.
Alongside images of such performers as B. B. King, Mahalia Jackson and Della Reese are photographs of Martin Luther King Jr. preaching, the future United States Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall exhorting a congregation under a painting of a supplicant Jesus and an N.A.A.C.P. meeting beneath a copy of the Declaration of Independence.
Haunting, heartbreaking and always life-affirming, "The Early Years of Rhythm &amp; Blues" is a triumph of the spirit and a celebration of the soul.


The Poet and Her Family
To the Editor:
As the husband of Linda Gray Sexton, I found that the letter you published from Linda's cousins Lisa Taylor Tompson and Mary Gray Ford (Aug. 25) contained several misstatements of fact as well as a few instances of what I can only assume is denial.


Miss Tomallo Is Wed
Joanna Nicole Tomallo, an assistant designer at Workman Publishing, and Taras Jon Wayner, an art director at the Mad Dogs and Englishmen advertising agency, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Joseph W. Wittmer officiated at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Wayner, 25 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald P. Tomallo of Aurora, Ohio.
Mr.
Wayner, 24, is a cum laude graduate of Syracuse.
He is a son of Drs.
Peter and Donna Wayner of Latham, N.Y.


CAMPUS LIFE: Berkeley; Scholars in China Discover a Meal By Early Man
Finding human teeth marks on a million-year-old elephant ankle made waiting a lifetime to dig in China worthwhile for an anthropology professor at the University of California at Berkeley.
A team of American and Chinese anthropologists led by Emeritus Prof.
Desmond Clark -- who in 1981 in Ethopia was a co-discoverer of some of the oldest human remains found to date -- recently received the first grant for non-Chinese to conduct excavations in China since before World War II.


This Week: Quest for the Ideal Lily Bulbs
Here is Dianna Gibson's list of easy-to-grow lilies for beginners.
L. henryi, a tough-as-nails species that can reach 8 feet with 20 to 50 yellow-orange flowers and green nectary furrows.


Laura Proske Weds James O'Hara
Laura Anne Proske, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Proske of Emerson Hill, S.I., was married yesterday to James Patrick O'Hara, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph G. O'Hara of Forty Fort, Pa.
The Rev.
J.
Patrick Frawley, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of Our Lady of Victory in New York.
Mrs.
O'Hara, 31 years old, is a vice president and assistant general counsel of Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Villanova University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.


Wall Street; The Forgotten Shareholders
Since the Occidental Petroleum Corporation announced early this month that it would press ahead with its plan to sell its controlling stake in IBP Inc., the meat-packing giant, the financial community has focused chiefly on what the deal means for Occidental.
Management experts and the media saw the move as a pragmatic departure from the ego-driven policies of Occidental's former chairman, Armand Hammer, who died in December.
Industry analysts mostly agreed that the oil company was wise to lower its debt load by shedding IBP, despite a weak market for such spinoffs.
Wall Street insiders wondered whether Occidental's investment bankers, the First Boston Corporation and the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation, would be able to dispose of all Occidental's 24 million shares of IBP stock.


Corrections
A listing of the recent activities of principal actors from the original "Star Trek" television series in Arts &amp; Leisure last Sunday misidentified the director and title of a movie starring Leonard Nimoy.
The director of "Never Forget," which had the working title "The Promise," was Joseph Sargent.
On the same page, a listing of miscellaneous facts about the series misstated the number of actors who have appeared in all three versions of "Star Trek" -- the original television series, the films and the new series.
In addition to Mark Lenard, Majel Barrett and DeForest Kelley have also appeared in all three versions.


China Takes on the Role of Enemy No. 1 to the West
WITH the disintegration of the Soviet Communist regime, a vacancy emerged for the position of "evil empire" for Americans to revile.
Now there are signs that China will fill the vacuum and become America's chief ideological adversary and symbol of much that Americans find offensive -- but in a style far different from Moscow's.
This "new cold war" -- as Deng Xiaoping, China's leader, refers to the tensions between China and the West in a document circulating among officials -- is unlike the competition between America and the Soviet Union in some fundamental respects.
Beijing does much to offend American values, but does much less to threaten American interests.
There are indications that China may be supporting rebels in the Indian state of Assam, part of which China claims as its territory, but in general China appears uninterested in supporting terrorism or in backing insurgencies in Latin America or southern Africa.


Deciphering Ins and Outs Of Wood and Metal Files
FILES are usually thought of as tools for smoothing and shaping metal, but they also are useful for woodworking.
In fact, certain files are meant just for wood.
Files intended for use on metals are called mill files, and those designed for cutting wood are called wood-, cabinet- or patternmaker's files.
Mill files can be used on wood, but files for wood will dull quickly on metal.


Edward Asner's New Cause: 'The Trials of Rosie O'Neill'
"Last year," says Edward Asner, "I was arrested six or seven times. And I worked once.  This year is different."
Last year, the burly actor spent his energies demonstrating against United States military aid to El Salvador.
This year, peace talks in that country have made his presence at public demonstrations unnecessary.


POSTINGS: New Role for Old Convent; The Mission Continues
It was built in the last century to house the Sisters of Mercy, Roman Catholic nuns who devoted themselves to works of charity among the poor.
Now the order has moved into a new headquarters adjoining its old convent, at 249 Classon Avenue in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn.
The move freed the convent to serve the poor in a new way, as a renovated, $9.5 million single-room-occupancy hotel for homeless women over age 45 now living in shelters.
The renovation is to begin next week and, according to the design by the Manhattan firm of Schuman Lichtenstein Claman and Efron, Architects, there will be 78 apartments, each with its own kitchenette and bathroom and several with balconies.


Croatians Under Fierce Assault; Pleas for Real Truce Are Ignored
Federal army tanks battered Croatia's easternmost garrisons with shell fire and warplanes struck its Adriatic coastline today as the army launched the civil war's broadest and harshest assault against the secessionist republic.
Croatian officials appealed to the military leaders in Belgrade twice for a truce in a conflict that is threatening to escalate beyond control, but there was no public response, suggesting that the federal authorities seemed bent on expanding territorial control in a weakened Croatia.


A Post-Modern Museum for Television, Sans Irony
The last vertical, free-standing museum built in Manhattan was Edward Durell Stone's Huntington Hartford Gallery of Modern Art, which opened on Columbus Circle in 1964.
Not much of an architectural role model, that marble confection: it soon went bust and today houses the offices of the city's Department of Cultural Affairs, which fits no better into its awkward, cramped galleries than Mr.
Hartford's pictures did.
It's hard not to have that building in mind when looking at New York's latest museum structure, the Museum of Television and Radio, which opened earlier this month at 25 West 52d Street.
Not that this new museum looks like the conceit of Columbus Circle.
This building, designed by Philip Johnson along with John Burgee, is sober and traditional, a limestone-clad tower that aspires to dignity (and largely achieves it), whereas the Huntington Hartford museum emanates giddiness and foolishness.


British Airways To Add Flights
British Airways will increase its capacity by 15 percent on trans-Atlantic service to Heathrow Airport outside London next year with the introduction of twice-daily departures from Los Angeles, Boston, Washington, Miami and Chicago.
The expansion program is part of a long-range goal to provide two round trips a day from all 18 American cities from which it flies.
Kennedy International Airport in New York is now the only gateway with more than one flight a day: it has six on weekdays, seven on weekend days, including Concorde service.
The airline will begin twice-daily Los Angeles to Heathrow service on Oct. 27, though the airline is dropping a daily flight from Gatwick.
The expanded Miami service begins March 29; Washington and Chicago, May 1, and Boston, June 1.
British Airways also operates three Concorde flights a week to London from Dulles International Airport, outside Washington.


Giants Hope Browns Provide A Tonic
The Super Bowl champion Giants will play the lightly regarded Cleveland Browns Sunday at Giants Stadium.
Who would have thought the Browns would take the field with the better record?
But the Browns, rebuilding from a 3-13 season with a new coach, are 2-1 this season.
The mighty Giants, with their new coach and new quarterback, are 1-2.


Charles Edward Widmayer, Editor, 83
Charles Edward Widmayer, a founder of Editorial Projects for Education, which published the weekly Chronicle of Higher Education, and for 30 years the editor of the Dartmouth College Alumni Magazine, died Thursday at Alice Peck Day Memorial Hospital in Lebanon, N.H.
He was 83 years old.
He died from acute respiratory failure, the family said.
Mr.
Widmayer, a native of Washington, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth in 1930.
After a year's graduate study at Harvard, he returned to Dartmouth and Hanover, N.H., where he lived for the rest of his life.
He taught English at Dartmouth in 1932-33 and served as director of athletic publicity in 1933-1934.
He joined the staff of the Dartmouth Alumni magazine in 1933.
In 1957, he became a founding member of Editorial Projects.


Late but Eager, '92 Democrats Assemble
With a blast at President Bush, a blithe dismissal of the polls and some blunt rejections of politics as usual, the Democrats who would be President assembled here today and began, in earnest, the scramble for the nomination.
"Welcome to what is clearly the start of the 1992 campaign," declared a beaming Ronald H. Brown, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee.
"It feels good, doesn't it?'


Making a Difference; A Confidence Builder For the Futures Industry
As president and chief executive of the National Futures Association, the self-regulatory organization for the commodity futures industry, Robert K. Wilmouth has a major stake in assuring that public confidence in futures brokers and private traders remains high.
To say the least, Mr.
Wilmouth has been busy: Ever since news broke in January 1989 of an undercover F.B.I.
"sting" operation at the Chicago Board of Trade and at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Mr.
Wilmouth has spent much time working to repair the business's tattered image.


Threat to Veto Israeli Guarantee Imperils Talks
To the Editor:
"But First, the Peace Conference," your Sept. 6 editorial supporting President Bush's request of Congress to defer legislation guaranteeing $10 billion in bank loans to Israel for refugee absorption, is off course.


CUOMO TO PROPOSE A STATE TAKEOVER OF MEDICAID COSTS
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is expected to announce next week that he will support a state takeover of the hugely expensive and rapidly growing share of Medicaid costs currently paid by New York City and other local governments, Cuomo administration officials said today.
The announcement would be a major policy shift for the Governor, who warned the city three months ago not to expect such a takeover anytime soon.
To negotiate such a takeover and to push it through a politically divided Legislature will require great technical and political dexterity.
But Mr.
Cuomo's advisers characterized his planned announcement as a significant step intended to build momentum behind the concept.


A Darien Production Of 'West Side Story'
IT has been six and a half years since Connecticut's Broadway Theater, then the Darien Dinner Theater, tackled "West Side Story." The milestone musical, which opened on Broadway 24 years ago, retains a chilling hold on an audience.
It is a masterful, enduring theater work and one needs to be reminded of its importance.
That the racial schism reflected in 1957 has deepened, and violence escalated, attests to the instructive and prophetic power of art and the regressiveness of human nature.
The Darien production, though newly cast and directed, is as erratic as ever.
To its credit are the potency and precision of the dance sequences, "Cool" and "Somewhere" in particular.
The statements they make -- how to handle hostility defensively, how to dream your way out of it -- emerge with startling lucidity.


Vienna Museum Of the Theater
The Austrian Theater Museum, with a collection of 1.4 million items, will be opened in the renovated and adapted Lobkowitz Palace in Vienna on Oct. 26.
The palace, at 2 Lobkowitzplatz in the city's old quarter, is two blocks behind the State Opera House, near the Austrian National Library and the Albertina Collection of Graphic Arts, and a short walk from the Imperial Palace.
On display in the new museum will be costumes, stage props, programs, posters, recordings and set designs.
There will be a section that uses models and computer games to introduce youngsters to drama and comedy.
One of the first special displays will be dedicated to Max Reinhardt, the Austrian theatrical producer who founded the Salzburg Festival and directed movies in Hollywood.


For the Fruits of Autumn, Cobblers and Compotes
WITH the advent of autumn a new list of ingredients tempts the cook.
This is especially true when it comes to fruit.
Summer's tender fresh peaches, plums and berries are replaced by pears, apples, cranberries and dried fruits.
The fall fruits withstand longer cooking and are delicious when baked into old-fashioned bread puddings, cobblers, crisps, compotes, and the like.
These kinds of desserts do not require painstaking pastry-making skills.
Like cooking a pot of stew, they can easily be improvised by buttering a baking dish, adding fruit and a topping and placing the mixture in the oven for about an hour.


Salute from San Diego for Dravecky
Exactly seven years after the San Diego Padres won their only division title, former left-handed pitcher DAVE DRAVECKY, a hero of the 1984 campaign, was honored at Jack Murphy Stadium before Friday night's game against the Giants.
It was Dravecky's first visit to a major league stadium since his pitching arm was amputated in June because of cancer, and there was evidence that he had been practicing for the ceremonies.
Before the game he spent two hours autographing copies of his autobiography at the stadium bookstore, acknowledging that it had been a challenge to learn to write with his right hand but that he had finally mastered the switch.


Robin Fancher, Traders' Aide, Weds Robert S. Strandberg, an Executive
Robin Lynn Fancher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Fancher Jr. of Barrington, R.I., was married at Lattingtown, L.I., yesterday to Robert S. Strandberg, a son of Mrs.
John R. Wierdsma of Locust Valley, L.I., and the late Albin D. Strandberg.
The Rev.
Charles G. Newbery, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
John's of Lattingtown.
Mrs.
Strandberg, 26 years old, is a fixed-income trading assistant with Lazard Freres in New York.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College.
Her father and her mother, Janice Fancher, own Greenwood &amp; Gryphon, an advertising agency in Barrington.


POSTINGS: Circle on the Drive; Co-op Celebrates Its 70th Birthday
The annual gathering next Tuesday evening of shareholders of the Circle, a co-op at 114 Morningside Drive, will be a celebration as well as a business meeting.
The 30 families who live in the building are planning to give themselves a birthday party in honor of the co-op's 70th anniversary.
"There will be champagne toasts and some reminiscing," said Gioia Shebar, president of the co-op's board of directors.


NONFICTION
THE HEARSTS An American Dynasty. By Judith Robinson. University of Delaware, $49.50.


Dr. Hilary Light Has a Wedding
Dr.
Hilary Felicia Light, the daughter of Sabine Light and Martin Light, both of New York, was married yesterday to Braden Christopher Deutsch, a son of Ilene Deutsch and Leonard Deutsch, both of New York.
Cantor Barbara Horowitz officiated at the Union League Club in Manhattan.
The couple graduated from Brown University.
Dr.
Light-Deutsch, 26 years old, is a pediatric resident at Babies Hospital of Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
She received her M.D. from the State University of New York Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
Her father, who is retired, was a lawyer in Brooklyn.
Her mother has retired as a fashion designer in New York.


Old Pests, New Pots and Soil Mixtures
SOMETIMES house plants have to be discarded.
This is what happened to a beautiful Boston fern that was looking rather sad the last few weeks with many yellow or, worse, dead fronds.
Since it was hanging in a strategic place, closer inspection was needed to determine the trouble.
The elegant Boston fern hanging next to it didn't need a sad partner.
So down from its hook came the yellow Boston fern.
The first thought was that it just needed repotting, as it had been rather crowded in its hanging container.
But upon close inspection, the source of the problem was revealed: scale insects.
These oval hard-backed insects were adhering to the backs of the oldest fronds in huge numbers.


The Executive Computer; Want More Power? Pull Out a Chip and Put In a Faster One
The Compaq Computer Corporation introduced a family of four upgradeable desktop computers last week, the latest sign of a trend that is expected to become the standard in the personal computer industry.
Upgradeable systems have previously been available from Compaq's biggest rivals, including I.B.M., Digital Equipment, Advanced Logic Research, AST Research and Dell Computer.
But Compaq's modular design appears to be more elegantly conceived and executed, and the company has priced the systems to compete more directly against the low prices of Dell and AST.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
The Necessary Other
Barry Lopez reminds us of the crucial role animals have had in human evolution, and the ways in which they still shape our imagination.
An excerpt from his book "Crossing Open Ground" is included in "The Islands and the Sea: Five Centuries of Nature Writing From the Caribbean," edited by John A. Murray (Oxford University).


Say Hey: Gant Has Bit of Mays in Him
On Friday night, while the Atlanta Braves were leaping back into first place in the National League West, Ron Gant took a small leap of his own somewhere between first and second base.
He had reason.
Gant's two-run homer in the sixth inning helped lift the Braves to a 3-0 victory over Los Angeles, giving Atlanta a half-game lead as the two teams prepared to meet again tonight.
It also put Gant's name next to two baseball luminaries -- Willie Mays and Bobby Bonds -- in the record book.


Amy Schneider Has a Wedding
Amy Lynne Schneider, a clinical social worker at the Peachtree Hospice, and Douglas Stockton Brophy, an associate in the law firm of Gilbert &amp; Montlick, both in Atlanta, were married last evening by Rabbi Alvin Reines at the Westin Hotel in Cincinnati.
Mrs.
Brophy, 27 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eli Isaac Schneider of Cincinnati, where her father is a general practitioner.
She graduated from Ohio State University and received a master's degree in clinical social work from the University of Michigan.


Margaret Gold Wed to David Lesser
Margaret Ellen Gold, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Gold of Merion Station, Pa., was married last evening to David Alfred Lesser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Lesser of Miami.
Rabbi Max Hausen officiated at the Main Line Reform Temple in Wynnewood, Pa.
Mrs.
Lesser, 25 years old, is a research associate at Higdon, Joys &amp; Mengle, an executive search firm in New York.
She graduated from Mills College and the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father, formerly the president and chief executive of Knight-Ridder Broadcasting in Miami Beach, now heads his own firm, Glencoe Broadcasting, in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Lesley Gold, is a freelance medical writer.


Warned of Repairs on Bridge, Drivers Jam Lincoln Tunnel
Apparently forewarned by predictions of stalled highways because of weekend repairs on the George Washington Bridge, many motorists shifted the traffic jam to the Lincoln Tunnel, doubling the normal volume of Saturday-morning traffic headed west there, officials said.
Starting Friday night, Port Authority officials closed some ramps in Manhattan to the New Jersey-bound side of the bridge so workers could lay a new road surface.
The work did not affect bridge traffic into Manhattan.


Philharmonia Offering Old Favorites
THE Philharmonia Virtuosi, having already given chamber-music performances at Westchester Community College and at the Peekskill Paramount, moves on to Iona College in New Rochelle today with a 2 P.M. all-Mozart program.
Then next Sunday at 3 P.M., the full orchestra under the music director, Richard Kapp, returns to its long-time performing headquarters at the State University of New York at Purchase, opening the Mainstage Concert Series with what Mr.
Kapp refers to as "our greatest hits" and "the P.V. basic Baroque show."


Cuttings; Love Affair With the Exotic Lily
I used to associate lilies with funerals.
Their waxy petals recalled the embalmed faces I would come upon with a mixture of fear and fascination in my grandfather's house.
He was an undertaker, and the deceased lay in state, surrounded by flowers in his front parlor.
The lilies and gladioluses seemed too violently colored and cold, like too much rouge on the dear departed's cheek.
White lilies were also associated with brides, of course, who carried huge bundles of the white Madonnas down the aisle.
But this tradition seems to have gone out with virgins.


Matthew Roberts and Ms. Lampson, Lawyers, Are Wed in Washington
Edith Rutledge Lampson and Matthew David Roberts, lawyers in Washington, were married there yesterday at the Dacor Bacon house.
Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, for whom the couple clerked, officiated.
Mrs.
Roberts, 34 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Miller, Cassidy, Larocca &amp; Lewin.
A member of Phi Beta Kappa, she graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and magna cum laude from Harvard Law School, where she was a member of The Harvard Law Review.
She also received a master's degree in English from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of the late Edward Tudor Lampson, a Foreign Service officer, and Mary Wright Lampson of Washington, a former assistant to the Mayor of Washington.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19
The Yugoslavian civil war raged on, as the separatist republic of Croatia appealed to the country's central Government in Belgrade for a "real truce." Croatia made the appeal after being battered by a harsh Yugoslavian assault.
Page 1


Marxism as a Broad Hypothesis Still Awaits a Replacement
To the Editor:
The hoopla about "the death of Communism" and "the end of ideology," as exemplified by your front-page article "New Issues Born From Communism's Death Knell" (Aug. 31), is premature, to say the least.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 22
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams had the day off


Data Update
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Aug.
July
Aug. 90
Rents
175.0
2.0
4.7
Homeowner's costs
172.9
0.2
3.2
Fuel and utilities
106.0
-0.4
3.7
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex,
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.23
9.37
10.37
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.96
7.01
8.40
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.11
9.20
10.18
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.82
6.87
8.12
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.12
9.23
10.24
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.88
6.96
8.28
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.35
9.47
10.57
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.47
7.46
8.53
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.58
5.70
7.75
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.12
9.12
9.70
(Source: HSH *Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  Associates)


Sports of The Times; Phil Simms Simmers In Silence
IN a box on the floor near Phil Simms's locker, the letters were piled about 15 inches deep.
Three weeks of fan mail.
And for Phil Simms, it has also been three weeks of frustration as the Giants' backup quarterback.
Three weeks of simmering silence on the situation.
In his wisdom, Phil Simms chooses not to talk about his role that will resume today when Jeff Hostetler starts against the Cleveland Browns.
Ask the 35-year-old passer anything else and he will answer in his firm but friendly manner.
In other seasons he bought pizza for all his teammates every Friday, but no longer.
But not because he's the backup.


Yank Play Dead for Red Sox
The Red Sox are feeling it.
The hits are falling, the pitching is stingy and the Yankees are lying quietly on a stretcher and waiting to be carried home.
The setting at Fenway Park is splendid for a Boston team involved in a pennant race and sickening for a New York team trying to save face and avoid losing 95 games again.
Any semblance of a rivalry has been reduced to a mockery as the Red Sox fight for the division and the Yankees fight to stay awake.


CAMPUS LIFE: Columbia; Medical Students Learn The Art of Filmmaking
Students at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons have taken their medical studies from the classroom to the street to see the human side of medicine.
In the process, Brent Wise and a dozen classmates became first-time directors, producers, researchers and script writers for a videotape that will be distributed nationally.
Their film, "Staunching the Flow: Health Care and the Homeless," will be distributed to every medical school in the United States for classroom use, medical school officials said.
Empire Blue Cross Blue and Shield plans to finance the film's distribution, Mr.
Wise said.


What's In a Pseudonym?
To the Editor:
Ken Shulman spent a goodly part of his article on Artemisia Gentileschi's private life, with detailed conjectures where documented facts were in short supply.
He might have found room at least to mention the historical novel "Artemisia," first published in 1947 and recently translated into English (University of Nebraska Press) by Anna Banti, wife of the illustrious art historian Roberto Longhi, duly cited in the article.


The Perfect Man, the Perfect Place, and Yet. . . .
MATING
By Norman Rush. 480 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Bucks County
For more than 300 years, Bucks County has been a real place, not a resort, not a suburb, and this has made all the difference.
Its old inns have fed and tucked in generations of travelers of every kind: immigrants, bargemen, wandering peddlers and probably highwaymen.
Its rich farms fed cities and still grow fine fruit and vegetables.
If tourists flock here, as they do on autumn days when the deep metallic green of the Delaware River reflects the blaze of color from the trees along its banks, it is in part because of the solid authenticity of the place, measured in the stone of its old farmhouses and the gentility of its village streets.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FATHER AND SON
Frank Langella, best known for his romantic interpretation of "Dracula" on stage and screen, has the role of Junius Brutus Booth, the 19th-century Shakespearean actor and father of Edwin Booth, in "Booth Is Back," opening this week at Long Wharf in New Haven.


OFF COURSE
If it is Uchitelle's goal to prove that the airline industry is uncompetitive, he has unfortunately emphasized precisely those facts that most undercut his point.
He notes, for example, that the hub system decreases the cost of providing air service -- an obvious benefit to the consumer.
He warns against the spate of airline bankruptcies -- an excellent sign of vigorous competition.
He tells us that profit margins at the major carriers are low -- again, precisely what you would expect of a competitive industry.
Even the decrease in super-discount fares is quite consistent with a competitive market; when the Government stops fixing prices, we would expect to see a substantial dispersion in prices initially, as producers and consumers test out the newly freed market.
Eventually, those producers who price too low (People Express) and those whose inefficiencies keep them from pricing low enough (Eastern) drop out, and an equilibrium price level emerges.
If these are the strongest arguments that can be marshaled against airline deregulation, we can declare it a smashing success.
PAUL G. MAHONEY
Charlottesville, Va.
ILS&gt;Drawing


Texas A&amp;M Falls, 35-34, To Tulsa's 63-Yard Score
T.
J.
Rubley passed on a 63-yard touchdown play to Chris Penn with 2 minutes 47 seconds left, and the big-play running of Chris Hughley carried Tulsa to a stunning 35-34 victory over Texas A&amp;M today.
Billy Cole recovered a fumble on the ensuing kickoff and Hughley, who rushed for 231 yards, got Tulsa (3-1) a first down on a 4-yard run with a minute to go that allowed the Golden Hurricane to run out the clock.


To Mixed Reviews, Education Chief Leaves the Stage
THE state's Education Commissioner, Gerald N. Tirozzi, is collecting a lot of plaudits these days.
He has received commendations from the State Board of Education, the Connecticut Education Association and Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s office, among others.
But these are not the only mementoes Dr.
Tirozzi will be taking with him as he leaves his post to assume the presidency of Wheelock College in Boston on Oct. 1.
Hanging from his office walls are numerous framed newspaper and magazine articles published during his eight-year tenure as chief of the State Education Department.
One, published in The Hartford Courant's magazine in March 1988 under the headline "How Dare He?," chronicles the firestorm of controversy, including calls for his resignation, elicited by Dr.
Tirozzi's call for greater racial integration of schools.
"Gerry was constantly out being a very strong advocate for education," said State Rep.
Nancy Wyman, a Tolland Democrat who is co-chairwoman of the General Assembly's Education Commission.
"We were fortunate to have Gerry with us, and we are unfortunate to have him leave."


First Comes the Singing, and Then the Dancing
THE Gateway Playhouse in Bellport has proved itself to be the premier summer theater on Long Island not because of its standard selection of stock revivals, but because of the outstanding quality of its productions.
"Song and Dance," with music by Andrew Lloyd Webber and lyrics by Don Black, is the current Gateway effort.
It closes this evening, but the entire production will return intact next month.


Paying by the Can for Garbage Pickup
The article on garbage per-can fees is misleading regarding Bound Brook.
Although it did state that the 1990 fee was $255 for the year, it also said Bound Brook charged residents for the amount of garbage they actually discarded.
This is not true.
If a resident used all 80 stickers issued for the year, the cost per bag amounted to $3.19.
No credit is given for unused stickers.
My family used 32 stickers, which made the per-bag cost $7.96.


Business Diary/September 15-20
COMPANIES A.T.&amp; T. Admits the Human Error Was on Management's Side


German Team Prevails As U.S. Loses Gamble
A gamble by United States Davis Cup captain Tom Gorman proved costly this afternoon at Kemper Arena when a desperate doubles duo from Germany staved off their team's elimination from this semifinal round by unravelling two Davis Cup newcomers, Scott Davis and David Pate, in straight sets,7-6 (7-3), 6-4, 6-4.
Michael Stich and Eric Jelen, selected by Nikki Pilic, the German coach, expressly for their Davis Cup experience and 4-0 record, kept Germany in contention in the three-of-five-match competition after singles victories by Andre Agassi and Jim Courier on Friday.


Deciphering Ins and Outs Of Wood and Metal Files
FILES are usually thought of as tools for smoothing and shaping metal, but they also are useful for woodworking.
In fact, certain files are meant just for wood.
Files intended for use on metals are called mill files, and those designed for cutting wood are called wood-, cabinet- or patternmaker's files.
Mill files can be used on wood, but files for wood will dull quickly on metal.


Anti-Tamil Campaign Disrupts Indian State
The authorities' campaign against a militant Tamil network in Karnataka, ending in the suicide deaths of those who allegedly planned former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's assassination, has disrupted the normally placid state.
"This is no longer an island of tranquillity," said a top police official in Bangalore, the state capital, as he described the police and military operation last month that tracked two Sri Lankan Tamils and their followers to a small house near here.


Lisa M. Stewart Has a Wedding
Lisa Michelle Stewart, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Pierce Stewart Jr. of New York and Villars-sur-Ollon Switzerland, was married yesterday to Charles Gerard Roy Target, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian Target of Toowoomba, Queensland, Australia.
The Rev.
Hira Tevaearai, a Dutch Reformed minister, performed the Protestant ceremony at the Temple de Gryon in Gryon, Switzerland.
Ms.
Stewart, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, is a senior investment manager for the East Asia Fund in Hong Kong.
She graduated from College Beau Soleil in Villars and from Barnard College, and attended Columbia University School of Business.
Her mother, Barbara Stewart, is a journalist for The U.N.
Observer, the United Nations' monthly publication in New York.
Her father is chairman of W. P. Stewart &amp; Company, investment counselors in New York.
Her great grandfather William P. Stewart was a founder of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
Mr.
Target, also 34, is a general partner in the London partnership of Alan Patricof Associates, the New York venture capital firm.
He graduated from Oxford University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
His mother is a landscape painter known as Patricia Prentice.
His father, who is retired, was in the British foreign service and served as Attorney General of Zanzibar and of the Seychelles, among other posts.


C. J. Tully Wed To Ms. Cooleen
Mary Beth Cooleen, the daughter of Mrs.
John J. Cooleen of Jackson, N.J., and the late Mr.
Cooleen, was married in Lakewood, N.J., yesterday to Christopher John Tully, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Tully of Bayside, Queens.
The Rev.
Michael Sullivan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Mary of the Lake.
Mrs.
Tully, 29 years old, is the special assistant to the senior vice president for finance at the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received a master's degree in public administration from New York University.
Her mother, Ruth S. Cooleen, is a real-estate executive with Prudential New Jersey Realty in Freehold, N.J.
Her father was the Eastern regional sales director in New York for Taylor-Dunn, an industrial equipment company.


Foreign Affairs; A Secret Plan for Israel
President Bush tested his strength against Congress and the Israeli lobby and won.
There will be no vote on loan guarantees to resettle Soviet Jews in Israel until January, though no one yet wants to say so publicly.
But the President's victory in this brief, bloody, ugly and unnecessary battle will spiral into a sinkhole of unrealistic Arab demands and unquenchable Israeli suspicions -- unless he moves now to restore harmony with Israel.


THE NEVER-FAIL CAKE
On Aug. 11, you printed a letter from a reader whose effort to make the Never-Fail Cake ended in failure (Food: "The Never-Fail Cake," by Michael Frank, July 7).
I've made it at least six times this summer, with nothing but success.
The trick with the cake is not to overbake it; I usually bake the layers for about 23 minutes, which is just enough.
I also use three 8-inch pans rather than the two 9-inch pans called for in the recipe.
It's a wonderful, old-fashioned vanilla cake, light and delicious!
I actually managed to improve on it this weekend when I ran out of milk and increased the usual amount of half-and-half.
I agree that the icing is too sweet, but I just increased the amount of unsweetened chocolate and substituted bittersweet for sweet chocolate, and it's perfect.
ARIETTA SLADE
Roxbury, Conn.


Review/Film Festival; Estrangement by Video In Drama From Japan
The solemn, intent faces of the Japanese schoolboys playing video games in Jun Ichikawa's "No Life King" bespeak a new type of modern horror.
Addicted to their favorite new game (from which the film takes its title), these children have become seriously estranged from the real world.
The film's constant emphasis is on the ways in which this has been allowed to happen, and on how emblematic it is of larger attitudes in a technological society.
When a young boy trying to converse with his mother must compete with a home computer for her attention, it's not hard to see why the boy has retreated into his own computer-dominated world.


Europeans' Hopes For a Yugoslav Peace Turn to Frustration
AT first, European Community leaders jumped at the chance of mediating a solution to the Yugoslavia crisis.
Meeting in Luxembourg in June, when the crisis was first turning nasty, they immediately dispatched a high-level mission to Belgrade and Zagreb.
And when the envoys returned the following morning with news of a cease-fire and a three-month cooling-off period, the Western Europeans felt vindicated: the community had at last demonstrated that it had political clout.
But their good cheer lasted only a few hours.
And since then, the 12-nation community has found itself increasingly haunted by the intractability of Yugoslavia's problems.
It has repeatedly worked out cease-fires that have fallen apart, the latest just last week.
It invited the warring parties to a peace conference, but found little will to negotiate.
Last week, it even debated sending a military peacekeeping force to Croatia -- then backed off after measuring the risks.


HoJo Seeing 30-30
To the Sports Editor:
Poor Howard Johnson.
He is on track for an incredible and uncreditable 30-30 performance: more than 30 home runs, more than 30 errors.
Standing alone, it's unique; paired with his earlier 30-30 (home run-stolen base) performance, it requires a new adjective.
FRANCIS S. RIVETT  Albany


Are These Movies On Their Way To Extinction?
It's hard to imagine, but when a young anthropologist in Bali and her husband started lugging a 16-millimeter movie camera along on their village rounds, that simple methodological change amounted to no less than a professional revolution.
In 1936, for Margaret Mead and Gregory Bateson to make a movie was an act of defiance, a flouting of a supreme law of scientific seriousness, namely, that the word is mightier than the moving picture.
In the 1990's, of course, the tables have been turned.
Mead and Bateson's films are hoary classics in a field, visual anthropology, that boasts its own professional journal and graduate programs.
And at a time when people are increasingly dismissing traditional anthropology as a) boring or b) an advanced form of colonialism, audiences throng the American Museum of Natural History every September for the Margaret Mead Film Festival, the only American showcase of ethnographic movies. It offers four nights of film about culture -- ours, theirs or, when you get right down to it, both.
From tomorrow through Thursday, the festival will screen 46 films and offer discussions with about two dozen film makers.
As in each of the 15 festivals held since 1976, the stylistic span will be broad, ranging from an ethnographic film as orthodox in its approach as the British Broadcasting Company's "Two Girls Go Hunting," in which an anthropologist interrogates two girls from the Hamar tribe in southern Ethiopia on marriage, to a documentary that mines a quirky vein in Western culture, "Christo in Paris," about the artist's quest to wrap the Pont Neuf in Paris.
"Christo in Paris" was produced by a group that included the pioneering documentarians David and Albert Maysles (makers of "Salesman").
"What's important for me," said Malcolm Arth, the festival chairman, "is not that the camera has come in with or without an anthropologist. What's important is the sense of the people themselves being depicted, that some context has been provided."
Yet even as the festival basks in popularity, it is also besieged from every side, intellectual as well as financial.
Philosophical challenges have arisen that may put ethnographic film makers -- at least as conventionally defined -- out of work.
More immediately, as funds dry up, the festival's very survival is in question.
In the past year alone, unrenewed grants left the festival $35,000 poorer; the figure represents about 40 percent of the total budget.
Meanwhile, Mr.
Arth, who has been with the festival since its first year, retires later this week.
The incoming chairman, Talbert Spence, has not yet announced his plans for next year's festival.
This year, less money means that fewer film makers will attend.
And Nathaniel Johnson Jr., the museum's director of special programs, thinks that the budget crunch will make it tough for programmers to keep up with the rapidly expanding field.
A hamstrung selection process could tarnish the festival's credibility.
For if any trend can be spotted in a field as motley as ethnographic film making, it is toward handing the camera over to indigenous groups who are the traditional subjects of anthropological film.
And they tend to prefer the camcorder to the movie camera.
"That's the transformative edge of the genre," said Faye Ginsburg, head of New York University's ethnographic film and video program.
"
Or, in the words of David McDougall, who with his wife, Judith, is among the better-known ethnographic film makers, "The question is, whose story is it?"
For the McDougalls (whose film, "Photo Wallahs," a study of Indian portraiture, will be shown Wednesday), the path of recent ethnographic film history is a series of ethical U-turns.
In the 1960's, tired of what Mr.
McDougall called the "illustrated lecture," the McDougalls developed a freewheeling style known as observational cinema, the ethnographic equivalent of cinema verite.
But eventually that, too, galled them.
"That fly-on-the-wall stuff is actually a very objectifying approach," said Mr.
McDougall.
The McDougalls then began making movies with and about Australian aborigines.
Now that project has landed the couple in another ethical bind.
"White film makers making films of advocacy on behalf of indigenous people are putting their own words into the mouths of others." he said.
To make ethnographic film makers' lives even more complicated, some scholars have come to the conclusion that, as a discipline, visual anthropology simply has no reason to exist.
"The basic idea of any film as document is that it's evidence of something," said Brian Winston, documentary film historian and dean of Pennsylvania State University's School of Communication.
"That depends critically on the idea that the photograph can be trusted. I'm not sure that, in the era of digital image manipulation, we can believe that. If the essential relationship between the photographic image and the thing it's supposed to represent is under attack, you can still live with the fiction film. You can even live with a documentary like 'Roger and Me.' But when you get into the realm of social science, you're in trouble."
Whatever the ultimate value of the festival's films, most people attend simply because they like them.
"It sounds almost ethereal in some way, but there's a feeling that some kind of truth is being discovered," said Jonathan Stack, producer of "Damned in the USA," being shown tomorrow."
Were it not for the festival, it seems likely that many of these films would never be seen.
"When you look at the programming on PBS or the Discovery Channel, a lot of those films premiered at the festival," said the festival's programmer, Elaine Charnov.
"It would be a crime if that did not continue." VIEWPOINTS
The Margaret Mead Film Festival will show 46 films in four theaters over four nights, meaning that times for some films will overlap.
Tickets cost $7 and admit holders to all films that evening.
Ticket sales begin at 5 P.M. daily, screenings at 6:30.
Schedule information: 212-769-5305.
Here are some festival highlights:
MONDAY: "Mr. Mike Is on the Mountain" (1989) -- tensions between British mountaineers and their Sherpa porters.
"Final Rest" (1990) -- workers in a family-run funeral home outside New York City.
"Damned in the USA" (1991) -- censorship in America.
TUESDAY: "Cowboy and Maria in Town" (1991) -- an aboriginal rock star and a determined mother in squatter camps in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea.
"Two Girls Go Hunting" (1991) -- two Hamar brides from southwestern Ethiopia.
"Absolutely Positive" (1990) -- living with the HIV virus.
"Herdsmen of the Sun" (1988) -- a male beauty contest among the Nigerian Wodabbe, showing Werner Herzog at his most ironically romantic.
WEDNESDAY: "H2 Worker" (1990) -- expose of the treatment of Jamaican sugar cane cutters on temporary visas in Florida.
"Photo Wallahs" (1991) -- photography in India.
"The Last Marranos" (1989) -- Portuguese Jews who practice in secret.
THURSDAY: "Christo in Paris" (1990) -- the artist's quixotic quest to wrap the Pont Neuf.
"Age 7 in America" (1991) -- Phil Joanou's American version of "7-Up."


CAMPUS LIFE: Dartmouth; An Ultimatum To Open R.O.T.C. To Gay Students
Dartmouth College told the Defense Department last week that if by April 1993 the department had not reversed its policy of banning homosexuals from the Reserve Officers Training Corps, the college would discontinue its campus R.O.T.C. program.
"We made this decision because we recognize the inconsistency between our equal opportunity policy and the Department of Defense policy," the Dartmouth President, James Freedman, said in an interview on Thursday.


Off-Duty Policeman Is Shot Outside Precinct
A Brooklyn police officer who had just ended his shift was shot twice by a teen-ager early yesterday at a bodega across the street from the 75th Precinct station house in East New York, the police said.
People in the neighborhood told the police that the young man yelled, "I'm going to smoke this guy!" moments before firing on the policeman, Officer Edward Serocki, 29 years old.
The police said the suspect may have known that his target was an officer.


Blurred Visions; Is Time Running Out For Bush to Remake the Middle East?
FOR a few giddy days after the allies with improbable ease swept the forces of Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait early this year, it seemed to some members of the Bush Administration that a comprehensive reshaping of the Middle East might be possible.
Iran might be brought back into ordinary discourse with other nations, Mr.
Hussein's days seemed numbered, the Arabs and the Israelis appeared more favorably disposed to settlement than perhaps ever before.
But this historic window of opportunity, as President Bush repeatedly called it, opened onto a political landscape of nightmarish complexity.
In the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, the other great arena of change of the last decade, events have unfolded to the West's and Mr.
Bush's advantage with few bold strokes on his part; but in the Middle East, nothing is that simple.
So Mr.
Bush found himself last week deeply committed to a vision of the future in the Middle East, and involved in policies designed to turn that vision into reality, but he was finding the going very difficult.


Tantalizing Chinese in Striking Setting
ON an unimposing side street not far from the Hicksville railroad station, Imperial Wok has been surprising diners for four years with tantilizing Chinese food in handsome surroundings.
The dramatic dining room is picture-perfect with pale plum walls, Chinese brush paintings and bold black highlights.
On each table, a bud vase of fresh flowers is spotlighted.
In contrast, the overflow dining room is a sleek throwback to the world of Chinese tasseled lanterns and red ceilings.
On weekends, a pianist softly plays romantic standards.
One evening, in response to a toddler's attention, she played a Disney medley that had the tot dancing in the aisles.


Mutual Funds; The Outlook for Concentration
The biggest mutual fund companies have grown so large in recent years that it is tempting to assume that the industry is consolidating.
But this is not the case.
In the last decade, the percentage of assets managed by the 10 largest advisers actually slipped, from 58.4 to 47.8 percent.
This trend will probably reverse in the coming decade, according to A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical Services Inc. in Summit, N.J.
Some smaller funds may be merged into larger ones or liquidated.
And problems in management companies may create a few large-scale mergers.


Dire Straits, Today as Yesterday
From their self-titled 1978 debut through their new album, "On Every Street" (Warner Brothers 26680; cassette and CD), Dire Straits have been responsible for some of the prettiest moments in all of rockdom.
"Romeo and Juliet," from their 1980 album "Making Movies," tried to answer age-old questions about love with a starry-toned mandolin melody and lines like "All I do is kiss you through the bars of a rhyme." The 1982 opus "Love Over Gold" reconciled violently opposed musical extremes, from a drum beat resounding like thunder to a piano trickling like water in a gutter.
Even the simplest cliches, like the it'll-be-all-right sentiment of "Why Worry," from the 1985 megahit "Brothers in Arms," were vested with enough emotion to elevate them above the ordinary.
Mark Knopfler, the band's lead singer, songwriter, producer and guitar wizard, seemed bent on transforming rock into an idiom capable of near-operatic beauty; Dire Straits albums sounded as though Mr.
Knopfler had examined life's great truths under a microscope and wanted to project what he found onto the very heavens above.


Sunday Outing; Like a Pastoral Step Back in Time
A popular exhibit at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City is a large diorama, "An October Afternoon near Stissing Mountain."
Opened to the public in 1950, the diorama -- 23 feet wide, 12 feet high and 6 feet deep -- and 13 smaller ones in the Felix M. Warburg Memorial Hall of Agriculture, show Stissing Mountain, an unusual geological formation, and the farming region of Pine Plains, here in northern Dutchess County.
The information on the display says, "This area of New York State was selected as a basis for the hall because it has mountains, natural lakes, forests, a variety of rock formations and both wild and cultivated land."


A SHOP RAT'S TALE
Ben Hamper's emotional plight seems to me an example of the widespread fracturing of the human soul that is occurring in the workplace all over America ("A Shop Rat's Tale," by John Marchese, Aug. 11).
Old Ben sounds pretty normal to me, bored to death by a job he hates, driven to anxiety attacks by exploring a bit too deeply his connection, or lack of connection, to his work and the minuscule role he plays in the world.
I do appreciate how Hamper feels, and I hope his book will open a debate on the effects of boredom and frustration on the job.
THOMAS B. HOYT
San Diego


Wine; Finding Portugal
I LOVE WHITE PORTUGUESE wine more than claret," Jonathan Swift wrote to his beloved Stella. "I have a sad vulgar appetite."
Not a man to mince words, Dean Swift.
But, one suspects, he was also a bit of a snob.
In his day, in the first half of the 18th century, England drank five times more Portuguese wine than French.
It was the vin ordinaire of that epoch.
Thanks to Hanoverian import duties and the Whigs who imposed them, claret -- red Bordeaux -- was more expensive than caviar is today; only aristocrats could afford it.


OFF COURSE
What is most alarming about Louis Uchitelle's article "Off Course" (Sept. 1) is not that the public tolerates being shunted to hub airports and having to sit for hours in airline terminals.
Nor is it that the Bush Administration "strongly supports an increase in foreign ownership" of America's airlines, up to 49 percent.
What is most alarming is that everyone seems willing to let commercial aviation continue going off course.
Even Alfred E. Kahn, the father of airline deregulation, while unhappy with the results of his efforts, says, "That's the way the system is supposed to work." MILT CAINE
Melville, L.I.


Old Pests, New Pots and Soil Mixtures
SOMETIMES house plants have to be discarded.
This is what happened to a beautiful Boston fern that was looking rather sad the last few weeks with many yellow or, worse, dead fronds.
Since it was hanging in a strategic place, closer inspection was needed to determine the trouble.
The elegant Boston fern hanging next to it didn't need a sad partner.
So down from its hook came the yellow Boston fern.
The first thought was that it just needed repotting, as it had been rather crowded in its hanging container.
But upon close inspection, the source of the problem was revealed: scale insects.
These oval hard-backed insects were adhering to the backs of the oldest fronds in huge numbers.


In Florence, Vibrant Mosaic 'Paintings'
THE mighty stone facade of the Pitti Palace is one of Florence's landmarks, and the rooms of the palace resound with the voices of tour guides extolling the glorious paintings by Raphael, Rubens and Titian that cover the walls.
In the excitement, visitors all too often overlook another glory of the Renaissance, the palace's rich collection of mosaics made with semiprecious stones and known as pietre dure -- literally, hard stones.
More than four centuries ago, the art of shaping fragments of jasper, lapis lazuli and the like into stone "paintings" was nurtured in Florence by the Medici princes, the Pitti's owners.
The city became the leading center for the manufacture of pietre dure, and its elegant mosaic tabletops and wall panels decorated homes and churches throughout Europe.
The most expensive piece of furniture ever sold in auction is a pietre dure cabinet made in Florence around 1730 for a British nobleman and sold for $15.2 million last year at Christie's in London.


Klingler's Woes Continue As Illinois Routs Houston
Jason Verduzco, not David Klingler, was the hot quarterback today, throwing for three touchdowns to Gus Palma as Illinois trounced Houston, 51-10.
Klingler, Houston's record-setting passer, had four passes intercepted and was sacked four times as Illinois (2-1) handed the Cougars (1-2) a second consecutive embarrassing loss.
Miami beat Houston, 40-10, nine days ago.


Sports of The Times; Football Needs More Vendettas
THE New York Jets and the Buffalo Bills do not play each other again until Dec. 1, so we must all do everything in our power to stir up the feud between Bruce Coslet of the Jets and Marv Levy of the Bills.
Don't forget: Coslet called Levy "an over-officious jerk" after Levy suggested the Jets had been faking injuries last Sunday.


Stacy C. McCrocklin, a Banker, Weds
Stacy Claire McCrocklin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Alfred McCrocklin of Monroe, La., was married there yesterday to Robert Clifford Wilson 3d, the son of Mrs.
Wilson Jr. of New York and the late Mr.
Wilson.
The Rev.
C.
Jeff Kraemer officiated at Grace Episcopal Church, assisted by the Rev.
Thomas W. Philips.
Mrs.
Wilson, 32 years old, is a vice president of Hibernia National Bank in New Orleans.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father, who is retired, was the vice president of operations for the Johns-Manville Corporation in Monroe.


Miss Campbell, Student, Is Wed
Susan Burgess Campbell and Charles Garrison Meyer 3d, third-year students at the University of Virginia School of Law, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Thomas Smith performed the ceremony at the Fork Episcopal Church in Doswell, Va., assisted by the Rev.
John E. Dever.
Mrs.
Meyer, 25 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh Campbell of Richmond.
She graduated from Virginia.
Her father is a lawyer in Ashland, Va.
Her maternal grandfather, Eugene Barbour Pendleton, is the president of the Order of First Families of Virginia.


Posies and Rubble: Designing 'Reality' For Pina Bausch
"Working with Pina Bausch is like swimming in deep water," says Peter Pabst.
He knows from experience, for during the last 11 years he has designed most of the scenically powerful productions by the iconoclastic German choreographer.
He filled the stage with 10,000 carnations for "Carnations" (1982), covered it with grass for "1980" (1980) and created a pit surrounded by heaps of dirt for "Viktor" (1988).
He will make an enormous concrete wall come tumbling down at the start of "Palermo, Palermo," a 1990 work that will receive its American premiere Saturday when Miss Bausch's Tanztheater Wuppertal opens at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The ensuing action -- which ranges from the brutal to the bitterly comic -- occurs amid the rubble.


Watts Journal; In Scrapheap Art, a Reason for Hope
The giddy, gaudy, improbable work of fantasy known as Watts Towers, teetering in a lacy pattern above the Los Angeles slums, gives Carolyn Byers, an 18-year-old unwed mother who lives nearby, a strange feeling: hope.
The 99-foot-high triple spire of steel rods, chicken wire and concrete, as fragile as it is flamboyant, was designated this summer by Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. as America's newest national landmark.


Many Black Voters Face Quandary Over '92 Race
Bruce Lightner, the Raleigh, N.C., businessman who organized home-state Presidential campaigns for the Rev.
Jesse Jackson in 1984 and 1988, is still waiting for his call to action this year.
Like other politically active black voters across the country, he is in something of a quandary as the 1992 election campaign finally gets underway and two leading black figures -- one declared, one not -- hover at the edges of Presidential contention.


Senior Citizens
To the Editor: My wife and I recently returned from a Cosmos escorted bus tour to the Rockies and Canyonlands, where we visited six national parks.
On this trip, our third such bus tour, I noted a practice I believe common among other tour operators: the tour guide counts passengers over 62 on the bus and gets free entry for them at National Park gates.
Since the tour company charges all passengers the same, but many of them are seniors, the National Park Service gets shortchanged and the tour company pockets the difference.
I suggest that the National Park Service charge tour companies for every passenger, regardless of age, since they in turn charge everyone the same, regardless of age.
ERWIN FRIED Clifton Park, N.Y.
Stacy Andrikos of Cosmos replies:
Mr.
Fried leaped to a conclusion that is the reverse of what happens.
Globus Gateway/Cosmos knows that most people on its U.S. tours are seniors, and therefore costs into its prices the "senior" entrance fees at the national parks.
For those few who are not seniors, the company absorbs the small difference.
This, incidentally, is standard with most tour companies.
Neither the Park Service nor the travelers are shortchanged.


Ideal Fulfilled in 'West Side Story'
THEY just met an hour ago.
Now, after a feverish love duet, Maria, a contemporary urban Juliet, stands on the fire escape, and Tony, her Romeo, is on the sidewalk below.
They reach out to each other.
It is a still moment, a simple gesture, a familiar scene.
In the fresh restoration of "West Side Story" -- call it a rediscovery -- at the Paper Mill Playhouse, the director and choreographer, Alan Johnson, holds that moment of stylized innocence and impetuosity as if it were a revelation, fixing it indelibly in memory.


Janet Macomber Has a Wedding
Janet Morgan Macomber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John DeWitt Macomber of Washington and North Haven, Me., was married yesterday in New York to Samuel Hart Williamson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wayne Arlo Williamson of Portland, Ore.
The Rev.
Brenda Husson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
James' Church.
Mrs.
Williamson, 28 years old, graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in historic preservation from Boston University in June.
She was a member of the New York Junior Assembly in 1981.
Her father, a former chairman of the Celanese Corporation in New York, is the chairman of the Export-Import Bank of the United States in Washington.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the influence of money in the Democratic primary campaigns for the New York City Council misstated the showing of Javier Nieves in the 38th District in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Nieves placed second in a field of nine candidates.


Arrogance in Swing Time
TRAPS, THE DRUM WONDER
The Life of Buddy Rich.
By Mel Torme.
Illustrated. 233 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $21.95.


Struan Coleman Wed to Isobel Coles
Isobel Derouet Coles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Coles of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Struan Howard Coleman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Coleman of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
John Traynor, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Isle Church on Shelter Island, L.I.
He was assisted by the Rev.
George Zabriskie, an Episcopal priest.
The couple, both 26 years old, are completing studies for doctoral degrees at Oxford University, she in international relations and he in microbiology.
Mrs.
Coleman was until recently a research fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
A graduate of Princeton University, she has a master's degree in international relations from Oxford.
Her father is a limited partner in Goldman, Sachs in New York.
He is a former chairman of the Goldman, Sachs International Corporation.


Amy Welzer Has Wedding
Amy Welzer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank C. Welzer of Wallington, N.J., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Greisch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard N. Greisch of Glenview, Ill.
The Rev.
Samuel Matarazzo, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Greisch, 28 years old, is an associate at J. P. Morgan in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father, who is retired, was a chemical engineer with Hoffman La Roche in Nutley, N.J.


Stamps
'Rareties' That Aren't
A decision by the Postmaster General in 1934 to reward friends with special printings of stamps drew a storm of criticism and eventually led the Post Office Department, under pressure from President Franklin D. Roosevelt, to create hundreds of thousands of "rare" stamps without perforations.


Susanna Lowy Weds Victor Morgan Davis
Susanna Meg Lowy, a lawyer with CBS, and Victor Morgan Davis, a film and video producer, were married yesterday evening in Great Falls, Va.
Cantor David Shneyer officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Judy and Arthur Lowy.
Mrs.
Davis, 36 years old, graduated from Yale University and the University of Virginia law school.
Mr.
Davis, 39, is a senior producer, director and writer at Unisys in Princeton, N.J.
A graduate of the University of Akron, he is the son of Martha Davis of Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio, and the late Harold Davis.


Miss Moore, Lawyer, Weds
Elizabeth Ann Moore, a lawyer, and Dr.
David Calcagno, a surgeon, were married yesterday at Old Chimney Farm in Carversville, Bucks County, Pa.
Judge Isaac S. Garb, the President Judge of the Court of Bucks County, officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
William T. Moore.
Miss Moore, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate at the Washington office of the Atlanta law firm of Kilpatrick &amp; Cody.
She graduated from Lafayette College and George Washington University law school.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in Philadelphia.


Irish Rockers With a Rebel's Cause
Don't try to get comfortable with "Viva Dead Ponies" (Radioactive/MCA RAR-10242; all three formats), the first album by the Fatima Mansions.
Settle into a song and, the moment it's over, the band blasts it away with anything from jittering synthesizers to pummeling drums and feedback to a belting opera singer.
Most of the tunes ride terse, catchy riffs, but blaring guitars drive one song, cool keyboards the next, mechanical sequencers a third.
Cathal Coughlan, the band's songwriter and singer, can croon with an open-throated Irish baritone, but he also cramps his tone with a bullhorn or distorts it into a sour growl.
Even within songs there's friction; "Angel's Delight," a kind of lullaby that opens the album, croons, "Kill a cop."
The jolts fit the Fatima Mansions' world view.
In Mr.
Coughlan's hallucinatory lyrics, civilization has turned into a nightmare of poverty, fear, endless strife and what the triumphal-sounding "You're a Rose," which is something like a love song, calls "squalid, mute despair." The spooky "Look What I Stole for Us, Darling" starts at a whisper above breathy, subdued funk and dissonant noises, then moves to hard, synthesizer-driven rock as it describes a purely joyless existence: "I must be brutal or die."


Raffles Hotel Is Reopening
One of Asia's more storied hostelries, the 105-year-old Raffles Hotel of Singapore, reopens this month after a two-year, $80 million renovation.
The changes are meant to modernize the hotel, whose regular guests included writers like Rudyard Kipling and Joseph Conrad during its prime in the early 1900's, when a gin cocktail called the Singapore Sling was first mixed in its Long Bar.
The three-story hotel, near the Singapore marina, was to open last week with 104 rooms, 19 fewer than before the renovation, all of them suites.
But the hotel said its guests will find other changes besides the size of their rooms: Victorian fittings and furnishings, Persian rugs and antiques have been placed throughout the building.


Removing Charges of Racism
To the Editor:
All too frequently, black trainees or managers perceive training or instruction -- even though not overly critical -- from white professionals or executives as racist. ("Pairing Up for Better Understanding," Managing, Sept. 1.)


A. J. Scott Wed To Ms. England
Elizabeth Paule England, the daughter of Elyse England Hassanein of Sands Point, L.I., and Monroe B. England of Lenox, Mass., was married yesterday to Antony James Scott, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Scott of Gidea Park, Essex, England.
Judith Patty, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Lenox Club in Lenox.
Ms.
England, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is a senior account executive at Ruder Finn Inc., the New York public relations firm.
She graduated cum laude from Wesleyan University.


Cozza and Yale Prevail on Wishbone
Yale knew that Brown would come out throwing today in the run-and-shoot offense instituted last season by Mickey Kwiatkowski, the former Hofstra coach whose teams live and die by the pass.
Brown did just that as Jeff Barrett, its new left-handed quarterback from Santa Monica Junior College, completed 27 of 49 passes and his backup, Nick Richardson, went 5 for 5 late in the game for 70 yards and a touchdown pass.


Miss Finnerty Weds
Linda Kathryne Finnerty, a public relations assistant at the Ann Taylor Stores Corporation, and Richard Joseph O'Leary, a vice president at Liberty Brokerage, both in New York, were married yesterday at Our Lady of Victories Roman Catholic Church in Jersey City.
The Rev.
Walter J. Swenson officiated.
Mrs.
O'Leary, 24 years old, graduated from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert John Finnerty of Weehawken, N.J.
Mr.
O'Leary, 33, graduated from the University of Connecticut.
He is a son of William J. O'Leary of Ellicotville, N.Y., and the late Joan Nugent O'Leary.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; New Hope for Bridgeport Housing Project
REDEVELOPMENT of Father Panik Village, one of Connecticut's oldest, largest and most notorious public housing projects, is under way in Bridgeport.
The hope is to produce a mix of private and public housing free of the problems that have given the project the reputation of being the city's most dangerous area.


Two Rembrandt Lucretias Are Together at Last
For what may be the first time in their 300-year existence, two paintings by Rembrandt that show the violated Roman maiden Lucretia immediately before and after she stabs herself have been placed on exhibit together, by the National Gallery of Art.
The first scene was painted in Amsterdam in 1664 and the second in 1666, during a very troubled time in the artist's life., and Arthur K. Wheelock Jr., a curator at the gallery, said, "There is no record of them ever having been together. They could have remained in his studio for a while, but we don't know."


Phone Ills May Speed Air-Traffic Update
The long-distance telephone breakdown that tied up air traffic in the New York region this week may help untie a bureaucratic knot that has kept the Federal Aviation Administration from acquiring a new nationwide network of telephone lines, Government officials say.
The incident on Tuesday night was not the first time that the failure of a single circuit had caused disruptions in air service.
The aviation agency's vulnerability to telephone breakdowns has been identified as a problem for years, and is why the agency wants to upgrade its phone network.


Fever Chilled?
Within days after the Atlanta Braves lost their star outfielder, Otis Nixon, to drugs, they lost two important games to the San Francisco Giants and lost, at least briefly, their division lead to the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Thousands of long-suffering Atlanta fans could only hope that the Braves had not also lost the will to win their first pennant.
Nixon, an outstanding fielder, the league's leading base stealer and a .297-hitting leadoff man for the Braves, had a history of drug use.
But his last known brush with cocaine was four years ago, and he had tested negative for the drug 250 times since then.
Jolted by the announcement last week that Nixon had twice tested positive in recent weeks and was being suspended for 60 days, Nixon's teammates gave no public voice to negative thoughts.
"We didn't fold when we lost guys before," said pitcher Tom Glavine, "and we're not going to fold now."


Coming Apart
PLAIN GRIEF
By Maxine Chernoff. 222 pp. New York: Summit Books.


Old Pests, New Pots and Soil Mixtures
SOMETIMES house plants have to be discarded.
This is what happened to a beautiful Boston fern that was looking rather sad the last few weeks with many yellow or, worse, dead fronds.
Since it was hanging in a strategic place, closer inspection was needed to determine the trouble.
The elegant Boston fern hanging next to it didn't need a sad partner.
So down from its hook came the yellow Boston fern.
The first thought was that it just needed repotting, as it had been rather crowded in its hanging container.
But upon close inspection, the source of the problem was revealed: scale insects.
These oval hard-backed insects were adhering to the backs of the oldest fronds in huge numbers.


The Executive Life; The Thrill of the Dive; The Roar of the Boss
Marti Frucci is hurtling towards the ground at 120 m.p.h.
From the grassy field in Gardiner, N.Y., she is invisible.
Then, with a whoosh of parachute deployment, she comes into view, a tiny figure breaking through the clouds.
She swoops over her spectators' heads, then lands gently on her feet.
Pushing back her hot pink goggles -- which match her hot pink-and-green jumpsuit and her hot pink-and-green parachute -- Ms.
Frucci grins broadly.
"It's blowing pretty hard up there," says the 29-year-old associate in corporate finance at Bankers Trust.
"I got a lot of speed."


FLAW ENDANGERS BOMBER'S FUTURE
Until two months ago, the Air Force's Stealth bomber had an enviable record in early flight tests of its ability to elude radar: a perfect 10 for 10.
But on flight No. 11, whose results the Air Force disclosed last week, one of the three black bat-winged planes now in testing in California's Mojave Desert failed a radar trial.
The Air Force suddenly faced the prospect that the B-2 bomber was not as stealthy as promised.


From Manhattan Project to Seventh Avenue
Teflon is no longer just about pots and pans.
This fall, the protective surface treatment developed by the chemical division of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company for kitchenware also protects fashion wear.


Clare Francesca Russo, Consultant, Marries Seth Jackson Atlas, Lawyer
Clare Francesca Russo, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Geatano J. Russo of the Bronx, was married last evening to Seth Jackson Atlas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony H. Atlas of Rego Park, Queens.
Justice Jeffrey M. Atlasof the New York State Supreme Court, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Fountainhead in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride, 33 years old, is a senior personnel consultant with Digital Equipment Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Queens College and received an M.B.A. from Iona College.
Her father, who is retired, was a manager with Consolidated Edison in New York.


Ann Blinkhorn Weds John Driscoll
Ann Marie Blinkhorn and John Patrick Driscoll were married yesterday at Our Lady of Victory Roman Catholic Church in Centerville, Mass.
The Rev.
John Perry officiated.
The bride, 32 years old, is a senior analyst in the corporate planning department of The New York Times.
A graduate of Smith College with an M.B.A. from Harvard University, she is a daughter of Lois C. Blinkhorn of Milwaukee and Thomas A. Blinkhorn of Washington.
Her father is an officer with the World Bank in Washington.
Her mother is a reporter for The Milwaukee Journal.


Lauren Derby, Student, Is Wed
Lauren Hutchinson Derby, the daughter of Roger Alden Derby of Warrenton, Va., and the late Mrs.
Derby, was married yesterday to Andrew H. Apter, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
David E. Apter of North Haven, Conn.
Prof.
Ainslie T. Embree, a professor of history at Columbia University and a minister of the United Church of Canada, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Knickerbocker Club in New York.
Ms.
Derby, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Brown University.
She received a master's degree in Latin American history from the University of Chicago, where she is studying for a doctorate in history and where the bridegroom is an assistant professor of anthropology.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of the United States Trust Company of New York.


Camera
A camera for mixed media, one that may be a harbinger of a new kind of filmless photography, is coming to the United States from Japan.
The impact of television and the computer is being acknowledged by the Fujix Digital Still Camera, which takes 21 color images on a reusable Fujix IM-8S electronic memory card.
Its manufacturer, Fuji, sees a many-sided market -- for family pictures, photojournalism, for desktop publishing, for engineering and product design.


New York Harbor Sees a Return to the Age of Sail


Prize Performer


Queena Takes Ruffian; Meadow Star Is Sixth
In the worst performance of an apparently fading career, Meadow Star ran sixth in a field of seven yesterday at Belmont Park while the 5-year-old mare Queena won the Ruffian Handicap for the fifth straight victory of an obviously flourishing career.
It was the third loss in a row and the fourth in the last six races for Meadow Star, who won the Eclipse Award last year as the best juvenile filly in the country.
She lost by seven lengths to Lite Light in the Coaching Club American Oaks in July, rested for two months, then ran fourth in the Maskette three weeks ago and failed to restore the luster yesterday in the Ruffian.


Airlines Relaxing Policy On No-Refund Tickets
FACING a decline in passengers that began more than a year ago, major airlines increasingly are removing or easing some of their harshest restrictions on nonrefundable tickets.
In spite these modifications in policy, the limits on the cheapest airline seats remain formidable for the average traveler.
But there are ways around the system -- including bidding for your seat, asking to be wait-listed and flying standby.


Old-Man Rosewall Linked to Connors
To the Sports Editor:
Jimmy Connors is great.
But the occasion of his fantastic run at the United States Open is a good time to remember another wondrous 39-year-old, Ken Rosewall, who reached the semifinals of both the Open and Wimbledon in 1974.
Rosewall didn't stop there, either, beating John Newcombe (seeded No. 1 at Wimbledon, No. 2 at the Open) to reach the finals in each case.
His streak was stopped in both finals by a precocious left-hander: James Scott Connors.
JOHN W. ROSSITER  Hartford


Managing; The Efficiencies of Going Public
When the Centel Corporation, a Chicago telephone company, sold 18 percent of its cable operations to the public four years ago, it had just one goal: Drive up its stock by focusing public attention on a product line that traditionally commands a higher stock price than a utility.
Centel got its stock price rise, but the partially public subsidiary got a lot more.
It became so aggressive about raising its rates and lowering its costs that its revenues per customer and its profit margins soared.


For the Fruits of Autumn, Cobblers and Compotes
WITH the advent of autumn a new list of ingredients tempts the cook.
This is especially true when it comes to fruit.
Summer's tender fresh peaches, plums and berries are replaced by pears, apples, cranberries and dried fruits.
The fall fruits withstand longer cooking and are delicious when baked into old-fashioned bread puddings, cobblers, crisps, compotes, and the like.
These kinds of desserts do not require painstaking pastry-making skills.
Like cooking a pot of stew, they can easily be improvised by buttering a baking dish, adding fruit and a topping and placing the mixture in the oven for about an hour.


Heidi Chauncey Weds J. J. Vorwerk
Heidi Ann Chauncey, a daughter of Janet Lee Chauncey of Londonderry, Vt., and Kenneth DeVauhn Ratcliffe Chauncey of San Francisco, was married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass., to Justin James Vorwerk, a son of Mrs.
Patricia Dobbs of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Edward C. Vorwerk.
The Rev.
Edward B. Anderson performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Universalist Church.
Mrs.
Vorwerk, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president at Citibank in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is an art director at McCann-Erickson advertising agency in San Francisco.
Her mother is a real-estate agent in Londonderry.
The bride's grandfather, the late Harrison Chauncey, was president of I.B.M.
World Trade Corporation in New York.
Mr.
Vorwerk, 32, is a vice president at Bankers Trust in New York.
He graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
His mother is the assistant to the president of St.
Joseph's Hospital in Stamford, Conn.
His father was an investor in New Canaan.


Paying by the Can for Garbage Pickup
The article on per-container garbage fees failed to mention Chester Township.
Our per-container system has been in effect since July 1, 1990.
During this period, our recycling has almost tripled, while our garbage volume has been significantly reduced.
The system works because it was designed to be user-friendly.
Recycling is as easy as trashing.
Recyclables are picked up once per week at curbside, as is garbage.


Style Makers; Mary Costello Marker, Astrological Entrepreneur
When Mary Costello Marker decided to start her own business almost two years ago, she knew she didn't want to simply ride the coattails of a current trend.
She finally came up with what she considered a double whammy -- combining two perennial but very different favorites.
She founded Flora Scopes, a business that combines flowers and astrology or, in her own words, "the harmony of stars and flowers." Ms.
Marker, who is 49 years old and whose company is in Lexington, Mass., delved into books on both subjects and, she said, "I found a link."


MR. SOFTWARE
As a technical writer who has experienced the rise and fall of software companies from the trenches, I have nothing but praise for the work of the Microsoft Corporation ("Mr. Software," by Fred Moody, Aug. 25).
It produces innovative, relatively bug-free products for a reasonable price.
I'm using one of them now to write this letter.
As for Bill Gates and all the sour grapes about his billions -- compared with the likes of Michael Milken, he's some kind of American hero.
Just think, you can still get wealthy in America by making something!
LISA BOYER
Greensboro, N.C.


Exoticism: In the Beholder's Eye?
To the Editor:
Jack Anderson may see the "universal" in so-called exotic ballets  [ "Flights of Fancy to the Land of Truth," Sept. 1 ] , but I have reason to suspect that most audiences would probably only congratulate themselves on having developed precious individualism while pitying East Indians and the Japanese, who are still yoked under uncivilized mores peculiar to the third world.


The New Garden: Chablis, but No Cup
Down here at what they are now calling the Club, the seats are bouncy foam rubber, upholstered in a lavender plastic that is easy on the eyes and resistant to those annoying Chablis spills.
The cover charge is $65 per person, which includes entertainment, but not parking, drinks or Stanley Cup guarantees.
The menu is to your right, through the hole in the arm rest.
Your waiter, who as recently as last year was just another burly hot dog vendor, recommends the waffle fries for $3.95.


Cowboys Sure Don't Cut and Stack Wheat
To the Editor:
My family has been ranching in Colorado for a pretty long time, and I believe "Boom Times for Rodeo, Broken Bones and All" (front page, Sept. 8) must have misquoted Prof.
T.
A.
Larson as saying: "The real working cowboys, of course, don't do much of what you see at rodeos. . . . They spend most of their time cutting and stacking wheat, mending fences."


Yeltsin, in Azerbaijan, Proposes Pact on Enclave
A peace mission by the leaders of the two largest Soviet republics, Russia and Kazakhstan, reported that it had achieved some success today in arranging negotiations among the long-feuding parties in the dispute over the embattled Caucasus enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh.
The Russian republic's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, and the Kazakh republic's President, Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, said that talks might begin as early as Sunday evening, judging from their progress so far in a flying attempt to create movement in the long ethnic standoff.
Hundreds of people have been killed in the conflict surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh in the last three years.


Playing in Memory of a Master
When the Saito Kinen Orchestra makes its American debut at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening with Seiji Oza wa as conductor and Isaac Stern as soloist, it will be fulfilling an obligation and a dream.
The obligation is that of Mr.
Ozawa and his 93 musicians; the dream was that of their mentor, Hideo Saito.
Although Saito, who died in 1974, gained little public recognition outside Japan, no person has been more responsible for the proliferation of outstanding Japanese instrumentalists entering the mainstream of Western musical life during the last three decades.
He also played a major role, along with his compatriot Shinichi Suzuki, in cultivating the widespread appreciation and performance of Western music found in present-day Japan.


The Dollar Is the Least of Their Troubles
To the Editor:
"Learning to Dance with a Bouncy Dollar" (Sept. 8) skirts the real issues confronting middle-market companies -- understanding and dealing in a business environment that is increasingly globalized.


Monopoly Over Dead Sea Scrolls Is Ended
In a move expected to shatter the wall of secrecy surrounding much research on the Dead Sea Scrolls, a major library in California has disclosed that it has a virtually complete set of photographs of the rare documents from biblical time and has decided to make them available immediately and without restriction to all researchers.
Officials of one of the largest independent libraries in the country, the Huntington Library in San Marino, Calif., a suburb of Los Angeles, decided last week to open the collection of some 3,000 master photographic negatives of the ancient Jewish manuscripts found four decades ago in caves near the Dead Sea.
They said they believed that the collection consisted of all of the known scroll texts.


In Touch With the Tool-Belt Chromosome
Tim feels lost and confused.
His wife has just breezed out the door after forbidding him to rewire the dishwasher.
He shuffles out to the backyard, and his neighbor tells him the reason he's having trouble with his wife is because he doesn't know who he is as a man.
"You see, Tim, the Industrial Revolution took the adult male out of the home," he says.
"Men need to spend more time around the campfire with their elders, like in ancient days, seeking wisdom, telling stories, sharing." Tim interrupts.
"Would these men all have to be naked?" he asks.
Well, bang on a drum: the men's movement has come to the television sitcom.
Tim Taylor, the central character in "Home Improvement" (Tuesday on ABC at 8:30 P.M.), is the model of a 90's male.
He's lived through two decades of feminism and knows he ought to be vulnerable and sensitive.
But at the same time he's tired of apologizing for his instinct to be aggressive, analytical or to go ga-ga over the contents of a hardware store.


Knicks Cheerleaders? Not Exactly
"No skin," Pam Harris, the director of marketing for the New York Knicks promised solemnly, as 200 beautiful young women in leotards, tight halter tops and bicycle shorts practiced pelvic thrusts on the basketball court behind her.
"We won't have them do anything demeaning."
The Knicks basketball team, which recently acquired the former Lakers coach, Pat Riley, has decided to borrow another well-known feature from its Los Angeles rivals: dancing girls.
Yesterday, as women from aerobics studios and dance classes all over New York City, Long Island and New Jersey lined up, flexing and bending, at 7:30 A.M. at Madison Square Garden for an audition, club officials anxiously stressed what New York's dance team would not be.


Charlie Chan Was No Uncle Tom
To the Editor:
As a Caucasian who has seen just about every Charlie Chan movie there is, I must respond to the article by Gish Jen about stereotypes that perpetuate Charlie Chan as the Stepin Fetchit of Orientals  [ "Challenging the Asian Illusion," Aug. 11 ] .


Making a Difference; A 2,000-Hour Guarantee
In a few weeks, about 3,000 construction workers, chosen by a complex formula that includes years of service and training, will get an unusual offer from B.E.&amp; K. Inc.
The Birmingham, Ala., construction company will agree to pay them for 2,000 hours -- a year of 40-hour weeks -- plus a vacation and full benefits, in 1992.
They, in turn, must agree to work whenever B.E.&amp; K. needs them, and not to work elsewhere.
It is the kind of trade-off that factory and office workers take for granted.
But it is apparently a first in construction.
"It's time we brought some stability to our workers, too," said T. Michael Goodrich, 46, B.E.&amp; K.'s president.


Mindszenty and Jews
To the Editor:
You report that during Pope John Paul II's visit to Budapest, Hungarian Jews severely criticized the Roman Catholic bishops, particularly the late Jozsef Cardinal Mindszenty for failing to oppose Nazi persecutions of Jews (news article, Aug. 19).
While such allegations receive circulation, few readers realize that they were refuted by the Cardinal in his "Memoirs" (1974) and before that by two Hungarian Jews, Bela Fabian in "Cardinal Mindszenty" (1949) and Jeno Levai in "Hungarian Jewry and the Papacy" (1968).
Not only did Cardinal Mindszenty speak out against Nazi treatment of Jews, but he also enlisted other bishops and priests in helping to defend Hungarian Jews. (Rev.) VINCENT A. LAPOMARDA Coordinator, Holocaust Collection Holy Cross College Worcester, Mass., Sept. 7, 1991


Religious Strife Hits Cairo


Rangers to Board Train to the Game
The National Hockey League often acts as if it's a generation behind the other major professional sports.
But it is reveling in old-fashioned nostalgia as it celebrates its 75th anniversary season.
For the league's season-opener on Oct. 3, the Rangers will take the train to Boston to play the Bruins, just as they did once upon a time, when players smoked in parlor cars, played cards into the night and put their teeth in paper cups before going to sleep.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 23


Three Killed in New Haven During a Sickout by Police
The City of New Haven experienced one of the most violent weekends in recent memory, the police said yesterday, with 3 people killed and at least 7 wounded by gunfire beginning Friday night.
The killings occurred on a weekend in which many police officers called in sick to protest disciplinary action by the department.
The president of the police officers' union, Sgt.
Louis Cavalier, said that as many as 60 officers called in sick beginning Friday night and that the department was operating at almost half strength on some shifts.
Friday evening, for example, when 40 officers normally are on duty, only about 25 officers reported to work, he said.


Recruiter Does Job A Little Too Well
It's nice to have pride in your home-grown football players.
But, really, isn't it bad form to threaten to kill the coach who spirits them out of state?
CURTIS JOHNSON , who is San Diego State's chief recruiter, as well as the receivers' coach, had just returned home last February after a foray into Louisiana, where he plucked three players on signing day.
That night, he got a death threat from someone who identified himself as a Louisiana fan.
Earlier in the day, the caller had telephoned AL LUGINBILL , the San Diego State head coach.


Judith Westerman Weds E. A. Silver
Judith Kay Westerman, the associate director of publicity at Dell Publishing, and Edward Alan Silver, an associate general counsel for Columbia University, were married yesterday at the Scarsdale (N.Y.) Women's Club.
The Rev.
Diane Moore of the United Church of Christ performed a nondenominational ceremony.


Guard Held in Killing of 2 Outside L.I. School
A security guard at a Long Island high school shot and killed two young men and critically wounded three early yesterday as they tried to flee after an argument, the police said.
The guard, who was charged with murder last night, was on probation for weapons and drugs convictions and was not authorized to carry a gun, the police said.
The men were unarmed.


People
*
Mark Messing, 43, has been named senior vice president and management director at J. Walter Thompson New York, in charge of the Northwest Airlines account, from senior vice president and group director at Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York. *
Wendy Lapidus-Saltz, a creative director at Tatham/RSCG, Chicago, has been named a partner in the agency.


Robert Bishop, a Folk-Art Expert And Museum Director, Dies at 53
Robert Bishop, a Broadway dancer who became an author, an educator and the director of the Museum of American Folk Art in Manhattan, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 53 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS-related lymphoma, said his companion, Henry Niemann.


Brooklyn Man Is Held In Slaying of a Deacon
A young man has been arrested in the shooting death of a deacon of a Brooklyn church who was killed last month while riding to a community meeting in a church van, the police said yesterday.
The suspect, Jose Vega, 18 years old, of 420 Ridgewood Avenue in the East New York section of Brooklyn, was charged with second-degree murder and criminal possession of a weapon.
The weapon was not recovered, the police said.


3 Discounters on a Collision Course
For years, the county fairground just outside Bemidji was the site of carnival rides and 4-H Club contests for the residents of the small town in northern Minnesota.
More recently, though, the fairground was the site of a literal and figurative turf war between Wal-Mart and Target, two well-managed organizations that are among the nation's largest discount-store chains.


Kenya Tightening Curbs on Dissident Groups
Increasingly isolated in Africa as it resists calls for multiparty democracy, Kenya's Government seems to be on a collision course with opposition forces.
A senior minister in the Government of President Daniel arap Moi said on Saturday that a scheduled meeting here in the capital by a newly formed opposition group, the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy, would be "crushed" if it went ahead as scheduled on Oct. 5.
The minister, Nicholas Biwott, a close ally of Mr.
Moi, has barred opposition leaders from the Rift Valley province where he holds a parliamentary seat.


Dodgers Back on Top but Are Not That Secure
At the end of the day, the two teams went in separate directions.
But the Los Angeles Dodgers, with their largest lead in a month and their season down to its final 11 games, acknowledged today that they still hadn't dismissed the Atlanta Braves from the race.
Too much time, they said. Too many games.


Gunmen Kill Grocery Owner in Bronx
For 14 years Luisa Caban ran her grocery on Gildersleeve Avenue in the Bronx like a small-town general store, chatting with neighbors, dispensing friendly advice to anxious young mothers, and quietly extending credit to those facing lean times.
But this weekend the slow and easy rhythms that usually prevail in the Clasons Point section, a secluded community of tidy one-family homes nestled onto a peninsula jutting into the East River, were jolted when robbers shot and killed Mrs.
Caban during a failed robbery attempt.


For the 'Bessie' Festivities, Awards and a Little Music
Dance Theater Workshop presented its eighth annual New York Dance and Performance Awards on Friday night at the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center.
The awards honored achievements in dance and performance art for the 1990-91 season, and the recipients were chosen by a panel of dancers, producers and dance writers who attended 1,200 performances by approximately 900 artists and companies.
Familiarly known as the Bessies, the awards are named after Bessie Schonberg, a highly regarded teacher of dance composition.
Award-winning choreographers and performance-art creators received cash gifts of $1,000.
Winners in other categories received $500.


Metro Matters; One Man's Rx For an Economy That's Still Ailing
In 1984, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo galvanized Democrats by challenging President Reagan's vision that economic recovery had transformed America into a "shining city on the hill."
Now, less than a year before another Democratic national convention, New Yorkers are anxiously awaiting another overdue recovery.
The Governor, meanwhile, is grappling with the consequences of Washington's inattention and local inertia, which have transformed New York into a pining city in a slump.


Working Together In the West Bank
To the Editor:
As one who volunteered his labor to build homes in the West Bank this summer, I am proud to say that no longer will American news media myths cloud my judgment regarding Israel.
Sure, I believed that Israel was a ruthless, fascistic state exploiting, dehumanizing and massacring Palestinians illegally in the West Bank and with impunity.
All I had to do was read the newspaper or watch network news to confirm these allegations.


2 Quit Seagram's Tropicana
The Seagram Company, in a management shake-up, says it has replaced the top two executives at its Tropicana Products Inc. unit.
The company said on Friday that it had accepted the resignation of Tropicana's president, Robert L. Soran, and its executive vice president, George J. Zulanas Jr.


Urban Institute Fellow
Janet L. Norwood, who said in June that she would not accept reappointment to a fourth term as Commissioner of Labor Statistics, will join the Urban Institute as a senior fellow, the research and public policy organization said last week.
Besides labor-market analysis, Dr.
Norwood will work in the area of data quality and on the impact on the American statistical system of changes in Eastern and Western Europe.
The Urban Institute appointment is effective Jan. 1.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Gant's a Wreck, but Still Wins 4th Straight  Not even a wreck with 122 laps left could prevent a fourth straight Winston Cup victory for Harry Gant, who won the Goody's 500 in Martinsvile, Va., yesterday.
On Lap 377 on Martinsville Speedway's .526-mile oval, Rusty Wallace tried to get by Gant on the low side as they went into the third turn, and the two cars made contact.
Despite significant front-end damage to his Oldsmobile Cutlass, Gant charged right back through the pack, overtook Bodine with less than 50 laps remaining and won by 1.13 seconds to earn his 16th career victory.
Bodine was second, followed by Dale Earnhardt, Ernie Irvan and pole-sitter Mark Martin. (AP) Patrese Wins, and Senna Is Closer to Title: Riccardo Patrese of Italy won the Portuguese Grand Prix in Estoril, while Ayrton Senna, the runner-up, moved to the brink of his third world driving title.
Patrese, in a Williams-Renault, won by more than 20 seconds over Senna's McLaren-Honda.
Jean Alesi was third in a Ferrari.
With three races left, Senna has 83 points to Nigel Mansell's 59.
Patrese was timed in 1 hour 35 minutes 42.304 seconds, for the 71 laps on the 2.703-mile Autodromo circuit.
He averaged 120.314 miles an hour for the 191.91 miles. (AP)
GOLF  Couples, With Help, Rallies in B.C.
Open  Fred Couples was all set to win the B.C.
Open on his own, but he was only too glad to accept the help he got from Brad Faxon.
Couples made three consecutive birdies to tie the second- and third-round leader five holes into the final round at the En-Joie Golf Club in Endicott, N.Y.
Then it was Faxon's run of bogeys on the back side that opened the way for Couples's three-stroke victory over Peter Jacobsen.
Couples shot his second consecutive four-under-par 68 for a 72-hole total of 15-under 269.
Faxon dropped into a tie for third with Blaine McCallister at 11 under. (AP) Bradley Wins in a Playoff: Pat Bradley sank an 18-foot birdie putt on the second playoff hole to beat Rosie Jones in the Safeco Classic in Kent, Wash.
Bradley, the third-round leader, finished in regulation with an even-par 72, Jones a 69 as both finished with 280 totals, eight under par.
Danielle Ammaccapane was third at 282. (AP)
Hill Takes Seniors Victory: Mike Hill shot a one-under-par 71 to win the Senior PGA Tour's Nationwide championship in Alpharetta, Ga.
Hill, who finished at four-under 212, beat Tom Shaw by a stroke for his fourth victory of the year.
Shaw, who had a 69, was second at 213.
DeWitt Weaver finished third at 215 after a 71. (AP) HORSE RACING  An Unknown Captures the Super Derby  Free Spirit's Joy, an unknown Louisiana-bred horse, won the Louisiana Derby in 2:004/5 , the second fastest time ever for a mile and a quarter at Louisiana Downs in Bossier City, La.
The track record is 2:001/5 by Gate Dancer in 1984.
Olympio was one length back in second, and Zeeruler finished third in the 12th running of the $1 million race.
Best Pal finished fourth, 6 1/2 lengths behind, and Lite Light was next to last in the field of seven.
Free Spirit's Joy paid $59, $10.40 and $5.20 for $2 across the board. (AP)
Solar Splendor Wins Man o' War Stakes: Solar Splendor took the lead at the top of the stretch and drew off to a 1 1/4-length victory over Dear Doctor in the Man o' War Stakes at Belmont.
Solar Splendor, ridden by Herb McCauley, covered a mile and three-eighths on the turf in 2:121/5 to earn $240,000.
Solar Splendor paid $50.40, $22 and $8.40 for $2 across the board.
Dear Doctor paid $7.20 and $6, while Beau Sultan, another 1 1/4 lengths behind, was $8.20. (AP) TENNIS  Seles Routs Fernandez in Tokyo Final  Monica Seles demolished Mary Joe Fernandez, 6-1, 6-1, yesterday and won the Nichirei International in Tokyo.
The world's top-ranked woman player needed only 51 minutes to beat Fernandez, the tournament's defending champion and ranked seventh in the world, on the hard court of Ariake Coliseum. (AP)


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Filene's Basement Corp., 3.3 million shares. Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
General Physics Corporation, 3.2 million shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Shopko Stores Inc. 16.5 million shares. Goldman, Sachs.
York International Corporation, 10.7 million shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch


Review/Film Festival; Angelopoulos's Disillusioned Politician
The Greek director Theo Angelopoulos is widely considered to be in the first rank of contemporary film makers.
But until recently his demanding work -- daring in its images, fierce in its social and political concerns, sometimes running to four hours in length -- has scarcely been seen in this country outside of film festivals.
Last year the Museum of Modern Art presented an Angelopoulos retrospective, and the Public Theater showed his 1988 film, "Landscape in the Mist," an elegant, brutal, masterly work about two young children searching for their nonexistent father.
His new film, "The Suspended Step of the Stork," will be shown at the New York Film Festival tonight at 6:15 and tomorrow at 9:15 P.M., offering a high-profile opportunity for Mr.
Angelopoulos.
Unfortunately, this is neither his best work nor the best introduction to it.


Paige Windle Has a Wedding
Paige Windle, a Citibank manager in Ossining, N.Y., and Dr.
Walter Franklin Bloes, an oral surgeon in the Bronx, were married yesterday at St.
Christopher's Episcopal Church in Chatham, Mass.
The Rev.
Whitney H. Burr performed the ceremony.


A New President Is Named At Hachette's U.S. Division
David J. Pecker has been named president of Hachette Magazines, the American division of France's largest magazine publisher.
The appointment of Mr.
Pecker, who is 40 years old, was made Friday by Hachette's chairman, Daniel Filipacchi.
Mr.
Pecker has served as the company's executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Too Old to Sprint, Too Young to Quit
FLORENCE GRIFFTH JOYNER -- Flo-jo to fans who followed her flamboyant track career before her retirement in 1989 -- has been quietly working out, pointing to a return.
"She's been training for four months," said her Boston-based agent, BOB WOOLF .
"But it's not for the sprints and it's not for the '92 Olympics. She's training for the '96 Olympic marathon."


Cuomo Medicaid Plan Stirs Cautious Reaction
New York City officials and the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation reacted cautiously today to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal for a state Medicaid takeover, warning that the financial help might not come soon enough for the city and that the Legislature could prove a serious obstacle.
But state officials responded that the Medicaid plan was only feasible as a long-term strategy.
And they expressed frustration, as they have in the past, that the city was continuing to look to the state for a bailout when the state has severe fiscal problems of its own.
Taxing Authority
As part of a plan for state aid to the city, Mr.
Cuomo has suggested that the state assume the share of Medicaid costs currently paid by New York City and other local governments.
In exchange, local governments would cede existing taxing authority to the state.


Redskins' Start Is Best Since 1986
Two football teams heading in completely different directions crossed paths here today, and both continued on course.
The Washington Redskins (4-0) withstood a fierce second-half rally by the Cincinnati Bengals (0-4) and won, 34-27.
The victory increased the Redskins' soaring confidence and the loss sent the Bengals, who scored 17 straight points in one stretch this afternoon, spiraling deeper into an abyss they seem incapable of climbing out of.


South's New Blacks Find Comfort Laced With Strain
Two and a half years ago, when life in Los Angeles became too stressful, Delores Watson moved back to her hometown more than 2,000 miles away to go into business and start a new life.
Over the years her family had operated the small town's only black funeral home, a restaurant and a barber shop, but she and her husband, Rodney, had two teen-age children to raise as well.
And raising them here in Saluda, even against a backdrop of racial prejudice, seemed a bargain when compared with the gang problem and the drugs that had begun to penetrate the black upper-middle-class enclave where they lived.


Jets-Bears: Get Set for the Big-Play Era
The way Coach Bruce Coslet of the Jets sees his team's encounter with the Bears at Soldier Field in Chicago tonight, the outcome will turn on five or six plays.
Those plays will probably be big plays, defined as runs of 15 yards or better and passes of 20 yards or more.
In that department, the Bears (3-0) have a clear advantage.


The Pirates Find a Way To Bottle Their Success
The Pittsburgh Pirates are starting the 1990's the way they played in the 1970's.
The Pirates dominated the National League East in the 70's, winning 6 of the 10 division championships, and now they have finished first in each of the first two years of this decade.
In clinching the division title yesterday with a 2-1 victory over Philadelphia, the Pirates became the first National League team to win successive division titles since the Phillies and the Los Angeles Dodgers won in 1977 and '78.
Since 1978, every team in each division has finished first at least once, but no one could do it two years in a row.


U.S. Team Is Starting to Feel the Heat and the Call of the Ryder Cup
Of all golf's great events, none sends a ripple through the game quite like the Ryder Cup, which begins Friday at the Ocean Course on Kiawah Island in South Carolina.
In the last decade, the once-obscure biennial matches have come to determine much more than whether a 12-man team from the United States is better than a 12-man team from Europe over three days of 18-hole matches.


TV Report Links Levine To Scheme
The CBS News program "60 Minutes" reported last night that Dennis B. Levine, a central figure in Wall Street's insider-trading scandals of the 1980's, had introduced clients of his current consulting business to con men to help them in financial deals.
Mr.
Levine set up his own financial consulting firm after he completed a two-year sentence for securities fraud in September 1988.
All of the financial dealings described in the "60 Minutes" report involved three clients of his new firm.
The report said he had accepted tens of thousands of dollars from these clients in the last two years for introducing them to lenders and verifying that they were legitimate businessmen.


Essay; Leahy's Compromise
George Bush is on the verge of a Pyrrhic victory.
He picked a fight with Israel just before a peace conference, demanding that loan guarantees to Soviet refugees be again delayed, giving him a lever to force Israel to freeze settlements and in effect hand over the West Bank.
He knows his veto would be sustained in Congress, as all others have.
He has Washington Post and New York Times editorialists behind him.
In a test of strength, he would humiliate Israel and its American supporters, delighting Arab despots.


Clarke Offering a Defense Of Record as Comptroller
With his nomination to another term as one of the nation's top banking regulators in jeopardy, Robert L. Clarke today defended his record of five and a half years as the Comptroller of the Currency and vowed to increase supervision of banks if he is confirmed.
In a letter to the head of the House Banking Committee today and in remarks he released that are to be delivered on Monday before an industry group, Mr.
Clarke said his agency would be hiring 300 examiners in the next two years, the equivalent of increasing its field force by about 15 percent, and would also conduct examinations of small banks more frequently.


Don't Deform Bank Reform
The urgency rises: The Federal fund that pays off depositors when banks fail is running dry.
But before refilling it, Congress must be sure it springs no more leaks.
The Bush Administration's bank reform plan would do the job, but now it is threatened by two challenges.
The first, a proposal by Representative Charles Schumer of New York to create so-called "core banks," is useful, though overreaching.
But the second -- backed by John Dingell, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee -- is destructive and threatens to deform reform.


Poland Arrests Ex-Top Banker
The dismissed president of Poland's central bank has been arrested in connection with a scandal in which seven senior bankers are being held, the official PAP press agency has reported.
Grzegorz Wojtowicz was dismissed as president of the National Bank of Poland on Aug. 31.
He was accused of failing to properly supervise seven bankers, including his first deputy, who were arrested for issuing unsecured credit guarantees of up to $450 million.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTINE BICKNELL met RAISA M. GORBACHEV for brief seconds on a receiving line at the Wellesley College commencement last year, and she assumed that their lives would never again intersect.
On Thursday Ms.
Bicknell, who now works for the teamsters' union in Washington, was astounded to learn that she has been quoted in Mrs.
Gorbachev's newly published autobiography, "I Hope: Reminiscences and Reflections."


Let's Not Stop Electing Civil Court Judges
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 7 editorial on New York City Civil Court elections states that those who oppose nonpartisan merit appointment tend to wax eloquent about democracy and the value of letting voters pick judges.
You then state "But that's not the way it works in reality." Quite true.
But I suggest that nonpartisan merit appointment is also not the way it works.


Kurds Release 5 Westerners, Including Seekers of the Ark
Five Westerners, including four archeologists who had been seeking Noah's Ark, savored their freedom today at a United States air base in southern Turkey after being held by Kurdish rebels for three weeks.
The five men -- three Americans, a Briton and an Australian, all in their 50's -- telephoned their families and ate an American-style meal after arriving at the Incirlik base from eastern Turkey on Saturday night, said a base spokesman, Maj.
Michael McKinney.


New Devil Is a Surprise but Not Named Stevens
The face of the Devils changed some more today with the sudden arrival of Valery Zelepukhin from Moscow and Stephane Richer and Tom Chorske from Montreal.
While the presence of Richer and Chorske, who were obtained from the Canadiens in Friday night's trade for Kirk Muller and Roland Melanson, was expected, the other Devils were not expecting Zelepukhin.


Weak Outlook for Fall Could Spur Cut in Rates
The beginning of fall is often accompanied by a quickening economic pace.
This year may be different.
To a number of analysts, the economy is entering the final quarter of the year with less momentum than was visible when summer began.


U.S. Aid to Israel: $77 Billion Since '67
The controversy over Israel's request for $10 billion in United States loan guarantees has focused wide attention on a large-scale but little-understood American aid effort that since 1967 has totaled at least $77 billion -- $16,500 for each Israeli citizen -- when adjusted for inflation.
American aid to Israel may actually be larger than that, since it consists not only of the well-known grants and loans that prop up the Israeli economy and bolster its military, but also seldom-noticed indirect assistance.
This includes such items as huge transfers of surplus military equipment, subsidies for Israel's foreign aid program and assistance to refugees arriving from the Soviet Union, State Department and Congressional officials say.


Dance Group Refuses to Return U.S. Arts Funds
In the latest in a flurry of conflicts involving the National Endowment for the Arts, a small but critically respected New York City dance and performance-art group says it has decided not to return part of a $4,400 grant as the Federal agency has demanded.
The endowment demanded that the group, Movement Research, return the money after the group published a 20-page magazine including articles and photographs exploring the social and sexual lives of transsexuals, transvestites and others of unconventional sexual orientation.


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Gets Armor All Work
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, has been awarded the $10 million account of the Armor All Products Corporation, Aliso Viejo, Calif.
Armor All markets a variety of car-care products sold under brand names including Armor All and Rain Dance.
A spokesman for Foote, Cone said the review for the account included the incumbent agency, Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, and two other Los Angeles-area shops, Chiat/Day/ Mojo and Rubin Postaer &amp; Associates.


Caroline Moore Chambers Is Wed
Caroline Moore Chambers and Gene Kimmelman were married yesterday in the Lloyd Neck, L.I., home of the bride's maternal grandmother, Mrs.
George C. Barclay.
Rabbi Victor Rashkovsky officiated.


A 'Pause' That Vanished In the War of Theatrics
Around noon today, Branko Glavas, a military commander in eastern Croatia, reckoned that "a certain pause" had settled on Yugoslavia's civil war.
His uniform was a bright blue track-suit top, camouflage pants and a gold crucifix.
The Croat signed orders, drank coffee and smoked cigarettes continuously.
Near his office, incongruously, an outdoor Sunday flea market made a show of modest bustle.
Less than 90 minutes later, shells dropped over the Drava River, a sugar refinery blazed, the market folded its stall, and, as one projectile hit somewhere near the city center, a visitor was told that he could, if he wanted, avail himself of a bomb shelter as some people have been doing every night for the last two months.


Zeke and the Guys Get P.R. Pointers
Facing the unpleasant possibility that the 1990 LISA OLSON case -- in which Olson, a female reporter was sexually harassed by members of the New England Patriots -- may be a mirror of how other players perceive women in the locker room, the National Football League has tried to make the athletes more sensitive to the news media.
Every player has received an audio cassette tape detailing how to act during an interview.
The players also have a vest-pocket card for "emergencies" (like a middle-of-the-night phone interview).
The kit was prepared by a media specialist, KATHLEEN HESSERT .
Her do's include: "Praise teammates. -- Every great running back needs a good offensive line." A key don't: "Don't talk big bucks -- Sports is big business. Don't encourage talk of the large sums of money. The average fan does not identify with million-dollar payouts."


Ms. Geller Wed To D. H. Lesser
Danielle Caroline Geller, who is to become an associate next month at the law firm of Morrison Cohen Singer &amp; Weinstein, was married yesterday to David Harris Lesser, an investment banker at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, both in New Tork.
Rabbi Malcolm Thomson officiated at the Metropolitan Club.


300 People of Letters Come To Pulitzer's Birthday Party
This is one of those stories that cry out for the five W's.
The Who was more than 300 reporters, editors, photographers, cartoonists, authors, playwrights, poets and composers -- all Pulitzer Prize winners.
The What was a 75-minute ceremony and a reception that featured two pianists playing tunes from "Of Thee I Sing," "A Chorus Line," "Sunday in the Park With George" and "Oklahoma!" -- all Pulitzer Prize winners, too.
The Where was Columbia University, first in the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater and later under a tent on the campus's South Field.
The When was yesterday.


Kelly to Jackie and on to the Coop
With baseball's pennant races in full swing, imagine a team with GENE KELLY and JACKIE ROBINSON as the table-setters.
Why not?
In the movies, anything can happen.
What if they picked an all-star team of baseball players from film history?
Premiere magazine tries it in its October issue.


Rodeo Animals Suffer More Than Cowboys
To the Editor:
Re "Boom Times for Rodeo, Broken Bones and All" (front page, Sept. 8): I cannot sympathize with the "low pay and broken bones" of rodeo cowboys, who have chosen this so-called profession, in light of the injuries and trauma sustained by the animals, who have no voice in their sufferings in the name of entertainment.


San Franciscans to Vote For the Sake of Children
Crystal Stermer used to live on the streets of San Francisco.
Her father was a heroin addict and her mother a prostitute, and the little girl spent many nights alone, crouched in a doorway while her parents hustled money and spent it on drugs.
Now the 8-year-old child has an adopted family, a ruffled bedroom and a starring role in a video about the sorrows of urban youngsters, who childrens' advocates here say have been ignored by lawmakers and need the protection of an amendment to the City Charter.


French Plan to Aid Soviets Goes Awry
To the Editor:
"No French Doors to Eastern Europe" (editorial, Sept. 11) distorts the French position on relations between the European Community and Eastern Europe.


Israel Protests, but Library Opens Access to Scrolls
Israeli Government officials warned a major American library today against going ahead with a decision to make photographs of the Dead Sea Scrolls available to all researchers without restriction.
The Israelis said that the Huntington Library in San Marino, Calif., a suburb of Los Angeles, would be violating longstanding agreements if it carried out its plan.
But within hours of the warning, the library opened the collection, declaring its action a blow for academic freedom.


NEW LAW TO BRING WIDER JOB RIGHTS FOR MENTALLY ILL
A Federal law that takes effect in July will provide far-reaching employment rights to the mentally ill, requiring most businesses to alter hiring practices and workplace conditions.
Psychologists and Government officials say they expect the law and the recently issued regulations explaining it to diminish the stigma of mental illness and reduce discrimination involving millions of Americans.
At least 60 million Americans between the ages of 18 and 64 will experience a mental disorder during their lifetimes, Government economists say.


Safety and Solo Patrols
New York City police unions accuse the Dinkins administration of putting budgets before safety with a decision to field one-officer patrol cars.
Whose safety?
The plan poses only a marginal threat to officers' safety, while the contribution to public safety could be substantial.
Contract arbitration a decade ago gave the city the right to assign only one officer to a car.
But the Police Department agreed not to use single-officer cars unless precinct staffing permitted a sufficient level of two-officer patrol cars as well.
The idea was to guarantee enough two-officer cars to handle the more dangerous calls.


Houston Run-and-Shoot Appears Shot
Before the start of the 1991 college football season, Houston and its head coach, John Jenkins, were featured in nearly every sports publication because of their wave-of-the-future, pass-oriented offense.
One magazine showed Jenkins using a paper shredder to get rid of diagrams of his run-and-shoot plays, a move to guard against theft.
But in the wake of the second straight shellacking of the Cougars, perhaps Jenkins should simply trash the run-and-shoot.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A new law will provide far-reaching employment rights to the mentally ill, requiring most businesses to alter hiring practices and workplace conditions when it takes effect in July.
Psychologists and Government officials say they expect the Federal law and regulations explaining it to diminish the stigma of mental illness and reduce discrimination involving millions of Americans.
But companies are only beginning to recognize the implications.  [ Page A1. ]


Abroad at Home; Power and Pettiness
One of the mysteries of government is why those who have official power try so often to extend it in unnecessary directions.
In doing so they may be distracted from their real problems, they may run into controversy, but still they press on.
An example is at hand here in San Francisco: a petty one, and the more telling for its pettiness.
It involves officials of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, one of their inmates and The San Francisco Chronicle.
The inmate is Dannie Martin, a bank robber.
In 1986 he sent The Chronicle an article about life in the Federal penitentiary in Lompoc, Calif.
The paper edited it, put his byline on and used the piece in its Sunday Punch feature section.


Question Box
DiMaggio Minus Streak
Q.
After Joe DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak was stopped in July
1941, he followed with a 16-game hitting streak, so that he hit safely in 72 of 73 games.
DiMaggio played in 139 games that season.
In how many of the
66 other games did he get a hit, and was his percentage of games hitting safely the highest for one season?


ARMENIA YIELDING CLAIM ON ENCLAVE
Armenia has agreed to renounce any claim to a territory at the heart of its dispute with neighboring Azerbaijan and to enter formal negotiations on the issue on Monday, in an attempt to end the Soviet Union's fiercest and longest-running civil conflict, officials said here today.
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic announced the plan for a peace conference over the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh on a stop in the Armenian capital after a remarkable weekend of shuttle diplomacy that included a helicopter visit today to the hazardous region.


Just a Bunch of Guys in Blue: Ordinary Giants Even Record
In the first half this afternoon, the Giants, despite their fumbles, looked like world-beaters.
They held the Cleveland Browns to two first downs and 27 yards in total offense, and the Giants' 13-0 halftime lead looked like gold.
In the second half, the gold became tarnished.
The Giants' offense stalled, the defense showed occasional cracks and the special teams were overly generous.


Agassi Wins a Big One for U.S.
It was a flash finale, down to the wire, with the United States Davis Cup team's chances of reaching the final resting atop the unpredictable shoulders of Andre Agassi, the showman with a history of being unable to curtail his stage fright in pressure scenarios.
Today at Kemper Arena in the fifth and deciding match of this Davis Cup semifinal, Agassi had to defeat Germany's Carl-Uwe Steeb, a stubborn baseliner who had upset him in both previous encounters, one a humiliating loss in the deciding match of the semifinals two years ago in Munich.
But this time Agassi achieved his revenge, and secured his nation's ticket to the final round, by trampling the German, 6-2, 6-2, 6-3.


Why Homeless Families Are in Hotels Again
To the Editor:
"A Hotel Is Not a Home" (editorial, Sept. 1) correctly sounds the alarm that "the homeless problem is getting worse, not better," as government programs continue to fail at all levels.
While Sept. 30 is indeed a critical date for changing the way New York City shelters the growing number of homeless families, it is not a deadline for ending the use of hotels entirely (the court orders you mention apply only to substandard hotel rooms), but is mandated by the City Council for ending the use of dormitory shelters for more than 650 families -- generally far worse places for young children than commercial hotels.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League  LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Waived Doug Lloyd, running back, from the practice squad.
Activated Marcus Wilson, running back, from the practice squad.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Placed Ferrell Edmunds, tight end, on injured reserve.
Activated Charles Henry, tight end, from the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  DEVILS -- Signed Valeri Zelepukhin, right wing.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Traded Rod Brind'Amour and Dan Quinn, centers, to the Philadelphia Flyers for Ron Sutter, center, and Murray Baron, defenseman.


Police Trainee Dies After Finishing Running Test
A New York City probationary police officer collapsed and died yesterday after finishing a final running test to qualify for the force.
He was the second probationary officer to die this year.
A Police Department spokesman, Sgt.
Edward Burns, said the officer, Neil McGroary, 28 years old, of Queens, was immediately given cardiopulmonary and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation by two fellow probationary officers after collapsing on the pathway along the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive at 14th Street yesterday afternoon, but he never regained consciousness.
Mr.
McGroary was taken by ambulance to Bellevue Hospital, just blocks away, where he was pronounced dead on arrival shortly before 3 P.M.


Graham Preaches to Vast Crowd in Central Park


Cynthia Eve Rapport Has Wedding
Cynthia Eve Rapport and John Guy Barrett Jr. were married yesterday at the Sagaponack, L.I., home of Michael D. Barrett, the bridegroom's uncle, by the Rev.
Eugene Prior, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Mayer W. Selekman.


Wendy Krupnik Has a Wedding
Wendy Michelle Krupnik, a product manager in marketing for Avon Products, was married yesterday to Andrew Joel Melnick, an associate in the law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler, both in New York.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer and the Rev.
Salvatore Umana, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y.


Backer Spielvogel Wins U.S. Recruiting Account
The joint recruitment advertising account of the United States Armed Forces has been awarded to Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, after being held by Grey Advertising, New York, for the last 11 years.
The account, formally known as the Joint Recruiting Advertising Program, is reviewed every five years by the Defense Department's Defense Supply Service-Washington.
A contract is awarded for a year, with four one-year renewal options.


A Fall Migration to the Networks
The first week of the new television season did not solve all the problems that have afflicted the three big broadcast networks over the last several years, but it almost certainly postponed any orders for "going out of business" signs.
Audiences returned to network prime-time programs last week in numbers that were sharply higher than those as recent as the week before.
Network executives called this encouraging evidence that viewers still look to the networks for new fall entertainment.


SALVADORAN TALKS TACKLE ROADBLOCK
President Alfredo F. Cristiani and commanders of his country's guerrilla insurgency held intensive talks Sunday and early today on the main issue blocking an end to El Salvador's 11-year-old civil war.
When talks broke up at 1:45 A.M. today, diplomats at the United Nations appeared to be moving toward resolution of the issue, the demand by the guerrillas -- steadfastly rejected by the Government -- that some of them be incorporated into the armed forces as a means of assuring their personal safety after the cease-fire.


The Mosaic and the Melting Pot
"Was Cleopatra black?" That question, posed recently on the cover of Newsweek, encapsulates the raging debate over multicultural education in America.
Mainstream academicians say the movement mangles history.
Aggrieved minorities and women claim that history texts are full of glaring omissions, cultural stereotypes and misrepresentations of their histories.
These accusations ring true to me as an African-American.
I grew up in the District of Columbia and am old enough to have attended segregated schools and witnessed the onset of integration.
In the newly integrated schools of the 1950's, we were taught one version of the Civil War -- the Southern version.
Of course, there was another version of the war that we weren't taught.
And those contrasting versions clearly were the product of conscious decisions by historians, textbook publishers and school teachers.


Bankruptcy for Pay N Pak
Pay N Pak Stores Inc., an operator of home-improvement stores in 14 Western states, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors over the weekend.
The company said it had planned to continue operating and that it had arranged for $100 million in new financing from banks led by the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company.


Dividend Meetings


Review/Music  Rameau's Baroque 'Temple De la Gloire'
With Mahler and Vivaldi now securely ensconced in the repertory, it is time another worthy composer or two from the past were brought to the fore.
One who merits a closer look is Jean-Philippe Rameau (1683-1764).
A musical theorist attuned to the ideals of the French Enlightenment, Rameau was also a composer of genius and vivid imagination.
But the highly evolved conventions of the French Baroque add a whole set of problems to the normal ones encountered in music of the period.
Rameau's stage works, for example, make lavish and integral use of ballet, and the re-creation of early dance is perhaps even more conjectural than is that of early musical performance.


Review/City Opera; In Erich Korngold's 'Tote Stadt,' An Obsession With a Dead Wife
That was, in fact, the peculiar plot of this 1920 Viennese opera, which seemed, in the spirit of early Expressionist cinema, to contain a bit of everything: Freudian symbolism, necrophilia, a Salome-like dance with the snakelike braid, jealous rivalry between close friends, fantasy sequences and the exotic setting of the ruined medieval city of Bruges with its decaying churches and grotesque gargoyles.
It even possessed, at the time of its composition, a popularity later reserved for Hollywood hits.
Within two years of its premiere, 80 European productions had been mounted; Maria Jeritza chose it as a vehicle for her Metropolitan Opera debut in 1921.


Quarterbacks at Helm in Ivy League
Of the Ivy League's seven new quarterbacks making their first starts, three came through impressively Saturday; two others certainly met expectations, and there might be some doubt about the last two.
Princeton's Chad Roghair and Harvard's Mike Giardi were best in leading their teams to victories, the Tigers over Cornell, 18-0, and the Crimson over Columbia, 21-16.


Helen Train Wed to Paul Klebnikov
Helen Train, the executive assistant to the president of the Battery Park City Authority, and Paul Klebnikov, a reporter for Forbes magazine, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Russian Orthodox Cathedral of Our Lady of the Sign in New York.
Bishop Hilarion performed the ceremony.


Sports of The Times; Will This Be L.T.'s Last Season?
LAWRENCE TAYLOR dropped the words as if he had dropped his helmet on the blue carpet in the Giants' locker room.
With a soft thud.
After yesterday's 13-10 victory over the Cleveland Browns, the 32-year-old linebacker was talking about how "we're going in the right direction."


Optimism Buoys 46th U.N. Assembly
President Bush and other leaders are to gather here on Monday for the opening debate in the 46th General Assembly at an encouraging moment in international affairs, with the United Nations poised to tackle new crises like the Yugoslav civil war while also working to resolve older conflicts in Cambodia, Western Sahara and El Salvador.


4 Issues in This Week's Treasury Auctions
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week includes an offering of $13 billion worth of two-year notes tomorrow and $9.25 billion worth of five-year notes on Wednesday.
Also, the Treasury will hold its regular weekly offering of three- and six-month bills today, totaling $21.2 billion, the same amount as a week ago.
By late in the day on Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.19 percent, and the six-month bill was at 5.24 percent.


New York Hears Words of Hope From Billy Graham
The Rev.
Billy Graham, America's elder statesman of evangelism, brought his crusade of love and redemption to a vast diverse throng in New York's sun-flooded Central Park yesterday, delivering a message of hope for a city he had once compared to Sodom and Gomorrah.
In an idyllic lake-and-castle setting, with a backdrop of trees and majestic skyscrapers and a crowd estimated by the police at 250,000 spread out before him on the park's Great Lawn, the durable 72-year-old dean of evangelists stayed away from the negative themes of his last crusade in New York 21 years ago and sounded a call for renewal in a city burdened by crime, drugs, AIDS and homelessness.


Review/Dance; A Potpourri of Works By a Passel of Performers
Ballet Inc., an organization directed by Andrew Shiva and Charles Anderson, deserves praise for assembling attractive casts to perform new ballets.
Young dancers from several fine schools and companies took part in the program that Ballet Inc. offered Saturday night at the Triplex Theater.
Yet, whereas the evening's ballets always had polished surfaces, they sometimes lacked choreographic depth.
The most memorable piece was also the oldest.
"To Vernon," a solo to recorded music by Judith Landers that David Anderson choreographed in 1975, honored the memory of a friend who committed suicide by drowning.
Given a poignant interpretation by the choreographer's son, Charles Anderson, a member of the New York City Ballet, it emphasized gestures that suggested swimming through space.
At last the drowning man stretched his arms, first in longing and despair, and then in wild irrational exaltation.


Miss Block Marries
Wendy Ellen Block, the manager of domestic retail jewelry merchandising at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Andrew Charles Lipka, an ophthalmologist in Princeton, N.J.
Rabbi Eric Wisnia officiated at the Hollywood Golf Club in Deal, N.J.
Mrs.
Lipka, 32 years old, graduated from Tufts University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham E. Block of Holmdel, N.J.
A graduate of Yale University with a medical degree from Yeshiva University, Dr.
Lipka, 35, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David H. Lipka of New York.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.


Leaving Subic Could Be a Blessing
What the eruption of Mount Pinatubo did to Clark Air Base, the Philippine Senate may do to Subic Bay Naval Station: push Americans out.
The Senate voted not to ratify a 10-year extension of the U.S. lease on Subic Bay.
President Corazon Aquino is seeking to overturn the vote by referendum.
If she fails, the U.S. would be right to leave.
The base is now little more than a convenience.
Indeed, the potential departure of Americans from Subic Bay gives Defense Secretary Dick Cheney a much-needed opportunity to rethink U.S. naval deployments in the Pacific and convert a temporary inconvenience into long-term savings.
Some naval presence is surely required to secure U.S. interests.
But the retreat of Soviet power argues for reducing it.


Bridge
Most experts have been tournament players throughout their bridge lives, but a minority served a hard apprenticeship at the rubber bridge tables, playing in clubs for meaningful stakes.
The latter have the card-playing ability to create upsets when they move to the duplicate arena, and one of them did during the Greater New York Bridge Association's Triathlon at the Werner Erhard Center, at Fifth Avenue and 38th Street, over the weekend.
Derek Gale, an Englishman who lives in Jersey City, recently grew tired of a plethora of bad cards at the Midway Club in Forest Hills, Queens.
Guided by Michael Benjamin, who teaches and directs at the Culbertson Club, at 24 Fifth Avenue, he promptly made his mark in the tournament world as the individual winner in the triathlon at the end of three sessions.


Disabled People Gain Roles in Ads and on TV
NBC could easily have promoted the premiere of "Reasonable Doubts" as a  recedent-setting event in the struggle of disabled Americans to enter mainstream society.
The series, which makes its debut Friday at 10 P.M., Eastern time, arguably breaks new ground by featuring a deaf actor, Marlee Matlin, who plays an assistant district attorney and delivers some lines in sign language.
The plots of each episode -- the prosecution of criminals and romance with Mark Harmon, the co-star -- have little to do with disability.


World Economies


San Diego Daily Fades as Market Outgrows It
The letters in Neil Morgan's mailbox come from all over California, expressing dismay over the loss of an "old friend."
Mr.
Morgan, the editor of the soon-to-be-closed San Diego Tribune read one aloud in his office: "I'm sorry I wrote some critical and not-nice remarks to your paper some months ago. But The Tribune, to me, was the very best publication always. And who has time to read a morning paper?"


Insurance Reform in a Deadlock
Despite widespread agreement that the auto insurance system is in dire need of reform in many states, most revamping efforts remain stalled or ineffective, forcing drivers to pay ever-higher rates and insurers to grapple with escalating legal, medical and car-repair costs.
The announcement last week by the Allstate Insurance Company that it planned to stop doing business in New Jersey, where it is the largest auto insurer, was the latest example of the confusion and frustration building around the issue in some populous states.


V.O.A. Official Hurt As Car Is Rammed
The head of the Voice of America's Albanian service says he, his wife and two Albanian newspaper editors were injured in an automobile crash near the Albanian capital last week after their car was rammed in an apparent attack by remnants of the former Communist Government.
In a telephone interview, the journalist, Elez Biberaj, said the automobile in which he was a passenger was rammed once from behind and then sideswiped repeatedly by an unmarked car on Wednesday, causing their vehicle to overturn and land upside down in a ditch on the outskirts of the town of Fush-Kruje.


Review/Television; Questions Abound In the Case Of Noriega
CNN's busy special assignment branch has come up with a report on America's dealings with Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega that is not likely to add to the foreign policy luster of the Reagan-Bush Administration.
"The General's Price: The Full Story," which was first shown about a week ago, can be seen beginning tonight in four installments of about 15 minutes each on the cable channel's 6 P.M. news program.
It is more solid than the fare usually provided by the competing local news shows.
Timed to coincide with the Miami drug trial of the former Panamanian strongman, the program goes back to the years when, as the evening's reporter, John Camp, recalls, General Noriega was considered "Washington's man in Panama." He was courted by American intelligence services despite suspicions that he was chronically corrupt.
Richard M. Helms, a former Director of Central Intelligence, puts it pithily: "He's a bum." The pictures of General Noriega, which serve as a backdrop to much of the report, make him look like the heavy in a B movie.


Official Tally of Council Election Starts
Officials at the New York City Board of Elections will break the seals on voting machines today to begin an official tally of the City Council races, kicking off a frenetic, last-ditch scramble by the apparent losers in several close races to pull out a victory.
Even though the polls closed 10 days ago, the battle for election has just begun in at least nine races where candidates were separated by a handful of votes.
The contests will be carried out in the bowels of the city's Board of Elections warehouses, where candidates will scour the records and the voting machines for evidence of irregularities and fight over the validity of hundreds of absentee and emergency ballots, under the scrutiny of election officials and the police.


Cronyn Writes of Faults But Only if They're His
"I'm so familiar with guilt," says Hume Cronyn.


Tour by Japanese Emperor
Emperor Akihito will seek to lay to rest bitter wartime memories of Japan's brutal military rule over southeast Asia this week during the first visit by a Japanese emperor to the region.
The Emperor, accompanied by Empress Michiko, is to arrive on Thursday in Thailand, the first stop of an 11-day official tour that will include visits to Malaysia and Indonesia.
It will be Akihito's first trip abroad since his accession to the throne in January 1989 after the death of his father, Hirohito.


At Columbia Pictures, Turmoil Over Top Job Yields a Peek at Power
Frank Price, besieged by rumors that he is being ousted as the chairman of Columbia Pictures, broke into a loud laugh the other day when he was asked if it was difficult to work in Hollywood.
"It's not difficult at all if you like playing poker," he said.
"And I like poker."
Mr.
Price is locked in a high-stakes poker game involving his own career and job, one of the most powerful in the film industry.
The game has drawn some of the biggest players in town, including Mr.
Price's boss, Peter Guber, the chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment, and Michael Ovitz, the powerful agent and deal maker who heads the Creative Artists Agency.


Amy Cozewith, Planner, Weds
Amy Louise Cozewith, a director of strategic planning for American Express Travel Related Services, and Kenneth Bruce Giddon, president of Rothmans, a men's clothing store, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Howard Greenstein officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill, caterers in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Potvin and Bossy Make the Rounds
DENIS POTVIN and MIKE BOSSY , one the Islanders' greatest defenseman and the other their finest goal-scorer, will be honored at least twice this year.
First, they are to be inducted today in Ottawa for the Hockey Hall of Fame, which is in Toronto.
Then the Islanders plan to hold special nights for the players, presumably retiring Bossy's "22" and Potvin's "5." . . .
If you ever kept a scrapbook of TED WILLIAMS , and lost it, don't despair.
"Ted Williams: The Seasons of the Kid," by RICHARD BEN CRAMER , is being published Sept. 30 by Simon &amp; Schuster.
The book includes his trading cards, cigarette ads, stories and photos.


Beware of Gridlock
The New York City Department of Transportation has issued a gridlock alert for today and tomorrow for the opening of the United Nations General Assembly and President Bush's visit to the city.
Motorists are urged to use public transportation.
The following streets will be affected:
1.
Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive north between South Ferry and 42d Street will be closed from late this morning into early afternoon.
2.
The 42d Street entrance and exit of the F.D.R.
Drive will be closed from this morning until early this evening.
3.
First Avenue between 34th and 50th Streets will be closed late this morning throught early evening.
4.
No traffic will be allowwed east of Second Avenue between 40th and 50th Streets beginning midmorning and continuing into the late afternoon.
5.
From late Monday morning until early tomorrow evening, 50th Street will be closed between Lexington and Park Avenues.
6.
All construction work will be suspended on streets between 42d Street and 47th Street between First Avenue and Madison Avenue.
Parking alert: Because of Succoth, the Jewish holiday, alternate side parking rules will be suspended today and tomorrow.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Amy Birnbaum Weds
Amy Greer Birnbaum, a lawyer, and Andrew Heath, an assistant district attorney for Westchester County, were married yesterday at the Sunningdale Country Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Dr.
Thomas Looney, the leader of the Westchester County Ethical Culture Society, officiated.


Quotation of the Day
"There are patterns that are very comforting here. It's like the smell of fresh-washed sheets and bacon frying in the morning. These are verities and they are reassuring for me." Phoebe Benson of Columbia, S.C., one of many American blacks who have moved back to the South.  [ B10:3. ]


Reporter's Notebook; Democrats Review Presidential Bids, Vowing to Avoid the Losers' Mistakes
The ghost of elections past always stalks the hallways of Democratic National Committee meetings, and it was there this weekend -- lurking in the speeches, the slide presentations, and the black humor in the bars and lobbies of the grand old Biltmore Hotel, where the committee gathered for its fall meeting.
Implicit or explicit, the message from many of the candidates here was simple: I will not make the mistakes that the failed nominees have made.
This helps explain why so many of them seem so eager to pummel President Bush, after watching Michael S. Dukakis, their most recent nominee, take so many body blows, so passively, in 1988.


Why Homeless Families Are in Hotels Again; Shameful Dearth
To the Editor:
A few years ago, the legions of families living doubled up with relatives in tiny apartments were referred to as the hidden homeless.
Now, it seems, we should consider such families adequately housed -- even if they are, like the ones in your Sept. 4 front-page article, living nine to a room or two, not counting infants.


Trusting God to Heal Mother, Family Kept Her Body in Bed
Blanche Riley died 18 months ago at the age of 56.
But the family that she ruled as a religious matriarch believed her prediction that God would cure and awaken her.
And so her children kept her body in the bed of the East Flatbush home where she died in March 1990 until the police discovered it there Saturday.


Susan Cohn and Stuart Boros Wed in California
Susan Cohn, a third-year law student at the University of California at Davis, and Stuart A. Boros, a senior vice president of Dino DeLaurentiis Communications in Los Angeles, were married yesterday in their home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Rabbi Philip Nadell officiated.


U.S. Urging Economic Talks
The United States is pressing for an early meeting of economic policy makers from the Group of Seven industrial nations to discuss the plight of the Soviet Union, American officials said today.
The seven countries were already planning to meet in Bangkok in mid-October.
But the officials said Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady wanted an earlier meeting, to be devoted exclusively to the Soviet situation.


CHRONICLE
The July engagement of DONALD TRUMP, the real-estate developer, and MARLA MAPLES, a former Georgia beauty queen, has been called off.
While Ms.
Maples still has the 7.45-carat diamond engagement ring, both say they are moving in other directions.


A Brooklyn G.O.P. Race the Democrats Are Watching
Few people usually care who is elected county chairman of the splintered Republican Party in overwhelmingly Democratic Brooklyn.
But this year, the vote could be pivotal to David N. Dinkins and two who hope to seek to unseat him as Mayor in 1993: Andrew J. Stein and Rudolph W. Giuliani.
The vote is the first high-stakes, if indirect, confrontation between Mr.
Giuliani, the 1989 Republican mayoral nominee, and Mr.
Stein, the Democratic City Council President, who hopes to fashion a fusion campaign for mayor in 1993.


Blacks See Bias Trend In Job Cuts
As big companies increasingly retrench, black professionals are becoming more concerned that they are being disproportionately hurt by widening layoffs and that their opportunities for advancement are becoming severely crippled.
At a convention of the National Black M.B.A.
Association that ended yesterday in New York, one black corporate manager after another expressed those concerns, saying that the recession had caused many black professionals to lose their jobs and re-evaluate the worth of life in corporate America.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazines; Seeking to Redefine Itself, Time Works on a Redesign
THERE is an old saw in the magazine industry that the death of every great magazine is preceded by a redesign.
A less well-articulated saying, however, is that many a magazine might still be around if someone had redesigned it before the death throes set in.
With that in mind, Time magazine is embarking on a big redesign -- although no one is suggesting that the 68-year-old publication is in danger of its life.
But in the fiercely competitive world of news, the players keep increasing, the level of play keeps getting better and standing still is tantamount to losing ground.


INSIDE
Israel and the Scrolls
Israeli officials sharply criticized the California library that has invited scholars to study its copy of the Dead Sea Scrolls.
Page A8.
Fragile Truce in Yugoslavia
On the third day of a sharp Yugoslav Army offensive against Croatia, the two sides agreed to a frail new cease-fire in their civil war.
Page A6.
Iraqi Meets With U.N.
Official
Iraq's Foreign Minister met with the President of the U.N.
Security Council, which has sought unconditional access for U.N. helicopters.
Page A3.


U.S. Agencies Use Negotiations To Pre-empt Lawsuits Over Rules
Washington, a city of lawsuits, is embracing a new way of doing business.
At stake are rules that govern everything from who may sit in the exit rows on airliners to how much a power plant can pollute.
More and more, Federal agencies are collaring industries and interest groups and getting them together to decide what the new rules will say.


L.I.R.R. Journal; A Trouble-Shooter Armed to Soothe
His picture looms large on the train station bulletin board, overwhelming the usual notices.
But he is neither a missing person nor one of Hicksville's 10 Most Wanted.
He is James Brady, branch line manager, trouble-shooter and walking punching bag for the Long Island Rail Road.
Mr.
Brady, dressed in a neat gray suit, his name emblazoned on his badge, was armed with some pamphlets and his good nature when he arrived full of vim at the Hicksville station at 7 A.M. one recent morning.
It was hard to determine why he seemed so cheerful, considering his job: helping to improve the image of a railroad that, along with the Long Island Lighting Company, is probably the most universally mistrusted institution on Long Island.


Morris Barely Gets His Feet on the Ground
He hadn't been in a regular-season game at Giants Stadium since 1988, and yes, Joe Morris admitted, "it was emotional for me getting ready."
"But once I came in," he went on, "it was another venue for me."


Red Sox, Just Short of First, Make a Wrong Lefty Turn
The groans were heard before Matt Young threw even one pitch.
His first warmup toss sailed off the backstop, and the Red Sox dreams of a victory and a share of first place suddenly seemed so bleak.
Young (3-7) pitches rarely and fails often so the fans who moaned when he trotted out for the 10th inning today were ardent students of his history.
The unreliable Young became more ignominious by surrendering two runs in a miserable display that helped lift the Yankees to a 7-5 victory at Fenway Park.


Guard Held in Killings
A security guard at a Long Island high school killed two unarmed young men and wounded three yesterday as they tried to flee after an argument, the police said.
They said the guard was on probation for weapons and drugs convictions and was not authorized to carry a gun.
Article, page B1.


For Mets, Out With The Old, In With Young
If you were looking for champagne toasts, teary-eyed celebrations and thoughts of championships dancing in one's head, Shea Stadium was not the place to be yesterday.
For that matter, if you were just looking for a victory for the home team, Shea wasn't the place to be, either.


A NEW CEASE-FIRE FOR YUGOSLAVIA
On the third day of a sharp Yugoslav Army offensive against the forces of secessionist Croatia, the two sides agreed today to a frail new cease-fire in yet another attempt to end the country's civil war.
The agreement came a day after federal army tanks shelled eastern garrisons and warplanes attacked the republic's Adriatic coast in the heaviest fighting since Croatia and Slovenia declared independence in June.


At 75, Mr. Peanut Is Getting Expanded Role at Planters
FOR the last few years, Mr.
Peanut has been an advertising character all dressed up with no place to go.
Now, the top-hatted, monocle-wearing dandy, the symbol of Planters nut products for 75 years, is taking a much larger part in the brand's marketing and promotional plans.
"This is his most active year we've had in our recent history," Cheryl Bachelder, vice president of marketing and business development for the Planters Life Savers Company, said in a telephone interview from her office in Winston-Salem, N.C.


Delay Seen Likely on Israel Aid Issue
The Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, predicted today that Congress would grant President Bush's request to impose a 120-day delay on the consideration of $10 billion in housing-loan guarantees for Israel.
The White House and Congressional leaders have said that Israel would receive the loan guarantees eventually, but Mr.
Mitchell said today that he would favor placing conditions on such aid that would depend on whether the correct "formula can be found that accommodates the interests of all concerned."


Gates's Winning Form; A More Human Tack and Better Fortune Bring Smoother Sailing for C.I.A. Nominee
Despite new evidence that Robert M. Gates had received fuller and earlier warnings of the Iran-contra affair than he previously acknowledged, a majority of the Senate committee sitting in judgment appears to believe he is the man to lead the intelligence community through the uncharted waters of the 1990's.
The Senate Intelligence Committee, which will resume its hearings Tuesday, will continue to cover the old ground of the arms-for-hostages scandal and to hear closed testimony from witnesses who both assert and deny that Mr.
Gates slanted intelligence analyses in his years at the Central Intelligence Agency.
But unless the committee uncovers some startling new evidence, it seems determined to approve him to head the agency.
Contributing to the positive, at times upbeat, atmosphere of the hearings is the peculiar composition of the committee, its weariness with the Iran-contra affair and its willingness to please a popular President.
But the biggest factor may have been Mr.
Gates's performance as a repentant, humble and dedicated public servant.


Was Reunion Rotten? Just Ask Belichick.
Bill Belichick looked like a beaten man today, and a very frustrated one.
After commenting on his Cleveland Browns' loss to the Giants, he picked up a package of plastic coffee cups and tossed them into a door.
Then he slammed the door on his way out.
Even the security guard looked nervous.
Belichick's first Giants Stadium news conference as a head coach was over.


Pepsi-Cola Is Trying a New Look
One of the world's most familiar corporate logos -- the design that Pepsi-Cola calls its "bull's-eye" -- is being changed, a company spokesman said last night.
The Pepsi-Cola Company, a unit of Pepsico Inc., is scheduled to announce today the first significant changes in its logos in 18 years, the spokesman, Andrew Giangola, said.


Albany's Foolish Shell Game
Easy credit is a dangerous thing, for New York State as well as its residents.
There's no better proof than the state's flagrant misuse of the State Insurance Fund.
Pressed for cash and eager to hide its financial woes, Albany has turned what is supposed to be an
insurer
of last resort into a captive
lender
of first resort.
The fund's 1990 report records in a footnote that Albany persuaded the fund's trustees last December to ante up $75 million in return for certain assets of the state and the Urban Development Corporation.
That's on top of the $1.3 billion the state has borrowed without interest from the fund since 1982.


Building on Mistrust of Officials, Voters in West Try to Limit Terms
The most severe term-limitation measure ever to go before a state's voters is under consideration in Washington State, where a proposal on the ballot this November would throw out the entire Congressional delegation three years after the vote.
It would end the legislative career of Speaker Thomas S. Foley and kill the chance that the state's popular Governor, Booth Gardner, could run for a third term in 1992.
The Washington initiative is part of a populist movement that has been spreading like a prairie fire, especially in the West.
Three states -- California, Colorado and Oklahoma -- adopted term limits in 1990, and backers are circulating petitions for statewide referendums in 1992 or later in every Western state but New Mexico and Hawaii.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-12
An ethnic dispute in the Soviet Union, between Armenia and Azerbaijan, appeared to be settled as Armenia agreed to renounce its claim to a disputed territory and enter formal negotiations on the issue.
Page A1
The Czar? Sverdlovsk keeps its secrets A12


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chase Manhattan Banking Corp., New York, plans to redeem on Oct. 17 its outstanding 6 1/4 percent debentures due in 1992 and its 8 1/2 percent debentures due in 1996.
The total amount involved is about $23 million.


CHRONICLE
The actress ROSEANNE ARNOLD said her parents sexually abused her when she was growing up, and as the memories recently came flooding back, she considered suicide, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"My name is Roseanne, and I'm an incest survivor, and this is the first time I've ever spoken about this with anyone other than my group, my husband and my children," Ms.
Arnold said.
The star of the ABC television show "Roseanne," Ms.
Arnold spoke on Saturday in Denver at a conference attended by more than 1,100 incest survivors, therapists and others.
"My mother molested me as a small child," said Ms.
Arnold, 38, who grew up in Salt Lake City.
"My father molested me all through my life."
Ms. Arnold's parents, Helen and Jerry Barr, could not be located yesterday for comment.


The Czar? Sverdlovsk Draws a Blank
Less than a year since it was officially opened to foreigners, this musty, muscular city still guards its secrets.
Nobody says that the Kalinin Factory made missiles.
Nobody says that biological weapons were produced here.
And no one admits to knowing the current whereabouts of skeletal remains that were unearthed in mid-July and that are assumed to be the remains of Nicholas II, the last Romanov Czar, and his family.


Why Homeless Families Are in Hotels Again; Traumatic Experience
To the Editor:
Your front-page report that New York City families are living in shelters as a route to better homes (Sept. 4) presents a distorted and misleading portrayal of the situation thousands of homeless families face.


Iraqis Said to Stall on U.N. Inspections
Iraq has apparently failed again to give the United Nations the unconditional freedom it is seeking to use helicopters to hunt for President Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction, diplomats said tonight.
They described Baghdad's reply to the Security Council's latest ultimatum as "disappointing" and said it appeared to fall short of the unconditional acceptance that the Council wants.


Carol Marie Verdirame Is Married
Carol Marie Verdirame, an executive officer in the United States commercial banking division of the Daiwa Bank Ltd. in New York, and Elan Gerstmann, a New York lawyer, were married yesterday at the Wyndham Alumnae House of Bryn Mawr College in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Cantor Paul B. Schwartz and the Rev.
John Freeman, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


A Medieval Happening in Upper Manhattan


Memorial for Tom Eyen
A memorial service for the playwright Tom Eyen will be held this afternoon at 3 o'clock at the St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street.
There will be readings from his plays as well as songs performed by original cast members of the musical "Dreamgirls," for which he wrote the book and lyrics.
Songs from two of his musical works in progress, "Kicks" and "Dangerous Music," will also be heard.
Mr.
Eyen died on May 26 at the age of 50.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about a strike by teachers in Little Ferry, N.J., misstated the expiration date of the teachers' contract.
It was June 1990.


Security in Jerusalem Is Tightened for Weeklong Holiday


Douglas Watters Married to Alice de Picciotto
Alice de Picciotto, a consultant on foreign mutual funds, and Douglas Watters, a director in New York for the accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, were married yesterday.
Robert M. Haft, a former acting State Supreme Court justice, officiated at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.


Special Mass Is Said for Victims of Social Club Fire


Paris Accuses Iranian in Killing of Shah's Premier
An Iranian businessman who has reportedly admitted having ties to Iran's intelligence services has been charged with criminal conspiracy as an accomplice in the killing of a prominent Iranian opposition leader, Shahpur Bakhtiar, and his secretary outside Paris last month.
The Iranian businessman, Massoud Hendi, is said to have helped the three suspected assassins, all Iranians, by getting two of them false visas to enter France and false Turkish passports to speed their escape.
One suspect, Ali Rad Vakili, was arrested on Aug. 21 near Geneva and has been charged with murder.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday Budget Deficit . . .
Aug.
Tuesday  Auto Sales . . .
Sept.
Wednesday Durable Goods . . .
Aug.
New-Home Sales . . .
Aug.
Thursday G.N.P. . . . 2d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Personal Income and Spending . . .
Aug.


Blunt Style of Preaching And a Message as Direct
The message was as clear as the blue sky above, as bracing and soothing as the breeze that cooled the vast congregation gathered on the Great Lawn of Central Park: "God loves New York, and He has not given up on this city because He does not give up on people."
"God has not abandoned us. We've abandoned him," the Rev.
Billy Graham said yesterday afternoon, noting that when he preached in New York City three decades ago, many people "went out of bounds,but they knew where the boundaries were.


Charles Edward Widmayer, Editor, 83
Charles Edward Widmayer, a founder of Editorial Projects for Education, which published the weekly Chronicle of Higher Education, and for 30 years the editor of the Dartmouth College Alumni Magazine, died Thursday at Alice Peck Day Memorial Hospital in Lebanon, N.H.
He was 83 years old.
He died from acute respiratory failure, the family said.


Review/Theater; Nuclear Disasters In the Name Of Science
Now that the cold war has eased, collective fears of nuclear catastrophe may have abated.
But as accidents like the ones at Chernobyl and Three Mile Island have shown, war isn't the only avenue to nuclear nightmare.
And "Accident: A Day's News," a play based on a short novel by the German author Christa Wolf, offers a reminder that the unthinkable disasters still loom.
The one-hour performance piece, which plays at the Theater for the New City through Sunday, is a meditation on the meltdown at Chernobyl that blends diary excerpts, puppetry, music and scientific lore into a kind of personalized science fiction.
Performed on a set of movable panels depicting the inside of a nuclear reactor, the piece intersperses the reflections of a character called the Writer (Jody Moore) with depictions of a nuclear scientist undergoing brain surgery.
The scientist is represented by a Bunraku-style puppet manipulated by Stephen Kaplin.
An atmospheric cool-jazz-flavored score composed and performed by Ralph Denzer, who plays a synthesizer and muted trumpet, accompanies the action.


Dongxiangka Journal; China's Cultural Conquest: Tibetans Yield Meekly
Most of the golden wheat was still uncut, swaying tall and proud in the sun and wind, but 20-year-old Tsering Beng put down his sickle, squatted on a patch of stubble, took a swig of water and deliberated on matters more important than the summer harvest.
"I'd like a Han Chinese wife, I think," said Mr.
Tsering Beng, a Tibetan.
"If your clothes get torn, then a Han wife will sew them up, but Tibetan women don't sew so well. And Han women cook better than Tibetans."


Egypt's Desperate Trade: Body Parts for Sale
By the time Ahmed Mohammed Hamuda reached home it was dusk.
He entered the two concrete rooms he occupies with his seven children, wife and elderly parents and bent down to pick up his 10-month-old son.
"How goes it with you?" his wife asked softly, but he did not answer.


Market Place; Chip-Set Maker At a Crucial Turn
The future of Chips and Technologies Inc. will be on the line a week from today when the company introduces a set of microprocessors compatible with the Intel Corporation's popular 386 chip.
If the products succeed, they could restore the luster of Chips and Technologies, once a high-flying semiconductor company that is now plagued by losses.
But if the products fail, the San Jose, Calif., company might not even survive over the long term, analysts say.


Review/Film; Paying Off a Vietnam Debt In a Colombian Drug War
James Glickenhaus's action-adventure film "McBain" might charitably be described as a contemporary historical fantasy, although lurid cartoon would be more accurate.
The title character is a Vietnam veteran who rounds up his former brothers in arms to go to Colombia and aid a people's rebellion against the Noriega-like strongman who rules the country.
McBain's motives are personal.
Eighteen years earlier, the rebels' leader, Santos (Chick Vennera), saved his life at a Vietcong prisoner-of-war camp.
So when the slain Santos's sister Christina (Maria Conchita Alonso) calls on McBain in New York, it is understood he must drop everything, round up his old army buddies and avenge the killing.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the New York City police investigation into the case of a young girl whose body was found in a picnic cooler rendered the name of the officer in charge incompletely.
He is Lieut.
Joseph Reznick.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Du Page County, Ill., priced $69 million in storm-project general obligation bonds through William Blair &amp; Company, to yield from 5 percent for the 1993 maturity to 6.7 percent for the long-term 2021 maturity.
Ratings are AAA by both Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Son Inc., a unit of Seagram Co., filed for up to $300 million in notes, with the money to be used for general purposes.
Goldman, Sachs heads the underwriting.
COMMON STOCK *
Crown Cork and Seal, Philadelphia, a container maker, filed for 950,000 common shares to be sold through First Boston and Goldman, Sachs.
The company will sell 750,000 shares and the Connellly Foundation 200,000 shares.
At the current price of 91 1/2, the company's offering could be worth about $68.6 million. *
Value Merchants Inc., Milwaukee, sold 500,000 shares in a private placement to four institutional investors for $15.8 million.
The cash will be used to to reduce short-term bank borrowings and help finance additional retail stores.


In a Despairing Afghanistan, There Is Caviar for the Few
Abdul Wahid, a slight 17-year-old with a smile that engulfed his face, invited a visitor into his shop on Chicken Street.
"There used to be many chickens here," he explained in tones that hinted he was offended by the memory.
He spread his hands toward shelves jammed not with withered tomatoes or gnarled ears of corn but with the bounty of capitalism's food industries.
From ceiling to floor were cans of Campbell's cream of chicken soup, neat stacks of After Eight mints, a corner devoted to Calumet baking powder and Betty Crocker lemon cake mix, a tower of Kellogg's cornflakes, cases of Henniger Kaiser pilsner beer, and mounds of four-ounce jars of caviar.


For Taiwan, New Access to Western Arms
After years of being spurned on the international weapons marketplace, there are signs that these days Taiwan is finding Western countries willing to sell it modern military equipment to defend itself against mainland China.
Taiwan's relative success in buying modern weaponry shows the extent to which it may be reintegrating into the international community even though scarcely any important countries recognize it as the legitimate Government of China.
The weapons purchases are also likely to inflame relations between Taipei and Beijing and cause tensions between the Chinese Government and Western Governments willling to sell such equipment.


INSIDE
Ex-Noriega Aide Testifies
One of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's closest aides for 25 years testified in a Federal Court that he had delivered drug payoff money to the Panamanian dictator.
Page A21.
Gay Rights Fight, Again
St.
Paul voters will consider repealing a homosexual rights law, making the city the latest battleground in the long fight over such laws.
Page A18.
The Florio Factor
In New Jersey, Republican legislative candidates are running against Governor Florio; many Democrats don't want to run with him.
Page B2.


BRIEFS
*
Ethyl Corp., Richmond, a petroleum and chemical products company, signed a letter of intent with BP Chemicals Ltd., London, to acquire substantial parts of BP's Adibis lubricant and fuel additives business.
Terms were not disclosed. *
First Financial Management Corp., Atlanta, an information services company, signed a definitive agreement to acquire Kalvar Corp., Minneapolis, an information handling company and subsidiary of Electronic Data Systems Corp.


PC Prices Are Cut By Dell Computer
The Dell Computer Corporation reduced prices on its personal computers by up to 33 percent and introduced a new series of desktop models based on the Intel Corporation's 486 model microprocessor.
Dell said it was cutting its prices to expand its market share.


Bush Asks General Assembly to Repeal Resolution Equating Zionism With Racism
President Bush called on the General Assembly today to repeal the 1975 resolution that equated Zionism with racism, telling the organization that it "cannot claim to seek peace" until the much-criticized document has been repudiated.
"We should take seriously the charter's pledge to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors," Mr.
Bush said in his fourth address to the assembly since he became President.
He added that "Resolution 3379, the so-called Zionism-is-racism resolution, mocks this pledge and the principles upon which the United Nations was founded."


Treasury Issues Up a Bit in Price
Prices of Treasury securities improved slightly in slow trading yesterday, as dealers continued to adjust portfolios in advance of two-year and five-year note auctions to be held today and tomorrow.
Market participants said demand for the new notes should be good.


U.S. Could Cut Defense Spending By More Than 33%, Report Says
An authoritative study of American defense needs by the Brookings Institution concludes that the United States can reduce military spending by more than a third over the next 10 years and still maintain the world's preeminent military establishment capable of dealing with any likely emergency in the post-cold war era.
The Brookings Institution estimates that cumulative savings of $316 billion to $619 billion could be realized.


By Design; Stretch Comes to Men's Wear
"Stretch for success" should be the motto for a lot of the fashion business today.
Look at the way leggings and tights have almost become basic necessities for women from infancy to old age.
For example, no one was surprised this fall when the stretchy body suits, tops, skirts, jeans and pants sold out first in the Anne Klein Company's new A Line sportswear collection.
In fact, the presence of a certain amount of stretchability woven into any kind of fabric is so pervasive today that it helps shape fashion from the heights and prices of Paris's Azzedine Alaia and New York's Donna Karan to the lowliest goods sold by a street vendor.


I.B.M. in Technology Pact With Thinking Machines
I.B.M and the Thinking Machines Corporation said yesterday that they had signed a joint development agreement to integrate the supercomputer maker's technology with I.B.M.'s mainframe computer systems.
The announcement is a further indication of the rapidly growing influence of massively parallel computing -- a technology in which inexpensive microprocessors break problems into hundreds or thousands of small parts.


Market Place; Mortgage Lender Is Back for More
FOR most companies, one public stock offering a year is plenty.
But rapid growth and a sharp rise in its stock price have led Countrywide Credit Industries, a Pasadena, Calif., concern that specializes in home mortgage financing, to ask for a second helping.
The second stock offering -- 6 million shares offered today by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company at a price of $27.375 for a total of $164.3 million -- will be much more rewarding to the company than the offering in March of 3.7 million shares at $12.25 each.
The company's stock price has more than doubled since March, and demand for the new offering was strong enough that the size was increased from 4 million shares.


Bernard Shapiro, 83, Social Welfare Worker
Bernard Shapiro, who served in high social welfare posts in both Connecticut and New York State, died on Sunday at the North Shore Hospital Hospice in Miami.
He was 83 years old and had homes in Miami Beach and Guilderland, N.Y.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Edward Hoffman 3d, Portrait Sculptor, 74
Edward Fenno Hoffman 3d, a sculptor of portraits, children and religious themes, died on Friday at Bryn Mawr (Pa.) Hospital.
He was 74 years old and lived in Wayne, Pa.
His wife, the former Nadine Kalpaschnikoff, said he died of leukemia.


Chief of Savings Bailout Is Appointed
The Bush Administration today appointed Albert V. Casey, the former chairman of American Airlines and First Republic Bank, to manage the bailout of the nation's savings industry.
The selection of Mr.
Casey to the new position of chief executive of the Resolution Trust Corporation, which had been expected, was announced on the eve of the confirmation hearing of William Taylor, who has been nominated to serve as chairman of both the trust corporation, which was created two years ago to oversee the bailout, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
He is widely expected to be confirmed for the positions, which are now held by L. William Seidman.


NBC May Capture Ryder Cup's Vulnerable Side
Johnny Miller played in Ryder Cup matches in 1975 and 1981 when the United States was nearly invincible against the British-Irish team.
But after two straight defeats to the expanded European team in 1985 and 1987 and a draw in 1989, the United States team is hungry -- and vulnerable.


State Assails Hospital's Care In Crown Heights Stabbing
The Hasidic scholar who was stabbed to death last month during racial violence in Crown Heights died as a result of inadequate treatment by doctors in the emergency room of Kings County Hospital Center, the New York State Health Department said yesterday.
In a report, the Health Department found that emergency-room doctors stanched bleeding from wounds on one side of the chest of Yankel Rosenbaum, a 29-year-old student from Australia, but failed to notice a life-threatening stab wound on the other side for 45 crucial minutes.


On My Mind; Israel: 'Not for Sale'
This is a passage from a personal letter sent to the Prime Minister of Israel by a particularly sophisticated and experienced American supporter of his Government and country:
"If it should develop that the availability of loan guarantees should be conditioned upon a change in the principles you have adopted regarding participation in the proposed international peace conference or upon a change in the settlement policies established by the Government of Israel, I would urge that Israel forgo the loan guarantee instead of compromising your principles. . . . Policies and principles . . . should not be for sale."


Cuomo Outlines Fiscal Blueprint For Recovery of New York City
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo drew an ambitious blueprint for New York City's fiscal recovery yesterday, outlining an array of high-visibility public works projects aimed at creating tens of thousands of jobs, improving the city's long-term competitiveness and, perhaps most importantly, lifting morale.
In a speech delivered to business and civic leaders in Manhattan last night, Mr.
Cuomo said his plan to build mass-transit links to the city's airports, accelerate the construction of huge housing developments and explore the potential for high-speed water ferries on the city's rivers would "help rebuild the city from the ground up, putting people to work and pumping blood into our economy." Easing the Medicaid Strain
The Governor also announced his proposal for easing the strain placed by rapidly growing Medicaid costs on the budgets of New York City and other local governments.
Under his plan, which was first reported on Sunday, the state would assume the local share of Medicaid costs while taking some of the taxing authority now held by the city and county governments.


Observer; Life In Soapland
Today's soap summaries:
"Moby Dick": Ishmael finally persuades Captain Ahab's widow to go to the beach with him.
His courtship suffers a setback, however, when they come upon Starbuck's distraught nephew Sunbuck building a sand castle.
Sunbuck accuses Ishmael of inventing the story of the Pequod's destruction-by-whale out of whole cloth for sinister purposes.
Ahab and Stubb, still at the bottom of the well where Ishmael put them, make up after Stubb promises to quit telling peg-leg jokes.
A mysterious whale beaches itself in Nantucket harbor.
Queequeg, searching for Mrs.
Ahab's house to warn her against Ishmael, is seized by immigration authorities and faces deportation.
"Anna Karenina": Anna's husband comes to the hospital to identify Anna's body and has coffee and a heart-to-heart chat with Nurse Olga.
Count Vronsky and Anna, making love in a rental dacha, are interrupted by a blackmailer threatening to tell Count Tolstoy that Anna pushed her identical twin sister under a train.
Anna's husband has another cup of coffee and tells Nurse Olga he has loved her ever since the first cup.
Doctors prepare to drain fluid from the brain of Vronsky's twin brother, Count Fron sky, in an effort to cure his stutter.


Bill Would Tighten Rule on Hiring Guards
The security guard accused of killing two young men on Long Island over the weekend could not have gotten a job under a bill already approved by the New York State Senate.
Under such a law, people who apply to be guards could not begin work until they had passed a background check.
The background check is already required, but under the present system security companies can hire applicants and send them out on assignments while the investigation is being done.
Security-industry officials say it can take up to six months to get the results.


Shift in Industrial Aid Is Urged
New York City would benefit by concentrating less on trying to retain existing manufacturing jobs, and instead focusing more support on emerging businesses, a report released yesterday by the office of Deputy Mayor Sally Hernandez-Pinero recommended.
The report's conclusions indicate that the city is considering recasting its economic development strategy.


Victory Or Not, Hostetler Under Fire
The Giants lose two games, and Jeff Hostetler becomes the public scapegoat.
Then the Giants beat the Cleveland Browns Sunday by only 3 points, and fingers point at Hostetler again.
Leave the quarterback alone, Coach Ray Handley said today.
He said Hostetler was not the problem, but could solve the problem.


Sports of The Times; Coming In Out of The Cold
ALTHOUGH the regular season won't begin until Oct. 3, it may be safe to predict that yesterday's induction of former New York Islanders Dennis Potvin and Mike Bossy into the National Hockey League Hall of Fame may well be the highlight of the Islanders' season.
With the franchise resting on a rocky foundation, its star player, Pat LaFontaine, refusing to report until the franchise is sold, the once dominant Islanders seemed destined to tread water for yet another campaign.


Primary Tallies Show Voters Don't Match Votes
Hundreds of voters who entered the polls in the New York City Council primaries never recorded their votes, either because they could not operate the voting machines or because they decided not to vote for anyone, Board of Elections officials said yesterday.
The missing votes came to light yesterday as election officials broke the seals on hundreds of voting machines used in the primaries on Sept. 12 and began an official canvass of the results that will take two days to complete.


As Biosphere Is Sealed, Its Patron Reflects on Life
THE largest private sponsor of environmental research in the United States is not Amoco, the Environmental Defense Fund, Exxon, the MacArthur Foundation, the National Geographic Society, the Nature Conservancy, the New York Botanical Garden or the World Wildlife Fund.
It is Edward P. Bass, 46, maverick son of the multibilliondollar Texas oil family.
His main effort is a $150 million, eight-story, glass-and-steel structure in the Arizona desert that holds a miniature ocean, savanna, marsh, desert and rain forest as well as 3,800 species of plants and animals.
On Thursday, four men and four women plan to seal themselves inside Biosphere 2, as it is known, for a two-year experiment in recreating the earth.


Jail Official Is Under Inquiry on Law Firm Work
A top New York City jail official is being investigated to determine if she violated city ethics laws when she worked last year for a politically influential law firm and lobbyist.
The city's Department of Investigation said yesterday that it was looking into the job switches made by Allison Lewis-Smith, the Correction Department's Deputy Commissioner for Trials and Litigation.


Times Magazine Group Makes 3 Appointments
The women's publishing division of The New York Times Company Magazine Group yesterday announced new appointments for three executives.
Michael Golden, 42 years old, who had been publisher of McCall's, assumes the new position of senior vice president and general manager at the division.
He will be succeeded by Barbara J. Litrell, 47, a vice president who had been McCall's associate publisher.


Unitronix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deep Sea Extinctions
Deep sea life was virtually obliterated over large parts of the ocean floors 57 million years ago by a rapid warming of the earth, a recent study has found.
While scientists have long known that an intense global warming during this epic affected life on the surface of the earth, the study, reported last week in Nature, showed that a rapid rise in temperature also caused up to 50 percent of the deep sea species to become extinct.


GEAC Computer reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Continental Air Inquiry
Federal investigators are examining accusations that Continental Airlines Holdings Inc. stripped millions of dollars in corporate assets from its defunct subsidiary, Eastern Airlines, according to published reports.
The Wall Street Journal said yesterday that people familiar with the investigation reported that a Federal grand jury in Brooklyn had issued subpoenas for documents from Continental Holdings regarding its dealings with Eastern.


Summagraphics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Editorial Notebook; The Trouble With Hearings It's the Senators, Not the Process
According to Chairman Joseph Biden, the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearing process has gone so cockeyed that he needs to hold hearings on the hearings, seeking to improve the procedures by which the Senate confirms Presidential nominees.
The committee had Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee, on the stand for five straight days, yet several members still couldn't get answers to their questions.
"Maybe we need new ground rules," Senator Biden says.
There might be useful tinkering to be done with those ground rules, but the problem lies with the dissatisfied senators themselves.
Some lack basic cross-examining skills.
Most can't resist speechifying rather than focusing pointed questions on the witness.
Many seem unwilling to place the burden on the nominee to prove his qualifications, so that refusal to answer a fair question could be held against the candidate.


Bears' Ditka Lets Pass Criticism of Harbaugh
When the Chicago Bears made Jim Harbaugh their first-round pick in the National Football League's 1987 draft, Jim McMahon still led the Bears at quarterback and Mike Tomczak remained a troubled but persistent backup.
N.F.L. scouts were decidely mixed on Harbaugh's N.F.L. promise, and Bears fans indicated they believed that drafting a quarterback from run-crazed Michigan made as much sense as plucking a running back from pass-silly Brigham Young.
McMahon is now a Philadelphia Eagle and Tomczak a Green Bay Packer.
And Harbaugh did in Chicago what he did at Michigan: take a team squarely rooted in the ground game and show just how fun and productive a mobile quarterback who makes the most of his passes can be.


ELECTRICITY COSTS DIP UNEXPECTEDLY IN 2 AREAS OF U.S.
Wholesale electric prices rose in the 1970's and were stable in many places in the 1980's.
But now, contrary to expectations, they are doing something new: declining in the Northeast and Southwest.
Some reasons for the drop, like lower oil prices and the collapse in the price of natural gas, are temporary and likely to reverse themselves eventually.
The sluggish regional economies, which will presumably also reverse at some point, are a factor, too, lowering demand for power and thus leaving high-cost generating stations idle more often than usual.


Tribute to Fred Astaire
The cabaret singer Steve Ross is to present a tribute to Fred Astaire at the 92d Street Y's Tisch Center for the Arts tomorrow at 8 P.M.
The show, "Let Yourself Go: Steve Ross Sings and Plays Fred Astaire," is the first in the Y's new cabaret series.
Other artists scheduled to appear are Helen Schneider (Dec. 14), Maureen McGovern (Jan. 8) and David Carroll (Feb. 15).
Subscriptions are $90, single tickets $25.
The Y is at 1395 Lexington Avenue.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Starstream Commun reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
He started out as a political maverick, marching to his own drum, so it comes as no surprise that TOM HAYDEN, the California Assemblyman with the national presence, is still railing against the mainstream.


Classical Music in Review
Manhattan Chamber Orchestra  Symphony Space
Richard Auldon Clark and his Manhattan Chamber Orchestra scored several points for enterprise and variety in their season-opening concert at Symphony Space on Wednesday evening.
But they lost a few for the overall incoherence of the program.
The first half offered the New York premieres of widely disparate works by David Amram and Howard Cass, the second two works by Jacques Ibert.


Still More Trouble for Tyson
A New York actress has filed a lawsuit against MIKE TYSON, accusing the former heavyweight champion of grabbing her in a "sexually suggestive" way at a Manhattan nightclub.
The woman, ROBIN YOUNG, seeks $2 million in damages from Tyson for the alleged incident on Nov. 12, 1990, at the China Club.


No Headline
Sir Pao Yue-kong, a Shanghai bank clerk who became one of the world's richest men, died yesterday at his home in Hong Kong after a two-year battle with asthma, a family spokesman said.
He was 72 years old.
Mr.
Pao, who was known by the Anglicized version of his name, Y. K. Pao, had several careers.
He was a banker in Shanghai until just before the Communist takeover of China in 1949.
He fled to Hong Kong and opened an import and export business.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17
U.N. inspectors were detained in Iraq after they discovered secret Iraqi plans for making nuclear weapons, Western diplomats said.
After a long standoff, the inspectors were allowed to depart the building but had to leave behind the documents.
Page A1


Rockies Leave No Stone Unturned
BOB GEBHARD, a Minnesota Twins executive, was named general manager of the Colorado Rockies yesterday while JOHN McHALE Jr., a Denver lawyer, was named to the business side of the new National League franchise.


Flexibility Without Complexity
THE Microsoft Corporation has come up with three new Windows products for people who have powerful personal computers, but who do not need all the power of conventional Windows business software.
It sounds like a narrow field, but it really is not.
Computer prices are coming down as fast as computer technology is advancing, with the result that many beginning computer users today are starting out with machines that have the minimum requirements to run Windows software: a 386SX microprocessor, a few megabytes of system memory and at least 40 megabytes of hard disk drive storage.
Such a computer system, equipped with a color VGA monitor, keyboard and the usual accessories, can easily be found for less than $2,000.


G.O.P. Runs Against Florio, Who's Not Running
With control of both houses of the New Jersey Legislature at stake in November, Republicans are running hard against a man who is not on the ballot -- Gov.
Jim Florio.
Democrats, if not openly running away from the Governor, do not want to run with him.
"Our strategy is quite simply to focus voter attention on the disastrous record of the Democrats and of Jim Florio," said Jeffrey Michaels, executive director of the Republican State Committee.
"What we are doing in targeted districts is educating voters for the first time that the incumbent Democrats are responsible, telling them that Jim Florio could not have done it alone. They did it together."


Kodak in a Deal With Image Bank
Image Bank Inc. said it had signed a definitive agreement to be acquired by the Eastman Kodak Company for $6.75 a share, or a total of $24.9 million.
Image Bank, based in Manhattan, licenses reproduction rights to photographs, film and other images.


Helene Curtis Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bears Work Overtime to Send Jets Into Shock
The Jets were less than two minutes from celebrating a victory tonight over the Bears at Soldier Field, but wound up instead with a bizarre and disheartening 19-13 loss with less than a minute left in overtime.
Quarterback Jim Harbaugh ended the misery for New York with 18 seconds left when he dived in from inside the 1-yard line.
That came one play after an apparent touchdown was nullified by the replay official, Bill Fette, a call that only prolonged the Jets' agony.


Inmate Whose Appeals Shook System Faces Execution
After 13 years of litigation that helped define the law on capital punishment, a Georgia man may be put to death Tuesday despite statements by two jurors that they no longer think he should be executed.
The condemned man, Warren McCleskey, sentenced to death for the 1978 killing of an Atlanta policeman, was the subject of two Supreme Court rulings in recent years that have dramatically narrowed the options for appeal open to death row inmates and their lawyers.


Surprise Nominee Is Picked to Replace Helmick
In a surprise move yesterday, the executive committee of the United States Olympic Committee nominated William J. Hybl, a corporate executive from Colorado Springs, to serve the remaining 13 months of Robert Helmick's term as president.
Helmick, a 54-year-old lawyer from Des Moines, resigned last week after questions about several of his business relationships and possible conflicts of interest.
He was elected to a four-year term in 1988, after the Olympic Summer Games in Seoul, South Korea.


Atrix International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thomas Is Not Taking His Exclusion From Olympics Lightly
The feeling, Isiah Thomas said, is one of being unwanted, left out, like a kid unchosen in a schoolyard pickup game.
After 10 years as one of the National Basketball Association elite, he has been told by a 13-member committee that he can't be part of the 1992 United States Olympic team, already being called "the greatest basketball team ever."
For Thomas, the Detroit Pistons' point guard, who has led championship teams in college and in the pros while earning the reputation as one of the most gifted small men ever to play the game, it is "an emotion that I've never really felt before."


BAGHDAD DETAINS 40 U.N. INSPECTORS WHO FIND A-PLANS
Iraq detained about 40 United Nations nuclear inspectors for 12 hours today after they discovered secret Iraqi plans for making nuclear weapons stored in a building in central Baghdad and tried to remove them, Western officials said.
After a long standoff, the inspectors were allowed out of the building but had to leave the documents behind, the officials said.


Head of Cleveland Fed Leaves to Run Bank
The most vocal and effective advocate of zero inflation among the Federal Reserve's regional bank presidents has resigned to run a $9.5 billion Midwestern commercial bank.
W.
Lee Hoskins, who heads the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, will take over in mid-November as president and chief executive of Huntington National Bank, a solid if not spectacular regional bank based in Columbus, Ohio.
In the meantime, Mr.
Hoskins will no longer participate in making monetary policy or bank supervision.


Short-Order Musts: Speedy Hands and a Loud Mouth
In his short-order world, Julio Vega knows that prepping is everything, for if he doesn't properly anticipate the lunchtime onslaught of "whiskey downs," "tunas on a bed," "cowboys," "pistols," "merry Christmases" and "FBI's," then he is truly doomed.
His boss will find his neurons decaying, customers will begin anxiously jerking their feet and the obligatory waitress abuse will commence in earnest.
Once again, Mr.
Vega will discover himself snapping peevishly: "Hey, what do you think I'm doing -- opening cans back here? The food's not coming out of cans, sister."


TRANSACTIONS
HOCKEY National Hockey League
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Assigned Doug Dadswell, Chad Erickson, Mark Romaine and Corey Schwab, goalies; David Craievich, Kevin Dean, Chris Kiene, Petr Kuchyna, Chris Lipuma and Dean Malkoc, defensemen; and Steve Cadieux, Jim Dowd, Ben Hankinson, Bill Huard, Kevin Kerr, Scott Luik, Daryn McBride, Kevin Riehl, Matt Ruchty, Jason Simon and Brian Sullivan, forwards, to Utica of the American Hockey League.
Returned Martin Brodeur, goalie; Paul Wolanski, defenseman; and Donevan Hextall and Curt Regnier, forwards, to their junior teams.
Returned Jaroslav Modry, defenseman, to Dukla Trencin of the Czechoslovakian League.
Waived Alex Roberts, defenseman.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Assigned Steve Junker, left wing, to Spokane of the Western Hockey League; Todd Sparks, left wing, to Hull of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League; and John Johnson, center, to Niagara Falls of the Ontario Hockey League.
Waived John Davis and Frank Lascala, left wings; Derek Clancy, Derek Decosty and David Aiken, right wings; Perry Florio, defenseman; and Scott Harlow, center.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Sent Guy Larose, Brian McReynolds and Rob Zamuner, centers, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.


Chile Seizes 2 Policemen in Letelier Case
Under orders from a Supreme Court justice, the head of Chile's secret police during the military rule of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet was arrested today in connection with the murder of Orlando Letelier, a Chilean diplomat and former Cabinet minister who was killed by a car bomb in Washington in 1976.
In addition to placing Gen.
Juan Manuel Contreras Sepulveda under house arrest at the military hospital in Santiago, Justice Adolfo Banados also ordered the detention of Col.
Pedro Espinoza Bravo, who was director of operations under General Contreras.


Economists Say Recession Ended in Spring
Despite scant evidence so far of consumer participation, an overwhelming majority of economists insist that the recession ended at least three months ago.
And two members of the committee charged officially with dating it said today that the bottom most likely occurred in May.
Still, Michael J. Boskin, chief economic adviser to President Bush, persisted in expressing concern about possibly overly restrictive monetary policy by the Federal Reserve that could threaten recovery.


Nutri/System Makes Changes in Its Account
Nutri/System Inc., based in Blue Bell, Pa., has reassigned the creative and media portions of its advertising account, estimated to exceed $30 million.
FCB/Lewis, Gilman &amp; Kynett, Philadelphia, has lost the creative portion of the account, while gaining the media-buying responsibilities.


Rowe Furniture Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1


U.S. Seeking to Base More Arms in Saudi Arabia
Stepping up the military pressure on Iraq, the Bush Administration today asked Saudi Arabia for permission to send additional combat aircraft and Patriot missile batteries to the kingdom, perhaps as soon as this week, an Administration official said tonight.
The request was delivered to the Saudi Government by the United States Ambassador there, Charles W. Freeman Jr., who was accompanied by a general from the United States Central Command.
Mr.
Freeman's instructions, the official said, were to establish a timetable for the dispatch from Germany of three Patriot batteries that would assure the protection of major Saudi cities and defense installations from Iraqi retaliation should American forces mount an attack from Saudi soil.


Pearl Harbor Day Will Probably Go Smoothly; Shared Complicity
To the Editor:
I would have hoped that an article discussing how to observe the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and not "intensify anti-Japanese sentiments in this country and anti-America feelings in Japan" (front page, Sept. 1) would have mentioned that United States airmen had been firing for months before Dec. 7, 1941, on sight and without warning, on Japanese ships and planes in the Pacific.


Review/Dance; Ceremony and Surprise in Bill Of Zen-Inspired Choreography
Sun Ock Lee, a Korean dancer who settled in the United States in 1969, presented four separate concerts of her choreography as part of a two-day event entitled "Korean Zen" at the Asia Society over the weekend.
Not accidentally, these programs coincided with the beginning of Korea Week, proclaimed by Mayor Dinkins amid a series of presentations on a larger scale.
Some 136 performers will appear tomorrow night at Carnegie Hall in "The Sound of Millennia: A Korean Festival of Music and Dance."


Oppenheimer Multi-Govt reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


David Takes On Goliath, Toyland Style
CLIFF FREEMAN &amp; PARTNERS specializes in creating attention-grabbing campaigns for runners-up in intense marketing battles, clients like the Little Caesars pizza chain, Hills Department Stores and Philips light bulbs.
Now it has perhaps its most challenging assignment: helping Child World take on Toys "R" Us.
Beginning tomorrow, the agency's television commercials for Child World Inc.  will appear in 34 cities, including Boston, Chicago, Detroit and New York.
The spots seek to define the country's second-largest toy retailer as the one that satisfies the demands of today's children -- "toy nuts" who want the latest toy now.
The campaign, the centerpiece of Child World's big Christmas sales effort, is in keeping with Freeman's forte, which Cliff Freeman, the chairman and executive creative director, describes as "making the most out of less."


Clarke Reply To Questions On Finances
Robert L. Clarke, one of the nation's top banking regulators, disclosed today that while he was in office two business associates had separately discussed a regulatory case with him but that he did not intervene in the matter.
Mr.
Clarke's disclosure came in response to questions from the Senate Banking Committee, which is likely to quiz him closely about his personal finances at a confirmation hearing on Thursday regarding his nomination to a second term as the Comptroller of the Currency.


Classical Music in Review
Manhattan String Quartet  Kosciuszko Foundation House 15 East 65th Street
The Kosciuszko Foundation and Hunter College are presenting a collaborative series of concerts this season.
Each program is to include at least one work by a Polish composer, and all eight concerts are to be broadcast live by WQXR.
The Manhattan String Quartet opened the series on Sunday afternoon with a program that included works by Shostakovich and Beethoven, and fulfilled its commitment to Polish art with Grazyna Bacewicz's Quartet No. 4.


Dollar Continues to Fall; Data on Economy Awaited
The dollar drifted lower in quiet trading yesterday, continuing a weak performance as market participants awaited new details on the economy's future.
The dollar lacked a sense of direction throughout the session, and moved lower mostly in technical dealing, traders said.


Mark's Work Wearhouse reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Genentech Enters Research Venture
Genentech Inc. and Incyte Pharmaceuticals have signed an agreement to develop a drug to treat septic shock, an often fatal condition arising from bacterial infections.
Genentech will pay $14 million to Incyte, a privately held company based in Palo Alto, Calif., to cover research and development expenses and an equity investment.
Genentech will have the rights to market the drug everywhere except in the Far East.


MTC Electronic Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Parking Rules
Because of Succoth, the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles, alternate-side parking rules are suspended today in New York City.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Friends and Colleagues Honor Colleen Dewhurst
One by one, the mourners took the stage that Colleen Dewhurst had once inhabited like a force of nature, and said their last farewells to one of America's foremost actresses.
Although some of the words they spoke yesterday afternoon were written by the likes of Eugene O'Neill, the feelings they expressed were entirely their own.
"I dedicate everything I do to her, secretly," said her longtime O'Neill collaborator, Jason Robards, at yesterday's memorial service for Ms.
Dewhurst, who died at the age of 67 on Aug. 22.
He then read "The Chambered Nautilus," a poem by Oliver Wendell Holmes.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Cognex Corp., Needham, Mass., which makes machine vision systems, named Patrick Alias executive vice president of sales and marketing. *
Communications Satellite Corp., Washington, the telecommunications company known as Comsat, named John V. Evans president of its Comsat Laboratories unit.


Hamilton Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bush Asks U.N. to Repeal Zionism Resolution


The Real News in China Comes Out in Restricted Periodicals
The Chinese sometimes complain that the one place where news is never found is in the newspapers.
So perhaps it is not surprising that officials are so fond of a special breed of publications bearing the warning, "Internal Periodical -- Guard Carefully."
While ordinary citizens are left to read in People's Daily how everything is great and getting better, officials enjoy one of the most important perquisites of power, real information.
The Government runs a network of at least several dozen internal publications with news that is deemed too sensitive for the public.


Classical Music in Review
'The Most Happy Fella'  New York City Opera
New York City Opera's record with musicals in recent years hasn't exactly made one want to rush out to the latest one, especially after the original cast has dispersed.
But Arthur Allan Seidelman's production of "The Most Happy Fella" turns out to be basically respectful (though why, in an opera house, of all places, rename the "Trovatore" restaurant the "Golden Gate"?) and relatively free of camp (except in the treatment of the Italian chefs, dominated by Arthur Rubin's hammy braying).


Bedrosian's Pitching Hand Still Ailing
The Minnesota Twins are concerned about right-handed reliever STEVE BEDROSIAN after the failure of a procedure to restore proper blood flow to the fingers on his pitching hand.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.25
5.12
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.21
5.19
7.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.25
5.24
7.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.34
7.36
8.88
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.87
7.88
9.16
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
8.97
10.15
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.91
6.92
7.80
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The U.N. Today
General Assembly MEETS -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.


Reviews/Fashion: Insouciant, Relaxed Clothes From Three Designers; By Anne Klein II: Not Just Blazers
The first spring collections to be presented for 1992 focus on casual clothes, the kind women wear on weekends and vacations.
They are designed to be worn straight through next summer.
Sportswear has come a long way since Anne Klein reinvented this all-American style of dressing in the 1960's, when blazers, trousers, sweaters and raincoats made up the separates repertory.
In the spring collection of Anne Klein II, this has been expanded to include T-shirts, very short and very long skirts, shorts, bras, chunky patterned sweaters, leggings, shorts, jump suits, bras and, of course, jackets.


Canadians Do Without an Abortion Law
To the Editor:
Re: "What Comes After Roe v. Wade?" by Prof.
Walter Dellinger of Duke University (Op-Ed, Sept. 3): You may be interested to know that Canada at present has no abortion law.
Since 1988, when the Canadian Supreme Court held that Section 251 of the Criminal Code was contrary to Section 7 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the country has been without a law, a condition spokesmen for the Government insist on referring to as a "vacuum."


Silver Hits a 2-Month High; Economic Confidence Cited
Prices of silver futures charged to a two-month high yesterday the Commodity Exchange in New York on technical buying stemming from perceptions that the economy is climbing out of recession.
Silver for September delivery settled 8.1 cents higher, at $4.168 an ounce, the highest settlement of a near-term contract since July 23.
Gold for October delivery rose $2.20, to $351.10 an ounce.


Sanborn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reviews/Fashion: Insouciant, Relaxed Clothes From Three Designers; For Calvin Klein: New Directions
Calvin Klein's first problem was to make clothes women would wear on weekends that had the same understated look as his main collection but a totally informal feeling.
The second was to demonstrate both the similarities and the differences between the casual clothes and his regular collection.
Mr.
Klein decided that a fashion show was the way to do it, and so this month in his showroom, he presented the collection he calls Sport.
It reflected, he said, the way women really dress in their leisure time.
It is also considerably less expensive than his regular, more formal collection.
Prices are in the $50 to $360 range, with some suede jackets going up to $700.
Jackets in his regular collection would be double that.


On a Roll, Pepsi Changes Its Face
Pepsi-Cola unveiled its new face yesterday, a logo that the company hopes will make it seem peppier and younger than its age-old rival.
The new logo, with streamlined blue letters suspended over what looks like a rolling tri-colored beach ball, comes as Pepsi attempts to press home a series of public relations victories over Coca-Cola intended to capture the attention of the nation's youngest consumers.


City Opera to Try Out In-House Television
The New York City Opera, in a collaboration with Sony, is to experiment with high definition television in the New York State Theater during the Friday evening performance of Puccini's "Madama Butterfly." The system the company is using includes 10-foot diagonal screens, to be mounted on either side of the stage, and special high-definition cameras, which have been flown in from London and Tokyo.
The company said it hoped the system would give audiences, particularly those in the upper balconies, a closer view of the stage, in much the same way audiences benefit from the projection screens at rock concerts and sports events.
The closed-circuit broadast is to be directed by Kirk Browning, the director of "Live From Lincoln Center."


Slovenia Treasures Peace, but Has Little Else
Burned-out trucks along highways and steel tank traps at roadside crossings are lingering reminders of Slovenia's recent defeat of the Yugoslav National Army.
Otherwise, this alpine republic of 1.9 million, half the size of Switzerland, appears to be an island of undisturbed peace in a country torn by war.
The present fighting began after Slovenia t declared its independence from the Yugoslav federation on June 25, and was quickly followed by neighboring Croatia.


Time Management in a New Environment
ONE sign that Windows 3.0, Microsoft's graphical program for making DOS-based computers almost as easy to use as Macintoshes, is here to stay is that smaller software publishers are migrating to it.
If it takes the big programs -- like Lotus 1-2-3 and WordPerfect -- to validate a new computing environment, it takes the smaller programs to make it livable.
A new house needs more than a stove and refrigerator; it also needs towels and coffee cups.
OnTime, a time-management program from Campbell Services of Southfield, Mich., was a fine piece of work as a DOS program, discussed here last year.
The new Windows version is little short of sensational.


Voting in Puerto Rico to Address Ties to U.S. and Ethnic Heritage
When the Puerto Rican people vote Dec. 8 in a referendum on their political status, they will have an opportunity to tell Congress that while they treasure their ties to the United States they are proud of their Puerto Rican culture and their Hispanic-Caribbean origins.
A bill authorizing the referendum was signed into law last Tuesday by Gov.
Rafael Hernandez Colon, whose Popular Democratic Party favors continuation of the commonwealth relationship with the United States that has existed since 1952.


Break the Gridlock Over Car Insurance
New Jersey's drivers have been paying the nation's highest auto insurance premiums.
Gov.
Jim Florio promised to cut them, and did.
But the Allstate Insurance Company and several others say they're losing money, and want out.
Rising premiums are a nationwide aggravation.
But something is plainly wrong in New Jersey.
It's not clear who's at fault.
One way to break the gridlock may be to look at other states.
Some other states offer instructive models.


Bahia Journal; If It's 'Black Brazil,' Why Is the Elite So White?
Often called "the capital of black Brazil," this tropical city swelled with civic pride last month when the local Olodum Afro drum corps played with Paul Simon before a huge crowd in Central Park in New York.
But back home, recognition is not always so easy.


CHRONICLE
The presentation of "America's Awards" by the Positive Thinking Foundation next week at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts is to be a star-studded event.
The year-old competition was conducted by a foundation started by the Rev.
NORMAN VINCENT PEALE, and the judges include Senator BILL BRADLEY, WALTER CRONKITE, ROSS PEROT and the Rev.
THEODORE HESBURGH.
PRESIDENT BUSH and BARBARA BUSH are honorary chairmen.


Entronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dress Barn Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to July 27


All the Stars Come Tumbling Down
What odds would you give that Meadow Star, who won the Eclipse Award last year as the country's best juvenile filly, would run sixth in a field of seven on Saturday?
Or that Lite Light, who outran Meadow Star by seven lengths in July, would run sixth in a field of seven on Sunday?
The two fillies took their artistic tumbles 1,500 miles apart, Meadow Star falling from grace in the $200,000 Ruffian Handicap at Belmont Park and Lite Light taking the plunge in the $1 million Super Derby at Louisiana Downs.


Butler National reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Experts Unable to Link Chronic Fatigue to Virus
Experts who met over the weekend to evaluate recent reports on three types of viruses as possible causes of chronic fatigue syndrome said today that although some data were promising, "none of the evidence is yet conclusive."
The panel also said there was no evidence to suggest that the syndrome, often called yuppie flu, was contagious.


After 2 Killings on L.I., a Search for Answers
A day after an apparent argument between a security guard and five young men at the high school here ended with two of the men dead and three others injured, the people closest to the tragedy cannot agree on how things escalated the way they did.
To the distraught father of the 20-year-old security guard, who was charged with murder, his son's action was the inevitable response to an unbearable barrage of taunts and racial slurs.
To the shocked parents of the victims, it was an eruption of violence beyond comprehension.


Tracking the Ferret: A Cooperative Effort Benefits a Former Pest
Somewhere out here in the vast, rolling plains of the Shirley Basin, a handful of black-footed ferrets are roaming the prairie in a crucial test of survival for a species once considered extinct.
The ferrets, which have been bred in captivity, are being released a few at a time, as part of a rescue venture that, if successful, could rank among the greatest triumphs of wildlife conservation.


BUSH LIKELY TO GET HIS WAY ON ISRAEL
Israel's Congressional supporters and critics were moving toward a consensus today that President Bush will get his way on imposing a 120-day delay on the consideration of $10 billion in loan guarantees for Israel.
Even as lawmakers were floating ideas for a compromise with the White House, several Congressional officials said there was little enthusiasm for trying to override a Presidential veto on the guarantees.
Supporters of Israel in the House, uncertain about what steps to take now, were planning to meet on Tuesday to discuss their next moves.


7th Campaign for Old Soldier of Ryder Cup
Raymond Floyd was playing his first round ever on the seaside moonscape that is the Ocean Course in preparation for this week's Ryder Cup, and all the anticipatory stalking on the sandy battleground-to-be had him bubbling.
As he stood over a three-foot putt on the 16th green during a fast and loose practice round with Lanny Wadkins and Fred Couples, he recalled the moment that a well-known professional who no longer plays on the tour loudly pulled apart the Velcro fastener on his glove just as Floyd was ready to make the final stroke in a sudden-death playoff.


Ketema Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Correction
An article about discrimination against Asian Americans on Sept. 12 mistakenly said that Lloyd Ray Piche fatally injured Jim Ming-hai Loo with a blow to the back of the head.
The blow was inflicted by Mr.
Piche's brother, Robert.


Review/Film Festival; 3 Zanussi Characters as Vehicles for Ideas
Tomasz is an idealistic young man who lives with his overprotective mother.
Though he is good-looking, he seems too shy to approach a woman for a date, and it's entirely apt that we first see him getting a prescription for sleeping pills.
Julia is a woman in her 30's whose cherry-red earrings flash like a desperate symbol of hope against her haggard face.
As Tomasz leaves the clinic he notices Julia, who is feeling faint apparently after having had an abortion.
She is without family or friends and about to lose her apartment.
So Tomasz takes her back to his home, acting partly from charity and partly from a flickering attraction.
How can his morally upright mother refuse to help this troubled woman?
Yet how can she bear to let such a threatening creature stay?


Duke Softens Past in Louisiana Race
First came the warnings.
State Representative David Duke told a crowd of supporters gathered in a rural meeting hall here that their way of life was threatened by racial quotas and welfare babies.
Then Mr.
Duke, a 41-year-old former grand wizard of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, promised that if he was elected governor he would save Louisiana by giving poor blacks his own version of "tough love."


Review/Dance; Snobbery And Rivalry Of Siblings
Once upon a time there were two sisters from a respectable white family.
One married a lawyer, joined an exclusive country club and devoted herself to social climbing.
The other married a black truck driver.
No wonder the sisters didn't get along.
The sisters' quarrels were vehemently and amusingly depicted in "Small Wonders (It's Only a Game, Isn't It?)," the performance-art piece with text, choreography and direction by Nina Martin that Nina Martin/ Performance presented Sunday night at Performance Space 122.


For Sunday Blahs, Try the Art of Tea
To the Editor:
Luckily the Sunday afternoon blahs (news article, Sept. 8) are easily corrected.
All you need is afternoon tea, as the British figured out long ago, which works equally on our shores.


Patterns
An Unrefusable Invitation
The Council of Fashion Designers of America met yesterday and unanimously selected Ralph Lauren to receive the council's lifetime achievement award for 1991, which will be presented at its annual gala on Feb. 3.


Staodyn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Television; New Hourlong Drama In Soap-Opera Land
Having angered many viewers with its cancellation of "Thirty something," ABC is no doubt trying to make amends with a new series called "Home Front." No, it's not nearly so good, but at least it's a weekly hourlong drama, something of an endangered species in the new season's glut of half-hour sitcoms.
"Home Front" gets a special 90-minute premiere tonight at 9:30.
One of the executive producers is David Jacobs, the creator of "Dallas" and "Knots Landing." Viewers should not be surprised to find themselves shunted rather quickly to standard soap-opera territory.
The other two executive producers are Lynn Marie Lathan and Bernard Lechowick, a wife-husband team.
They devised and developed the idea for "Home Front" and wrote this evening's introduction.


Costa Rica in Pact to Search for Forest Drugs
IN an arrangement designed to exploit the economic potential of tropical forests without harming them, Merck &amp; Co., the American drug company, will collaborate with a Cost Rican research institute to prospect for microorganisms, insects and natural drugs that can be developed for medical and agricultural use, it was announced last week.
Under the two-year renewable agreement, Merck will pay $1 million to help train biologists who will do the prospecting and will return royalties from any marketable products that result from the collaboration to Costa Rica.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 24


Vie De France reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Flash! From 200 B.C.
The Dead Sea Scrolls, held captive for four decades by researchers, are now under welcome attack from guerrilla scholars.
Earlier this month, a pair of biblical scholars published a computer-generated version of a scroll reproduced from an index called a concordance.
Now the Huntington Library, in California, has surprised the world with its photographs of the scroll manuscripts.
It is opening them to all scholars -- a just and valuable act.


Israel Says It Killed 3 Infiltrators
The Israeli Army said today that its soldiers had killed three Palestinian guerrillas who were described as having tried to infiltrate the country during the night across the normally quiet border with Syria.
The dead men, said to have been armed with antitank missiles, hand grenades and automatic rifles, reportedly carried papers identifying them as members of a faction of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, which is headed by Nayef Hawatmeh.


Bonds's Performance Speaks for Itself
Exhibit A: Barry Bonds, the bat barely out of his hands, his legs still deeply bent in the effort of crushing a Lee Smith slider, thrusts his fists in the air and throws his head back in triumph.
The baseball winds up in the first deck of seats in right field at Three Rivers Stadium, and as a result, the Pirates post a 4-3 comeback victory in 11 innings against the Cardinals on Aug. 12.
The picture is of an instant of astonishing execution, realization and celebration.


Shifting the Risk; Under Cuomo's Medicaid Plan, Albany Assumes the Burden of Curbing Costs
By proposing state assumption of Medicaid expenses, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is recommending not only a shift in costs, but, perhaps even more important, a shift in risk.
As outlined by the Governor, local governments would have to give up some of their tax revenues in a swap with the state.
That is a trade that, under most circumstances they would greet with outrage.


Improving Technology In Services
DR.
DANIEL BERG of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute suggests that this is the decade for stressing technological improvements in industries that provide services to customers, just as in the last decade companies concentrated on lowering costs and improving quality in manufacturing operations to compete better with European and Japanese rivals.
Dr.
Berg points out that service companies account for more than 70 percent of the gross national product, and they employ 75 percent of American workers.
Yet, he says, technological development and innovation lag in the service sectors.


Ex-Noriega Aide Testifies on Drug Payments
A Panamanian military officer who was one of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's closest aides for 25 years testified today that he had delivered drug payoff money to the Panamanian dictator and that later, on General Noriega's instructions, he denied to judicial investigators that any such payments had been made.
In his third day on the witness stand at a Federal Courthouse here, the officer, Lieut.
Col.
Luis del Cid, said he had also accompanied his commanding officer, later deposed as dictator in the American invasion of Panama, to a meeting with President Fidel Castro in Cuba.
The meeting is said to have been called so that the two leaders could discuss a drug trafficking dispute.


A Brain Unit Seen as Index for Recalling Memories
Marcel Proust's flood of memory when he ate the madeleine has long fascinated readers of literature and science.
After decades of research, scientists who study the brain are at last poised to explain how the brain is organized to form long term, conscious memory and later to recall a particular memory and its various components.
In the beginning of his prodigious seven-volume novel of the mind, "The Remembrance of Things Past," Proust wrote:


Lebanese Army and Gunmen Trade Fire, Leaving 7 Dead
Seven people were killed and six others wounded today in a clash between the Lebanese Army and gunmen in the Shuf mountains southeast of here.
A communique by the army command said the troops had been searching for gunmen who had killed three civilians and four soldiers in the village of Maaser al Shuf.
Those unidentified gunmen fled to the mountains, the statement said.


Resolved: Less Paper. Any Seconds?
Deep within a labyrinthine bureaucracy, 70 or so translators pore over documents on the drab 23d floor of the Secretariat building, deciphering the dense language of diplomacy and painstakingly turning it into Chinese.
Like workers on an assembly line, the translators churn out hundreds of pages of official United Nations documents every day.
But many are never read here, for only one delegation speaks Chinese as its official language.


Devils Look For Offense From Richer
The puck left the hockey stick with such velocity from the top of the left circle that it whisked over the left shoulder of the goaltender and hit the roof of the net in the same blink of the eye.
"He can shoot the puck," said Lou Lamoriello, the president of the Devils, as he watched Stephane Richer going through his first full day of work with the Devils here this afternoon.
"He can shoot the puck."


Americana Hotels &amp; Realty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cosmetic Surgeons Seek New Frontiers
To camouflage her skinny calves, the 30-year-old film producer from southern California always wore long skirts and "felt like a freak" when she played tennis or ran.
For years, she lifted weights to improve the contour of her legs, to no avail.
"Doctors told me it's just the way your muscle is formed," she said in a recent telephone interview.
"But I was always self-conscious. I thought someday they're going to develop some way to help this."


U.P.I. Wins Cutback Ruling
United Press International won court permission yesterday to stop paying severance to laid-off employees and to continue pay cuts it says it needs to stay in business.
Judge Francis Conrad of the United States Bankruptcy Court also granted the company's request to use stringers or contract employees in place of the staff it is laying off.
But the judge refused to take away the right of senior employees to bump junior workers from their jobs, as U.P.I. had asked.


Bank of Boston Stock Declines
The Bank of Boston's shares fell sharply yesterday in heavy trading as investors and traders decided that plans to issue new shares as part of a proposed merger with the Shawmut National Corporation would reduce the value of existing shares.
After 1.2 million shares were traded -- enough to make it the day's seventh most actively traded stock -- Bank of Boston closed at $9.75, down $1.25 cents.
Shawmut fell $1.125, to $8.75, also on heavy volume.


The Pope and the Civil War
The war in Yugoslavia has put the Vatican in a position of extreme sensitivity.
Now that the European Community initiative appears to have failed, the Holy See must come out even further from the shadows -- not just to help, but also to clear the past.
So far this year, the Pope has made 17 appeals for peace in Yugoslavia.
Last month, he sent an emissary to meet with church officials in both Croatia and Serbia.
But the Pope should do even more.


Minnesota City Renews Gay Rights Fight
This capital city overlooking the Mississippi River repealed its first gay rights ordinance in 1978, and then, after the issue simmered for 12 years, passed a new ordinance in 1990 forbidding discrimination based on sexual orientation in housing, employment, education and public accommodations.
But the gay rights debate here is far from over: this summer more than 6,000 residents signed a petition seeking to repeal the ordinance, and the issue will be on the ballot in November.


Polygram In Motown Agreement
In its effort to expand its American operations, Polygram Group Distribution said yesterday that it had signed an agreement to distribute Motown Records in the United States.
Financial terms were not disclosed.
Polygram, which is owned by Philips N.V., the Dutch conglomerate, also plans to invest about $200 million into the motion-picture business over several years, several industry experts close to the company said.
The investment would cover production costs, marketing and advertising expenses, and could ultimately increase production to more than 10 films a year, they said.


Crack Hits Chicago, Along With a Wave of Killing
For most of the 1980's, street gangs kept crack out of Chicago, fearing that it could open the way for small dealers to challenge their control of the drug trade.
Now crack has arrived and those same gangs are warring over territory.
With the eruption of the same kind of turf wars that marked the arrival of crack in Washington and elsewhere, 1991 is shaping into the deadliest year in Chicago history, surpassing the rate during the bloody years of the Al Capone era and even the record year of 1974, when 970 residents were killed.


Public Storage Properties XX reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Paramount In Accord For 4 Films By Murphy
For the last year Eddie Murphy has been sulking.
The comedian has grumbled that Paramount Pictures has given him meager projects, that stars like Arnold Schwarzenegger are making far more millions and that he is turning 30 without being given adult roles.


Baby Boomers Fail as Born-Again Savers
For years, optimists have been counting on the middle-aging of the baby-boom generation to lift the nation's sagging savings rate.
As members of that generation abandoned late nights at discos for early dinners at home with the children, they were supposed to start saving for retirement or college the way June and Ward Cleaver did.
If only "Leave It to Beaver" were true today.
Personal saving habits peaked in the early 1970's, when the average citizen stashed away more than 9 percent of take-home pay, and declined through the late 80's when saving reached a nadir of less than 3 percent.
Maturing Is Not Enough
A few years ago it seemed that thrift was getting trendy again, but lately saving has slumped anew.
Worse, economists have concluded that there is little reason to believe that younger Americans, merely by maturing, will turn sufficiently thrifty to lift the nation's savings rate much.


Restivo: It's Color At Play or Work
Mary Ann Restivo has long been a favorite designer of working women.
When the "dress for success" formula of sober gray and navy suits was the rage, she managed to give her clothes a twist that made them look feminine and individual.
She had a soft and gentle touch.
Her spring collection has gone considerably further.
Actually, it will take her fans comfortably through summer.


Quotation of the Day
"Sardines shouldn't taste like egg salad and egg salad shouldn't taste like chicken salad. How many times do you order a chicken salad and there are some sardines around the edge? The guy didn't wipe the board. C'mon." -- Julio Vega, short-order cook.  [ B3:2. ]


Bluegrass Supporting Bush on Israel
Jobs, tobacco and taxes are the essence of Bluegrass politics, but when Representative Larry J. Hopkins brought his longshot Republican gubernatorial campaign here this weekend, he tested a new issue: the proposed $10 billion in loan guarantees for Israel.
Speaking before a sparsely attended fund-raiser, Mr.
Hopkins hinted that he would support President Bush's request that Congress delay consideration of the loan guarantees.
Such a position is an expression of his own opposition to all foreign assistance programs.


Serbs and Croats: Seeing War in Different Prisms
As the bright, warm times of summer gave way today to storms that soaked a city returning to life after days of air-raid warnings and worry, a senior official in the secessionist Yugoslav republic of Croatia surveyed both the weather and the future.
"It may be raining outside," Mario Nobilo, an adviser to President Franjo Tudjman, said, gesturing at a downpour that drenched a ceremonial guard and drummers on the cobbled streets around government offices, "but inside, it's political sunshine."


Investment Firm Hired by Maxtor
The Maxtor Corporation, a major disk drive manufacturer, says it has hired Robert Fleming Pacific Inc. as its investment banker to explore strategic alternatives involving its Storage Dimensions Inc. subsidiary, including the possible sale of the unit.


Not a Dancing School
To the Editor:
In a Sept. 6 news article, you refer to Smolny Institute in St.
Petersburg as "the grand dancing school of the czars."


Salvador Chief Says Bars to Peace Are Overcome, but Others Demur
President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador told the General Assembly today that the "main roadblocks" to an accord to end the 11-year-old civil war in his country were overcome in the past week of negotiations between him and the guerrilla leaders.
"Total agreement for an end to the conflict may be a reality in the very near future," Mr.
Cristiani said in a speech two hours before President Bush spoke in the same hall.


Dinkins Goes To a Hearing On Police Pay
In an unusual move, Mayor David N. Dinkins testified yesterday at the final day of arbitration hearings on a new contract for New York City police officers, arguing that the city cannot afford a raise greater than the 4 percent it has offered unless the union agrees to save money in other ways.
Municipal labor experts said they could not recall a similar appearance by a mayor in an arbitration dispute and they saw Mr.
Dinkins's testimony as a sign of the administration's deep concern about holding down the cost of a new 15-month contract with the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, to replace the one that expired in June 1990.


Business Scene; A Growing Drag From Services
THE recovery appears to have stalled, and in casting about for reasons why the economy is so recalcitrant, economists are beginning to focus attention on a new phenomenon: Many service industries are shrinking, and casting off workers, for reasons that often go beyond the nation's hard times.
Manufacturing companies, of course, went through this painful process in the early 1980's to make themselves more competitive.
But their contraction did not inhibit the recovery from the 1981-82 recession because so many other industries -- retailing, construction, insurance, banking and airlines, to name a few -- were expanding rapidly.


Motorcades and Bush, But (Gasp!) No Gridlock
Gridlock, that theoretical state in which motion halts, time stretches to infinity and motorists are reduced to quivering masses of protoplasm, did not materialize in Manhattan yesterday, despite a glut of motorcades and other comings and goings for the opening of the 46th United Nations General Assembly.
With the arrival of President Bush's 15-car, 30-motorcycle entourage and a plethora of other dignitaries moving around in flag-fluttering, traffic-choking limousines, the city had posted an East Side "gridlock alert" for yesterday, one of a dozen issued each year to warn of potential traffic freeze-ups.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Sept. 14 with an article about Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder's announcement of his Presidential candidacy, and a picture caption with the continuation of the article, reversed the identities of Mr.
Wilder's daughters.
In both pictures, Lynn was at the left.


Insurers Plan to Fight Congress on Small-Business Health Coverage
Private health insurers are planning a nationwide lobbying campaign to forestall Congress from passing legislation that would require them to provide health coverage to the millions of uninsured workers who work for small businesses.
The lobbying campaign is being aimed at state legislatures around the country.
Insurers say changes in state laws are preferable because they will provide more flexibility in addressing local needs.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Meskhi Defeats Probst
Second-seeded Leila Meskhi of the Soviet Union defeated Wiltrud Probst of Germany, 7-5, 6-4, yesterday in the first round of the Bayonne Open in France.
Unseeded Claudia Porwick of Germany beat Denisa Szabova of Czechoslovakia, 6-1, 6-3.
Top-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere of Switzerland will face Alexia Dechaume of France today.
Third-seeded Nathalie Tauziat of France will meet her countrywoman, Anges Zugasti. (AP) Matsuoka Beats Lundgren: Sixth-seeded Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan used an accurate first serve to defeat Peter Lundgren of Sweden, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the Queensland Open in Brisbane, Australia.
Todd Woodbridge of Australia, seeded fourth, beat Jeff Tarango of the United States, 6-3, 7-6, while eighth-seeded Richard Fromberg of Australia beat his compatriot, Mark Kratzmann, 7-5, 6-3.
Lundgren led by 30-0 in the final game, but double-faulted, letting Matsuoka back into contention. (AP) HORSE RACING Le Famo Triumphs
Le Famo took the lead entering the stretch and drew away to a convincing seven-length victory over Cazzy B. in the $47,000 Larida Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park.
Ridden by Jose Santos and carrying 120 pounds, Le Famo earned her fourth victory in 15 starts this year by beating six others in the mile-and-a-sixteenth race on the turf for older filies and mares.
Le Famo was timed in 1:41 3/5 and returned $5.80, $3.60 and $2.60 for $2 across the board. (AP)


Armenia and Azerbaijan Sign a Peace Agreement
The first major post-Communist attempt at inter-republic diplomacy resulted today in the signing of a formal agreement to submit the fierce Nagorno-Karabakh conflict to peace negotiations.
The agreement, which includes an immediate cease-fire, followed 14 hours of difficult negotiations resulting from the mediation efforts of the leaders of the two largest Soviet republics, the Russian federation President, Boris N. Yeltsin, and the Kazakhstan President, Nursultan A. Nazarbayev.


Q&amp;A
Volcano Dating
Q.
How do we know when ancient volcanic eruptions occurred?


Compuflight Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Accounts
*
K-Swiss Inc., Pacoima, Calif., a maker of athletic footwear, to Kresser/Craig, Santa Monica, for its $4 million-plus account.
The incumbent was Della Femina, McNamee, Los Angeles.


A Chance for Justice at the U.N.
A certain loftiness is customary from orators at the United Nations, and in any case President Bush, leader of Desert Storm, earned the right to recite the gains of freedom yesterday while aiming a blunt warning at an impenitent Saddam Hussein.
Yet he gave strong weight to an address thick with generalities by calling for the unconditional repeal of a notorious resolution about Zionism that may constitute the U.N.'s most unjust action.
By voting for repeal, every member state can remove an obstacle to reconciling diplomacy.


Chess
There are players who get into time pressure no matter what their situation.
Joel Benjamin, editor of the new magazine, "Chess Chow" is one.
That the 27-year-old New York grandmaster ran short of time in Game 1 of his final four-game United States championship elimination match with Gata Kamsky, a 17-year-old Brooklyn grandmaster, was not surprising.
He faced difficulties created by Kamsky's original play.
That is one reason even normally quick movers sometimes slow down radically.


Carr to Spurs, Schintzius to Kings
The Sacramento Kings have traded veteran forward ANTOINE CARR to the San Antonio Spurs for center DWAYNE SCHINTZIUS and a 1994 second-round draft pick.


PERU CHIEF'S VISIT HELPS AID CHANCES
A visit to Washington last week by President Alberto Fujimori of Peru has started the wheels turning in Congress for a compromise in which Peru would receive $94.9 million in military and economic aid that has been blocked because of human rights abuses.
Congressional aides said yesterday that it now seemed likely that Peru would receive all of the $60 million in economic aid that had been requested by the Bush Administration and most, if not all, of $34.9 million in military assistance.


Pearl Harbor Day Will Probably Go Smoothly
To the Editor:
Despite its foreboding tone, your Sept. 1 front-page report from Honolulu on anxieties over the planned 50th anniversary observance of Pearl Harbor Day resembles a tempest in a Pacific teapot.


The Internationalist Head of the Dia Arts Center
For her, the world centers of art are not the Met, the Louvre, the Prado and the British Museum.
They are the Hallen Sur Neue Kunst in a converted warehouse in Schaffhausen, Switzerland, the Castello Rivoli in a converted 17th-center palazzo outside of Turin -- and the Dia Center for the Arts here in SoHo.
She is Lynne Cooke, recently appointed curator of the last of these Meccas of contemporary art, succeeding Gary Garrells, who has moved on to the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis.
The Dia Center, which was known as the Dia Art Foundation before its reorganization in 1987, is one of the country's wealthiest institutions devoted to contemporary art.


Arafat Backs a Conference But Makes No Concessions
Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, expressed support today for American efforts to convene a Middle East peace conference, but he offered no specific concessions to meet Israeli demands for Palestinian attendance at such a gathering.
Addressing 450 delegates at the opening of a meeting of the Palestine National Council, the P.L.O.'s parliament, Mr.
Arafat apparently tried to strike a balance between moderates within his organization who want compromise with the United States on the peace talks and hard-liners opposed to any concessions to Israel.


Books of The Times; The Metamorphosis of the Networks
Three Blind Mice How the TV Networks Lost Their Way  By Ken Auletta 642 pages.
Random House. $25
In the mid-1980's, in the space of just about one year, the three broadcast networks changed hands and started to lose their grip.


Hewlett Accord With Microsoft
The Hewlett-Packard Company and the Microsoft Corporation said they would work together to insure compatibility of advanced software that each is developing.
Hewlett-Packard, which is based in Palo Alto, Calif., has been promoting New Wave, a program that allows different software programs to work together.
It competes in some ways with Object Linking and Embedding, a program that Microsoft is including in its Windows software.


Brazil's Environmental Plea Appears to Be Aimed at U.S.
In a speech before the General Assembly highlighted by his implicit criticism of the United States, the President of Brazil, Fernando Collor de Mello, said today that there was "an inescapable obligation" for nations to accept mandatory measures to protect the environment.
"Just as the question of development has yielded to other issues on the international agenda, I am concerned that the issue of the environment may also yield to other aspects of the day-to-day life of the world," said Mr.
Collor, whose country is to be the site of the first Earth Summit in June.


Did Ferry Terminal Meet Fire Safety Rules?
To the Editor:
Though homeless people may in the end be blamed for causing the fire at the Staten Island Ferry Terminal (news article, Sept. 11), there are too many unanswered questions.
According to New York City building codes, the loft space above the ceiling and below the roof of a building with this type of occupancy should have been equipped with smoke detectors, sprinklers or both; should have been divided into small spaces by fire-resistive partitions, and should have been constructed of noncombustible materials.
Were there sprinklers?
Smoke detectors?
Did they work?
What combustible materials could support such a conflagration?


Blue Jays Try Chasing Angels After 7-0 Deficit, but Lose, 10-9
Good news apparently wasn't enough to carry the Toronto Blue Jays tonight.
Buoyed by the loss of the second-place Boston Red Sox earlier in the evening, the Blue Jays still fell flat, losing to the California Angels, 10-9, but holding their game-and-a-half lead in the American League East.
The Blue Jays, 4-8 in a 23-game stretch against American League West teams, struggled to come from behind after starter Tom Candiotti gave up seven runs to the Angels in the first inning.


Bridge
Worrying about the location of an honor card is commonplace, but worrying about the location of a seven-spot is a rare event indeed.
It happened on the diagramed deal from the Vanderbilt Knockout Team in Atlantic City in July, and the North-South cards were held by Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., and Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I.
South had a difficult rebid after the one-heart response to his one-diamond opening.
His one-spade bid would be the choice of most experts, rather than a jump to three diamonds: A small lie about the spade suit is a reasonable price to pay for increased flexibility in the auction.


Great Performers Plans Rossini Bicentennial
The 1991-92 Great Performers series at Lincoln Center will include a Rossini Bicentennial Birthday Gala starring June Anderson, Marilyn Horne, Samuel Ramey and Frederica von Stade; a screening of the 1938 film "Alexander Nevsky" with the Prokofiev score played live by the Boston Symphony Orchestra, and recitals by Mirella Freni, Cecilia Bartoli, Jerry Hadley, Aprile Millo, Jessye Norman and Neil Shicoff.
The series opens on Oct. 8 with a recital by the soprano Lucia Popp at Alice Tully Hall.
In other programs, most of which are at Avery Fisher Hall, the flutist Jean-Pierre Rampal will celebrate his 70th birthday in a concert with Isaac Stern and Mstislav Rostropovich, the Salzburg Marionette Theater will give fully staged productions of four Mozart operas, and Luciano Pavarotti and friends will sing arias and duets.
Information: (212) 875-5030.


Greek High Court to Decide On Extradition in Hijacking
Greece's Supreme Court is to decide this week whether to extradite to Italy a Palestinian accused of masterminding the hijacking of the Mediterranean cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985.
The defendant, Abdulrahim Khaled, 57 years old, was caught by chance in March in a police raid on an Athens apartment.
His appeal against extradition is due to be heard by the Supreme Court on Tuesday.


Unisys Introduces New Mainframe
The Unisys Corporation introduced a new high-end mainframe it hopes will help salvage its weak business.
The new line is intended for airlines, governments and other large users of the high-powered machines.


Greentree Software reports earnings for Year to May 31


Executive Life Bid Advisers
The French insurance company Mutuale Assurance Artisanale de France named a team of executives today to lead its bid to acquire the failed Executive Life Insurance Company of California.
Mutuale Assurance said that John F. Hartigan, a lawyer and a former assistant director of enforcement at the Securities and Exchange Commission, would lead a transition administration and planning effort for its proposed purchase of Executive Life.
Working with Mr.
Hartigan will be Charles Carroll of the accounting firm Ernst &amp; Young and Thomas J. Bond, a former Texas insurance commissioner.


PRISON LABOR SEEN IN CHINESE IMPORTS
Administration officials told a Congressional hearing today that strong evidence existed that China had exported products made by prison labor to the United States in violation of American laws.
The testimony gave support to opponents of the unconditional renewal of China's trade status with the United States.
Their statements, however, appeared unlikely to enable Congress to override a promised presidential veto of legislation that would make improving China's human rights record and other policies a condition of extending its most-favored-nation trade status beyond June.


Regulators Add to Ties Abroad
United States securities regulators are expected to sign four new agreements expanding cooperative ties with their counterparts in other nations during an international regulatory conference that opens here Tuesday.
The first of these pacts was concluded today by Richard C. Breeden, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Sir Leon Brittan, vice president for financial institutions with the Commission of the European Communities.


TADZHIK REPUBLIC OUSTS PRESIDENT
The old guard Communists of the Tadzhikistan Parliament rose up today and forced the republic's President to resign because he had suspended the party's activities and seized its property in the wake of the unsuccessful Kremlin coup a month ago.
The action, which cuts defiantly across the anti-Communist wave sweeping the shattered Soviet nation, was both a feisty sign of life in a central Asian branch of the party given to insulated autocracy as well as a measure of how distant from the course of Moscow events this southernmost republic lies.


Can the Brain Provide Clues to Intelligence?
THE inner sanctum of the K.G.B. seems an extraordinary place for a brain laboratory to elucidate the structure of great minds.
But, according to the CBS News magazine "60 Minutes," Russian scientists, watched carefully by the Soviet secret police, peered through microscopes for decades to scrutinize tens of thousands of slides made from scores of brains, including those of Lenin, Stalin and other prominent Communists.


Arabs Hold Strike to Protest Israeli Settlement Campaign


Origins of Montana Prison Uprising Still Unclear
State corrections officials said today that they still did not know whether the prison uprising here in which five inmates were killed had been planned, although they said that one of the dead inmates had been scheduled to testify next week in the trial of two other inmates.
Prison officials said the inmates were beaten and tortured during the seige, but they would neither confirm nor deny reports by The Associated Press that four of the five slain convicts were hanged.
The dead inmates were among 10 prisoners being held in protective custody as informers, witnesses or for other reasons in a separate section of the Montana State Prison.


Salomon Plans Reserve For Fines and Lawsuits
Salomon Brothers plans to announce in mid-October the amount of money it will hold in reserve for Government fines and the costs of lawsuits that the firm expects from the Treasuries market scandal, Salomon told customers yesterday.
Wall Street executives also said that the firm would determine bonuses for employees within 30 days and that payments would be far more discriminating than in the past.
One executive said he had heard that Salomon planned to pay its best people more money than they expected, while cutting back significantly on pay to junior executives.


Pearl Harbor Day Will Probably Go Smoothly; Turning Other Cheek
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 1 report on the controversy and deep feelings that surround the coming 50th anniversary of Pearl Harbor quotes venerable World War II veterans like Hawaii's Senator Daniel K. Inouye, who would bury the past and look forward to a successful reconciliation with the Japanese.
But is it all well and good to protect our economic interests, if it means turning the other cheek?


Merrill Looks at Season And Says He's Innocent
Stump Merrill wore a ripped T-shirt, long underwear, slippers and an occasional frown today as he spoke frankly about his tenuous future as manager of the Yankees.
The manager made biting remarks about the New York news media, said he was not at fault for the dreary season and bravely claimed he was not fearful of being fired from the job he labored 11 years as a minor league manager to obtain.


Our Towns
Virtually every suburban municipality has several.
They identify themselves as concerned citizens.
Exercising their right, they speak about their grievance at public meetings.
They write voluminous letters crammed with evidence, even invective.
They make countless phone calls; some are returned.
They dispatch frequent faxes with notations scribbled in the margin.
Maybe they have an ad hoc group, maybe they stand alone in the maddeningly silent face of official indifference.
Maybe, dare it be said, they harbor a smidgen of political motive.
They never bring good news, these persistent people.
Usually they're angry, always they're frustrated; no one expects a big city to respond to a lone voice, but a suburb should, right?
Many times these minor fights assume a life of their own, with charges of rudeness and ignorance echoing in local newspapers that thrive on and fuel such controversy.
The original issue sometimes gets lost.


Aim of Apple-I.B.M. Tie Is Discussed
The chairman of Apple Computer and the president of I.B.M.'s personal computer business explained their proposed alliance publicly for the first time at an industry conference here today.
They said the partnership was intended to restore growth and innovation in the desktop computer market, which has slowed markedly as it has matured.
But the two executives refused to go beyond general comments on the new relationship, which stunned the computer world when it was announced earlier this year.
A number of executives at both companies said the negotiations, which have at times involved as many as 400 people, had gone slower than had been expected, although they insisted final terms were near.


Behavior Can't Change Blood-Transfused AIDS
To the Editor:
I was shocked and outraged by President Bush's response to a demonstration at Kennebunkport, Me., by advocates for people with AIDS (news article, Sept. 3).
He characterized acquired immune deficiency syndrome as "a disease where you can control its spread by your own personal behavior."
This is certainly not true for those who have contracted the human immunodeficiency virus through infected blood transfusions.
There is a long history of hemophilia in my family, with my uncle and cousin, as well as myself all suffering from this affliction.
All three of us also tested positive for the AIDS virus due to contaminated Factor 8 blood-clotting products.
None of us could have prevented ourselves from becoming infected with this hideous disease; we were all simply trying to stay alive.


Paul Lang, Musicologist and Critic, Is Dead at 90
Paul Henry Lang, a renowned musicologist and music critic, died on Saturday at his home in Lakeville, Conn.
He was 90 years old.
He died of heart failure, his son Jeremy said.


New Battle For Hedgehog
Sonic the Hedgehog, a video- game character that routinely trounces its foes, is embroiled in another type of struggle: a multimillion-dollar advertising war between Sega of America, its creator, and Nintendo of America.
While Sega is the leader in the more powerful, 16-bit segment of the video-game systems market, Nintendo has brought out a 16-bit Super Nintendo Entertainment System.
Nintendo dominates the overall video-game market in large part because of its Mario Brothers characters.


Fox Network Producer Named TV Guide Editor
Anthea Disney, executive producer of the Fox television show "A Current Affair" and a former editor of US and Self magazines, was named yesterday to be editor in chief of TV Guide.
Effective immediately, she replaces Joe Robinowitz, who moved to the newly created position of executive vice president of News America Publishing Inc., the subsidiary of Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation that operates his vastly reduced American magazine business.


A Theory Discounted On Gamma Ray Origin
THE performance of a spacecraft surveying the cosmos for gamma radiation has been flawless, astronomers reported yesterday, but they were dismayed that its first major discovery appeared to demolish a favorite theory on the nature of those brief, mystifying flashes of intense energy known as gamma-ray bursters.
At the same time, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration announced that the 17-ton spacecraft, launched in April, was being named the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory in honor of the late Dr.
Arthur Holly Compton, one of the first Americans to win a Nobel Prize in physics.
His research at Washington University in St.
Louis and the University of Chicago in the 1920's led to fundamental discoveries about light and high-energy radiation.


Hotels Await the Wake-Up Call
The nation's economy may be sputtering toward a recovery, but the hotel industry remains mired in its worst morass in decades, headed for its 10th consecutive year of losses.
"Sixty percent of the hotels in the U.S. are experiencing a net operating loss," said Bjorn Hanson, a partner in Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm.
"And this year that loss will reach a little more than $1,000 per room."


Washington Talk; Question on Jobless Bill: Can It Survive a Veto?
Sometime in the next week or so, Congress will almost certainly send President Bush a Democratic bill that would spend about $6 billion to help 3 million people who have been out of work for at least half a year.
Before then, Republicans will denounce the bill as a "budget buster," as President Bush did in killing a similar measure last month.
They will say, as Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, said Friday that the Democrats are more interested in an issue than in helping the unemployed with as many as 20 more weeks of jobless benefits.


Who's That on the Horizon? Montana
JOE MONTANA, the San Francisco 49ers' quarterback, was examined by team doctors yesterday and they said he may be able to start throwing as soon as Friday.
Montana hasn't thrown a football since Aug. 13 because of a torn right elbow tendon.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
U.S. securities regulators are expected to sign four new agreements expanding cooperative ties with their counterparts in other nations during an international regulatory conference.  [ Page D1. ]
The recession ended at least three months ago, an overwhelming majority of economists insist, despite scant evidence so far of consumer participation.  [ D1. ]


Dow Declines by 8.72, With Trading Slow
Blue-chip stocks fluctuated in a tight trading range for most of yesterday's session before falling slightly in the late afternoon.
Smaller stocks were also off, dipping below the record levels they reached on Friday.
The Dow Jones industrial average was down 8.72, to 3,010.51.


No Split Seen Over Tobacco
SCIENTISTS doing research financed by the tobacco industry believe that cigarette smoking is an addiction and causes a wide range of diseases, a new survey has found.
The scientists who conducted the survey said it demonstrated that the scientific community was not divided on the relationship between tobacco and health and that the tobacco industry did not act based on the opinions of scientists whose research it finances.


Red Sox, in Need of Luck, Get Everything but, and Lose
There were only 13 games left for the Boston Red Sox when they took to the field tonight, in pursuit of their second straight American League East title.
An unlucky number, perhaps, for those given to such superstitions.
And a black cat appeared on the field right before a crucial error favoring Baltimore.
But good karma, bad karma or no karma at all, one thing was certain: Boston had no luck at all.


Could President Bush's 15-Car, 30-Motorcycle Motorcade Get Past New York Traffic?


Robert K. Woetzel, 60, Founder of Law Group
Robert Kurt Woetzel, a professor and specialist in international law, died on Sept. 6 at his home in Montecito, Calif., a suburb of Santa Barbara.
He was 60 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Decision Is Delayed
A spokesman for BO JACKSON's doctor said yesterday no decision has been made concerning the two-sport star's immediate football future, and one won't be made until after the baseball season.
"Bo has said from early on that while baseball season is on, he's going to concentrate on baseball," said LANIER JOHNSON, a spokesman for Dr.
JAMES R. ANDREWS and Alabama Sports Medicine in Birmingham, Ala.
"When football season gets here, he'll deal with football."


Economic Scene; Cement Shoes For Venezuela
TRADE dumping: the words conjure up scenes of wily foreigners plotting to drown American businesses in a torrent of cut-price goods.
But what Washington calls dumping bears only a passing resemblance to the image.
In fact, some economists think that illegal dumping should often be celebrated rather than prosecuted.
A new case, involving sales of Venezuelan cement in Florida, illustrates their point.


Condition Worsens
The condition of boxer MICHAEL WATSON has deteriorated, according to doctors, who said the 26-year-old could have suffered permanent brain damage in his supermiddleweight title bout on Saturday.
Watson, who has been in a coma since shortly after his bout Saturday in London with CHRIS EUBANK, has since undergone two emergency operations to remove blood clots from his brain, but doctors said X-rays yesterday showed that his brain remained swollen and that the pressure on it had increased. . . .
Bantamweight FERNIE MORALES remained in a coma and in critical condition in a California hospital, three days after he collapsed after losing a bout to ORLANDO GONZALES.  . . .
Trainer LOU DUVA undewent triple bypass heart surgery in Houston, where heavyweight champion EVANDER HOLFYFIELD has been training with Duva for the Nov. 8 defense against former champion MIKE TYSON.
His prognosis was later described as excellent. (AP)


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.25
5.25
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.19
5.21
7.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.23
5.25
7.41
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.35
7.34
8.86
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.88
7.87
9.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
8.97
10.13
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.91
6.91
7.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Blue-Chip Stocks Rally; Dow Gains 18.56
After drifting listlessly through most of yesterday's session, blue-chip stocks rallied and posted moderate gains in what analysts described as a quick burst of futures-related buying.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which had been down as much as 14 points in the morning, closed up 18.56, to 3,029.07.


Panel Clears Bill to Make U.S. Purge List of Aliens
Congressional negotiators today adopted the Senate version of a measure that would require the State Department to remove from a secret list more than 300,000 aliens it has considered ideologically unacceptable to enter the United States.
The bill, which was approved by the Senate in June and would give the State Department three years to purge the names, was supported by the Bush Administration.
A version approved by the House would have provided only six months to purge the list.
The Senate version also gave the State Department leeway in putting names on another, acceptable list of people who were considered a threat to national security or inimical to the nation's foreign policy interests.


Cellular Gain by Motorola
Motorola Inc. said yesterday that it would offer a new radio-transmission technology that triples the capacity of a cellular telephone network.
Motorola officials said the new system, which they called Narrow-Band Advanced Mobile Phone Service, splits a standard cellular channel into three and uses new signal techniques to eliminate interference.


Plans for Electronic Medical Journal
To speed up news about life-saving drugs and treatments, a scientific organization said yesterday that it would produce an electronic medical journal.
Unlike other electronic communications, this will be the first whose contributions will be screened by fellow experts before appearing on the computer screen.


U.S. Firm on Soviet Bar
The Bush Administration said today that it still opposed the sale of fiber-optic telecommunications equipment to the Soviet Union.
The Soviets have sought the relaxation of cold war rules that bar exports of certain advanced technologies.
Restrictions on some technologies have been relaxed but not on fiber-optic sales.
The main reason is that it is more difficult for Western spy agencies to eavesdrop on Soviet communications that pass over optical fibers than it is to intercept radio signals sent through the air.


Many Avoid Dealers in Note Sale
In an apparent reaction to the shadow the Salomon Brothers scandal has cast on Wall Street, many participants at yesterday's auction of two-year Treasury notes chose to bypass dealing with the 39 institutions that are primary dealers in Government securities.
Instead, they placed bids directly wih the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
In releasing the auction results, the Treasury Department said 79 percent of the bids submitted by New York primary dealers for the $13 billion issue were accepted, compared with an average of 90 percent in past auctions.


EAST'S MASTER SPY SEIZED BY BERLIN
Markus Wolf, the master spy who for decades taunted and harassed Western governments from his bastion within the old East German Stasi, surrendered to German prosecutors today after a year-long flight that included a long stay in the Soviet Union and an unsuccesful quest for asylum in Austria.
Mr.
Wolf's Central Administration for Intelligence, the East German spy agency, was long considered among the most effective in the old Soviet-led East bloc, scoring such espionage successes as planting an agent as one of the chief aides of Chancellor Willy Brandt.
In that case, the disclosure that Gunther Guillaume, Mr.
Brandt's associate was a Stasi operative, led directly to the Chancellor's resignation in 1974.
Last year, in another striking revelation, German officials announced the arrest of Klaus Kuron, a senior West German counterintelligence officer who for eight years monitored West German double agents who spied against East Germany while serving as an East German agent.


CHRONICLE
Note from the "How time flies" file: It has been 50 years since HENNY YOUNGMAN first uttered the line, "Take my wife -- please," and what is more, he had already been in show business for 10 years when he said it.
So tonight there will be a party commemorating the dual anniverary at the Nile, a Middle Eastern nightclub at 327 West 44th Street.
On a telephone interview this week, Mr.
Youngman, who is 85 years old -- "I'll be 86 if they let me," he said -- demonstrated that his ability to deliver rapid-fire quips has not been slowed by time.
Asked what prompted the line about his wife, he said: "I was to be on the Kate Smith Show. My wife came in at the last minute with seven ladies needing tickets. I said to the usher, 'Take my wife, please.' Did I know that would become a nationally known saying?"


U.S. Buyers Cite Delays in Purchases From Japan
A Government report issued today says American electronics companies frequently report difficulties in buying the most advanced components and manufacturing equipment from Japan.
Such difficulties could seriously undermine the American companies' competitiveness.
The report, by the General Accounting Office, the auditing arm of Congress, said 22 of 61 American companies it interviewed reported that in at least one instance Japanese suppliers had refused to sell advanced components or machines that were on sale in Japan, or had delayed deliveries by six months or longer.


Gridlock Menace Eased By Stationary President
"Frozen" avenues thawed and Secret Service sharpshooters repacked their weapons yesterday as New York City's most fussed-over guest ended his latest stay.
It was an occasion that city officials have come to dread as more visitation than visit.
But when President Bush's helicopter lifted off from the South Street heliport, 30 hours after his arrival, relieved traffic and police officials said that a combination of factors had worked to limit the disruption often associated with Presidential visits that coincide with the opening of a United Nations session.


Canada Seeks Licenses For Pocket Telephones
In a move that upstages efforts in the United States, the Canadian Government said yesterday that it would begin taking applications for licenses for new wireless pocket telephone services.
The move paves the way for the development of advanced services that are still the subject of lengthy policy debate in the United States.
Analysts said the move was likely to increase the pressure on American policy makers as to what kinds of services they wanted to authorize.


2 C.I.A. Officials Say They Told Gates of Iran-Contra Suspicions
The memory of Robert M. Gates was challenged today as two senior Central Intelligence Agency officials said they presented him with indications that the White House was illegally funneling money to the Nicaraguan rebels.
The testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee by Richard Kerr, the Acting Director of Central Intelligence, and Charles E. Allen, a senior agency analyst, was at odds with Mr.
Gates's sworn testimony that he did not remember being told of their suspicions that Oliver L. North, a national security aide, was involved in the diversion of profits from Iran arms sales to the contras.  [ Excerpts from the testimony appear on page A18. ] Confirmation Seen Likely
The new material adds to the weight of evidence suggesting that Mr.
Gates, President Bush's nominee for Director of Central Intelligence, was warned in more detail than he has admitted to Congress that money was channeled to the contra rebels for weapons purchases at a time when Congress had barred direct Government assistance.


Defense Carrying Giants As Usual
In the old Yankee Stadium, players named Huff, Modzelewski and Grier were honored not for scoring touchdowns but for stopping them.
The cry was "Defense! Defense!" shouted by Giants' ticket holders from Madison Avenue to Wall Street.


Fed Bank Regulator Wins Support for Seidman Posts
William Taylor, the Federal Reserve Board's top banking regulator, won broad Congressional support today to succeed L. William Seidman as chairman of the the sister agencies managing the bailouts of the nation's banks and savings and loans.
Senator Donald W. Riegle, the Michigan Democrat who heads the Senate Banking Committee, said after a hearing today on Mr.
Taylor's confirmation that he did not see any impediments to his nomination to head the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Resolution Trust Corporation.
He also expressed satisfaction with Mr.
Taylor's answers to questions about his supervision over the last six years of some of the banks involved in the scandal of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.


U.S. EXTENDS DEAL FOR SOVIET LOANS
Agriculture Secretary Edward R. Madigan announced today that he was changing loan guarantees for the Soviet Union to make them more attractive to commercial banks.
In response to an urgent request from the Soviet authorities, President Bush made $315 million in loan guarantees available immediately in late August.
But the Soviets have only been able to obtain loans with $104 million of the guarantees, using the credit lines set up before the unsuccessful hard-line coup in the Soviet Union last month.


2 Prescriptions to Reduce Financial Fraud
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady and Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, today offered sharply different prescriptions for reducing fraud in the world's financial markets, with messages that responded to domestic politics as well as to global regulatory concerns.
Mr.
Brady, who spent a career on Wall Street before coming to Washington, used the forum of the annual meeting of the International Organization of Securities Commissions to warn Congress not to respond to recent financial scandals by imposing burdensome new market rules or by backing away from overhauling the banking system.


Moscow State Changing Its Books and Ideology
Moscow State University, an architectural and ideological monolith towering above the country's capital, has been left an orphan.
The ideology that fathered it, at least in its current incarnation, is comatose.
The state that nurtured it has passed away.
But it retains a stubborn devotion to its progenitors.
Courses like the once-required History of Atheism are gone, but many of the same men and women who stood behind the lectern then are still there, teaching new offerings like History of Religion.


Cuomo Ideas for New York City: Some Are Old, Some Are New
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's plan to prime New York City's economy with public works, an expansive vision of new high-tech "people movers," subway lines and huge housing complexes, is actually a melange of proposals, some bold and new but many old and languishing.
The Governor presented his plan yesterday, backed by stirring music and an elaborate, handsome film, offering a $7 billion wish list to restore the city's luster.


A Chronicler of Growth In Biotechnology Area
For G. Steven Burrill, writing Ernst &amp; Young's annual report on the progress of the biotechnology industry is like watching the baby he saw born coming of age.
The San Francisco-based partner in the international accounting firm worked with Geentech, Cetus and many other industry pioneers from their founding days in the 1970's.
His conclusion this year: "The product trickle of yesterday is becoming a stream flowing into many sectors, including health care-pharmaceuticals, agriculture, chemicals, energy and bioremediation. The profile today is of an industry past its incubation."


Mulroney Proposes New Canadian Framework to Stall Separatism
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, today proposed the most comprehensive constitutional overhaul since the nation's birth in 1867, recommending a new federal structure aimed at stalling the separatist movement in French-speaking Quebec.
The Government proposal, which was presented in a package called "Shaping Canada's Future Together," stressed the reaffirmation of a binding Canadian identity and called for the strengthening of economic integration by striking down trade barriers between the provinces.
In his address to the House of Commons, the Canadian leader declared that "renewal is what Canadians everywhere seek for our country -- not confrontation, not division, not rupture."


Review/Dance; In New Works, Laughter, The Alphabet and Old Saws
Dancers mixed linguistics with laughter on Monday night at the Judson Memorial Church in a program that was part of an enterprising series of performances of new work presented by Movement Research.
At the beginning of "El Alfabeto Espanol," Arthur Aviles struck isolated poses while a tape of the alphabet in Spanish played.
He continued with a gleeful solo, interrupted his festivities to introduce himself and pay tribute to his mother and partnered Chikako Yamauchi in a dignified duet.


Dinkins Orders Review Of Hospital in Brooklyn
An angry Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he had appointed a special counsel to conduct a "thorough, top-to-bottom" investigation of emergency room procedures at the Kings County Hospital Center in response to a state report that attributed the death of a Hasidic man in Crown Heights last month to inadequate treatment at the hospital.
The Mayor, speaking at a press conference, also sharply criticized officials in his own administration, saying they had failed to give him the results of an internal investigation by the hospital that was completed on Sept. 5.
The report found serious lapses in the care given to the stabbing victim, Yankel Rosenbaum.
Mr.
Dinkins said he first saw the report yesterday morning.


British Hostage, 77, Freed in Lebanon
Pro-Iranian kidnappers released a British hostage here today, the fourth Western captive to be released in Lebanon in the last six weeks.
Security officials in Beirut said that the freed hostage, Jack Mann, was handed over to Syrian security officers in Beirut, and that they drove him to Damascus to be handed over to British officials there.


Continental Bank Departure
S.
Waite Rawls 3d, vice chairman of the Continental Bank Corporation, resigned yesterday, saying he had pruned the bank's operations to the point that there was no longer a need for him to stay.
Mr.
Rawls, 43 years old, joined Continental Bank in 1988 from the Chemical Bank of New York.
At Continental, Mr.
Rawls immediately set out to build a huge operation that would focus on foreign exchange trading, distribution of corporations' debt securities, and management of corporations' interest-rate and currency risks.


For Yanks' Rookies, to Err Is Typical
They can thrill with their skill one inning and then make mistakes that open mouths an inning later.
They are rookies and the Yankees have endured rounds of delight and depression from their collection of youngsters this long season.
The Yankees probably lead the league in the dreaded rookie mistake because nine players have made their major league debut with the club.


South Korea Tells U.N. Of Hope for Unification
President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea proposed a three-stage plan today for the reunification of his country with North Korea, conditioning such a move on North Korea's immediately abandoning its development of nuclear weapons and allowing international inspections.
A decades-long effort by North Korea and South Korea to join the United Nations ended in success last week when they became the 160th and 161st members.
Today Mr.
Roh became the first head of state from either country to address the General Assembly as a full member.


Saudis Flex Muscle in Ultimatum to OPEC
Saudi Arabia served notice today that it would retain the huge share of OPEC production it has secured since August 1990, and sent its strongest signal yet to world oil markets that it was intent on keeping oil prices at their current moderate levels.
"Nobody has to approve what Saudi Arabia produces," the Saudi oil minister, Hisham M. Nazer, told reporters before meeting with other oil ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
He added that the kingdom would retain its production level of 8.5 million barrels a day, about a third of OPEC's total output of 23.6 million.


Sanders Will Do Double Duty By Helping Braves in Title Drive
Atlanta's busiest professional athlete, Deion Sanders, jumped from the Atlanta Falcons to the Atlanta Braves today in a move designed to give back to the baseball team some of the speed it lost last week with the suspension of league-leading base stealer Otis Nixon.
Only two days after helping the Falcons beat the Los Angeles Raiders, Sanders showed up in the Braves' locker room, greeted by a round of high-fives and back slaps from his Braves teammates.


Where Silence Was Golden, Pocket Phones Now Shriek
The hushed conversations and gentle clicks of cutlery against china at Campton Place, an elegant San Francisco restaurant, were shattered recently by a high-pitched squeal that seemed to emanate from one diner.
A pacemaker gone awry?
A stray white-collar criminal with an electronic handcuff?
No, it was another sort of tie that binds: Brad Kendal's new portable telephone, a $1,200 Pocket Commander.
"I forgot to turn it off," he said to his companion.
"Yeah!" he answered into the phone.


Metropolitan Diary
THE scene is the north side of 57th Street between Seventh Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas.
Time: end of day.
Assorted film people from the television show "Law and Order" are sitting and standing around on the sidewalk.
Adrian Bryan-Brown, who is passing by, spots a large piece of paper taped to the side of one of the movie-supply trucks.
He reads the hand-printed message:
FAMOUS PEOPLE WE'VE SEEN TODAY  1. Mayor Ed Koch (ex)
2. Werner Klemperer
3. Sylvia Miles (twice)
4. Elvis
5. Cindy Crawford
6. Jackie Mason (from the back, but one person saw all of him)
7. The 6th famous person's assistant
8. David Johansen
9. John Cougar Mellencamp
10. Paul Sorvino
11. Michael Moriarty
12.
13.
Mr. Bryan-Brown smiles, moves on, heads home, spots no one famous.
Paul Bogart dials a telephone number in Manhattan.
Voice on phone:
Good morning. Qantas Airlines.
Paul Bogart:
I'm sorry. I've dialed the wrong number.
Voice on phone:
That's perfectly all right. Thank you for calling Qantas.
Overheard by Charles Cale Lehman in the classical-music section of Tower Records, 66th Street and Broadway.
Clerk to inquiring customer: "I'm sorry, but we don't segregate the castrati and the non-castrati."
Early morning at 58th Street and Madison Avenue.
Frank E. Karelsen 3d sees two men in running shorts and T-shirts, perspiring profusely.
When they reach the corner, a stretch limousine appears out of nowhere.
The doors open, the two step inside and soon emerge, each holding their business suit for the day.
The limo leaves, the men turn the corner and disappear into the morning mist.
Dear Diary:
I'm glad I grew up when I did; we had so many experiences kids today can't know.
With no VCR's or Nintendos, rainy-day creativity was forced on us.
Dumbwaiter riding, for instance.
A dumbwaiter was an integral part of my old brownstone, built in the days when the formal dining room was above the kitchen and servants were a normal part of the household.
Dumbwaiters were large wooden boxes recessed into the kitchen wall.
When, during dinner, the mistress of the house pressed a foot buzzer, it alerted the downstairs maid, who placed the next course on the dumbwaiter and pulled it up on a pulley rope.
When I was 6 or 7, a friend dared me to crawl into the dumbwaiter, saying she would pull me up.
And so a new amusement was born.
It required a bit of courage for a small child, because total darkness prevailed during the journey down.
If other friends came to visit, we put messages of great importance on the shelf and pulled them up.
Parental objections were never a factor, mainly, I suspect, because they never knew of our escapades.
Dumbwaiter rides, one-way or round-trip, grew into a game we never tired of playing.
What finally ended our dumbwaiter journeys was size.
One had to be small to accomplish the ride and when we grew bigger, this giddy sport became part of our past.
RUTH WARD
A Madison Avenue bus on Yom Kippur eve.
A mother and her son, 5 or 6 years old, chat amiably.
Boy:
There's something really good I want to see on TV tonight.
Mom:
You know we don't watch TV on serious holidays.
Boy, thinks hard, then his face lights up:
So, we can tape it.
CHICKEN SOUP  Chicken soup is more than a soup.
Chicken soup is more than a meal  Chicken soup is religion you eat with a spoon.
Chicken soup is a very big deal.
Chicken soup was created when the first chicken  Met the first mom with a ladle.
From that came this elixer of life.
A potage for dotage and cradle.
Every culture and country says theirs is the greatest,  Every mother's, a haven from strife.
Whether she poured it straight from a can  Or gave it five years of life.
It's comfort and warmth, "Home" in a bowl.
The broth of gods, chicken scented.
The manna from Heaven would have been chicken soup,  But matzoh balls had not been invented.
Chicken soup's served with veggies, egg noodles and flanken  In cafes Chinese, French and Sri Lankan,  From Delhi to delis  It fills the world bellies  In L.A., Bombay and Man-hotten.
Chicken soup's made with kreplach, it's made with udon,  It's made with wontons and rice,  Of course, with the sacred matzoh ball,  And from cubes that can double as dice.
More than once it's been called "Jewish penicillin,"  Curing the ill, when germs are the villain.
For research has shown chicken soup may work best  When you shuffle from sick bed to kitchen,  Nose runny, bones shaking, your body all aching,  Eyes teary and red rimmed from itching.
Then someone must say, "Be careful it's hot,"  For that is the chicken soup prayer.
And you bow your head, and cozily slurp,  Knowing that chicken soup cares.
So if you're asked why  Chickens cross the road,  You will never be thrown for a loop.
You'll know it's all part of a master plan.
And the answer's as clear as your soup.
RICHARD MARCUS
The time: a Wednesday morning.
The place: an N.J.
Transit train transporting a slew of matineegoers into Manhattan.
The large cast includes Sheldon Roskin of Scotch Plains, N.J., who listens to the patches of dialogue, most of which have to do with Broadway productions of yesterday and today.
One of the patches bewilders him still.
Woman one:
I've been going to the theater for years, even before "South Pacific," and I love every one of the musicals I've seen.
Woman two:
Well, then you must see "Miss Saigon." It's just like "Oklahoma!"


F.A.A. EASES PLAN FOR PHASING OUT NOISIEST JETLINERS
Responding to pressure from airlines and the White House, the Federal Aviation Administration today eased its plan to phase out the nation's noisier planes.
By allowing airlines to continue operating many of their older and noisier planes, the decision will delay for several years some of the benefits for people who live near airports.


An Old Tear-Jerker Plays Again in East
O.K., so it's not exactly what you would call a classic pennant race.
It's more like a war of attrition.
But what two better candidates to wage an "I got it, you take it" battle for the American League East than the Toronto Blue Jays and the Boston Red Sox?
Boston's history, as we are reminded every single time the Red Sox engage in a September tease and an October heartbreak, is filled with near misses.
Not even this year's rendition of the Light Brigade's charge is particularly revolutionary.
Remember last season, when Boston capitalized on Toronto's absolutely inelegant swan dive to win the East?


About New York
"You rob someone of their basic core, and you can't get it back. You can't get your childhood back."
Judi Levy, a therapist who specializes in helping sexually abused children, was talking about incest.
She has seen hundreds of its victims in New York City, and in basic ways it is always the same story.
What the children are left with is a gaping hole in the soul.
Trust -- the magical certainty a baby starts to learn by crying for comfort -- has been ripped away.


Dollar Ends Higher in U.S. After Declining in Europe
The dollar closed higher in domestic trading yesterday after falling in Europe.
Gold prices advanced.
The dollar gained in early trading but turned lower after the Conference Board business research group said its consumer confidence index fell sharply in September.
The index was seen as yet another indicator of weakness in the United States economy.


New York's Clever Coyotes
A pumpkin-shaped moon bathes the landscape in silvery light.
Cool air pushes mists across the lowlands.
Drying leaves rattle in the wind.
Then a chorus of staccato barks erupts in the darkness, followed by a series of yelps and mournful howls
-- owr-owr-owr-owwwwwwrrrrr --
that take a long time to fade.
Such yelps and howls, long heard in the West, grow more familiar in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut as coyotes expand their range and breed with domestic dogs living in the wild.
Their presence displeases some New Yorkers, who now seek an end to state limits on hunting
Canis latrans
.
Natural history, however, teaches that these clever, adaptable creatures are better tolerated than fought.


Corrections
A brief report on the Media Business page yesterday misidentified the agency that is creating advertising for Sega of America's video games.
It is Bozell Inc., not Ketchum Advertising.


Reorganization Seeks A Slimmer Pan Am
The Pan Am Corporation yesterday proposed to emerge from bankruptcy as a smaller airline in a reorganization plan that would wipe out the holdings of its present stockholders.
Pan Am, which used to be advertise itself as the world's most experienced airline, struck a deal with Delta Air Lines this summer for Delta to buy a large share of Pan Am's assets.


Foreign Affairs; Why the U.N. Dog Didn't Bark
Why didn't world leaders and diplomats applaud during President Bush's speech to the U.N. on Monday?
Wasn't he finally shelving stale cold war rhetoric and moving on to the new agenda in world politics -- freedom, democracy and economic progress -- the agenda so long so dear to U.N. members?
It may be because of a revolutionary message about humanitarian intervention barely audible throughout the text, a message nonetheless sensed by representatives of despots and democracies alike that frightened all with its implications -- seemingly even Mr.
Bush by the time he finished.


Corrections
The Auctions column in Weekend on Sept. 13 misstated the mission of the Curtiss Jenny biplane in World War I. It was used to train pilots and was never in combat.


Open Positions on Nasdaq Short Sales Rise 2.5% in Month
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the number of actively traded shares sold short, and not yet covered, in the month ended Sept. 15 rose 7.6 million shares, or 2.5 percent, to 307.1 million shares.
In the previous four weeks, ended Aug. 15, open positions on short sales of active issues totaled 299.5 million shares.


Frito-Lay Chip Brands Consolidated at BBDO
The Frito-Lay division of Pepsico Inc. consolidated its potato chip advertising yesterday at BBDO, New York, as was expected, taking business from two agencies that continue working on other Frito-Lay products.
BBDO won the Ruffles and Ruffles Light account from DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago, and was assigned regional advertising for Lay's potato chips, previously at Tracy-Locke, Dallas.
All three agencies are owned by the Omnicom Group.


Panel Assails Canceling of Teen-Ager Study
An advisory council of the National Institutes of Health has strongly condemned the action of Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in canceling a proposed study of teen-age life, including questions about sexual behavior, officials said today.
The study, which would have been financed by an $18 million Federal grant, was to have been carried out over five years by a research group at the University of North Carolina.
It would interview a sample of 24,000 teen-agers around the country, as well as their parents, friends, religious leaders and others, to get a description of the culture in which they live.
Dr.
Sullivan canceled the study in July.


Where to File for Residency Permit
There is no application form for the new legal residency permit.
A letter of application should be sent to: AA-1 Program, P.O.
Box 60000, Arlington, Va. 22218-0001, U.S.A.
The region of which the applicant is a native must appear on the upper left hand corner of the envelope.
Example: Italy.


Johnson Sets Mets' R.B.I. Record


Lydia Cabrera Dies; Ethnologist, Writer And Artist Was 91
Lydia Cabrera, a scholar and chronicler of Afro-Cuban culture, died at her home in Miami last Thursday of heart failure, according to her companion, Teresa de la Parra.
Ms.
Cabrera was 91 years old.
An ethnologist, artist, oral historian and writer of folk tales, Ms.
Cabrera devoted most of her life to the study of Cuba's African-based culture and religions.
Ms.
Cabrera's Miami home, up to the time of her death, was a mecca for writers, academics, artists and students of Afro-Cuban culture and intellectual exiles from Cuba.


People
*
Michael Belitsos, 40, and Steve Goldsworthy, 42, have been named, respectively, senior vice president and creative director and vice president and creative director at Young &amp; Rubicam, Detroit.
Both had been top executives on the Jeep/Eagle account at Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Southfield, Mich.
At Y.&amp; R., they will work on the Mercury account.


New Life for a Neglected Jewel in Los Angeles
Architects have sometimes wondered if George Herbert Wyman designed the Bradbury Building as a kind of architectural surprise.
From the street, it looks like a nondescript 19th-century building with a plain Romanesque facade of brick and sandstone.
But after passing through a narrow arched entry, the visitor suddenly arrives in a grand atrium.
The eye is almost overwhelmed, carried up five stories on ornate black wrought-iron railings and staircases and carved red oak wainscoting and fascias to the clerestory windows and skylight that bathe the entire space in a warm ocher.
Two open-caged hydraulic elevators glide up and down on either side.


New Israeli Town Abuts West Bank's Border
Proclaiming that "there is no longer a green line" separating Israel from its occupied territories, Israeli leaders dedicated a new Jewish town here today on a rocky, bulldozed field abutting the West Bank.
Tzur Yigal, where 1,400 houses are planned, is 15 miles northeast of Tel Aviv and is fully within Israel's internationally recognized boundaries.
It is thus distinct from Jewish settlements that the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has been constructing at a stepped-up pace in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Personal Health
WHEN your mother told you "eat your vegetables," she should have added "and your fruit" if she was determined to protect your future health.
And not just any vegetables and fruits.
The ones she should have emphasized are those rich in vitamin C and beta carotene, the nutrients -- along with vitamin E -- that recent studies suggest are major factors in protecting against many common cancers and heart disease.


From the J. Press Fold To the Top of Tripler
After 31 years, Richard Press has bid adieu to his family's retail business and walked around the corner and up Madison Avenue to assume his new post as president of F. R. Tripler, the crown jewel of the Hartmarx Corporation's specialty store division.
"You can decide whether this is fact or fantasy but when I left J. Press, I looked up at the picture of my grandfather on the wall," the 53-year-old Mr.
Press said on Monday, his first day at his new job.
"He winked at me and said, 'Richard, go for it.' "


Rhode Island Rape Case Ends
A Rhode Island grand jury determined last week that there was insufficient evidence to indict a former University of Rhode Island student in the rape of a woman who was assaulted while other men watched.
David Lallemand was arrested and charged in the assault of an 18-year-old student at the University of Rhode Island in an incident that occurred during a fraternity house party on Oct. 27, 1990.
The incident received widespread attention as emblematic of a rising willingness among women to press charges in sexual assault cases on campuses.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Akzo Salt Inc., Clarks Summit, Pa., a division of Akzo N.V., appointed Harry A. Burns executive vice president and chief operating officer. *
American Savings of Florida F.S.B., Miami, named Stephen D. Taylor president and chief executive.


Cuomo Ties Dinkins Aid to Payroll Cuts
Even as he proposed to recharge New York City's image and economy with a range of proposed building projects, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo warned the Dinkins administration yesterday not to expect too much quick help in balancing its budget unless it cuts the city payroll more.
The Governor's warning, delivered amid dollops of good news, put Mayor David N. Dinkins on notice that he expects the city to deliver on its pledges to reshape its spending, especially now that Mr.
Cuomo has risked involving himself more deeply than ever in the city's fiscal problems by proposing to have the state assume the city's share of Medicaid costs over the next several years.


Officials Back Bank Mergers
Three of the nation's top banking regulators told a skeptical House Banking Committee today that the current wave of bank mergers would result in a safer and stronger banking system.
The committee is examining the issue of bank industry consolidation at a time when faltering profits and a desire to become more competitive internationally are leading many banks into mergers.


Tikkanen Is Signed
ESA TIKKANEN, who played out his option after leading Edmonton in scoring last season, signed a six-year contract with the Oilers yesterday.
Tikkanen, 26 years old, led the Oilers in points last season with 27 goals and 42 assists in regular-season play.
He also led Edmonton with 12 goals and 8 assists in 18 playoff games.(AP)


Eating Well
LIFE in the fat-free lane is time consuming, frustrating and annoying.
Every time you think you've got the hang of it, something makes you jam on the brakes.
Fat is good.
Fat is bad.
Fat doesn't make any difference.
It sounds like a Jackie Mason routine.


New Penalty Is Planned For Japan Brokerages
After disclosures of more wrongdoing by Japan's Big Four securities firms than previously acknowledged, the Finance Minister said today that the firms had agreed to punish themselves "voluntarily" for their part in the country's stock market scandal by withdrawing from the underwriting of Government bonds in October.
A ministry official said the Government planned to sell approximately $7 billion worth of long- and medium-term bonds next month.


Languages Becoming Hot Subject In Colleges
More college students in the United States are studying foreign languages than ever before, with Japanese, Russian and Spanish showing the greatest growth in enrollment, according to a new survey by the Modern Language Association of America.
The survey released last week found that nearly 1.2 million students were enrolled in language courses other than English last fall, an increase of 18 percent since 1986.


Reprimand for Remark
The president of the Lansing, Mich., school board announced yesterday she has reprimanded a board member for describing Lansing native MAGIC JOHNSON as "a big, dumb black kid" during his school years.
WILLIAM CARTER said his remarks during a Sept. 12 meeting were "a dumb thing." Carter said he would make a public apology to the National Basketball Association star and his family.


40,000 Aliens to Win Legal Status in Lottery
At one minute past midnight on Columbus Day, would-be immigrants and their lawyers will dump tens of thousands of applications into bins at a Virginia post office as part of one of the stranger and more controversial innovations in a new immigration law.
Under the 1990 law, the first 40,000 applications received after 12:01 A.M. on Oct. 14 from people born in 34 nations will qualify for the green card that signifies legal permanent residency in the United States.


K Mart Projecting Sales of $50 Billion
The K Mart Corporation's chairman, Joseph E. Antonini, predicted that the company's sales would reach $50 billion by 1995, up from $32 billion last year.
Mr.
Antonini told analysts that profits would equal 3.5 percent of sales, or $1.75 billion, in 1995, up from 2.4 percent of sales, or $756 million, last year.
"The sales goal is achievable, but the profit goal is pretty ambitious," said Daniel D. Barry of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
"If they do that, it's a pretty good number."


The Governor's Gift: Energy
Gov.
Mario Cuomo's ambitious plan to revitalize New York City is more than welcome.
It is essential.
Mr.
Cuomo, while remaining helpful, had kept aloof from the city's deepening fiscal crisis.
But now he has acknowledged his leadership role as Governor and come up with an imaginative roster of programs that, though short on detail, is long on promise.
Not all his ideas are new.
Many are familiar old ones cleverly repackaged, and many rely on money and an economy he does not control.
Indeed, several of his proposals are expensive prescriptions for his successor.
But even so, he offers New York City a gift: the energy of leadership.


The Foods of American Indians Are Looking Decidedly Modern
CHESTER MAHOOTY, a 63-year-old Zuni Indian medicine man, loves to cook.
He is a stickler about the kind of corn he uses in his posole. (It must be a special dried, large-kernel variety.) He likes his meat cut to a certain size and would prefer to butcher it himself.
In that way, he tries to cook much as his ancestors did generations ago on open wood fires.


Hope for the Ethnic Archipelago
There's suddenly hope that warring peoples in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union can learn to live together in peace.
The hope springs from an agreement this week between Armenian and Azerbaijani leaders settling a fierce dispute in the ethnic enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh.
The territory will remain part of Azerbaijan, local self-government will be restored and outside negotiators will be available to resolve future disputes.


Sports of The Times; Can the Jets Come Back From This?
WHY was this man smiling?
Why was Bruce Coslet showing almost all his teeth to a band of interrogators very shortly after (1) one of the more ghastly fumbles in New York football history, (2) an indelible 19-13 overtime loss in Chicago, (3) a brutally silent flight home, and (4) not nearly enough sleep?
The Jets' coach showed up for a press conference less than 12 hours after a dreadful defeat 850 miles away.
He was not exactly Kissinger or Schultz or Baker dealing with wars on jet lag halfway around the world, but he was impressive.


60-Minute Gourmet
CHICKEN breast is one of the most appealing foods in the supermarket because it is clean, simple to cook, low in fat and high in protein.
But if one falls into a rut by simply broiling or baking the chicken breast, dinner can be mighty boring.
This recipe for chicken fingers with garlic butter is simple yet tasty.
And you can vary the seasonings in countless ways.


Stall in Weicker's Union Negotiations
Already bitter labor talks between Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and the unions representing state workers broke off today, with both sides saying they were nowhere near agreement on a package of wage and benefit concessions tied to the state's new income tax.
The breakdown raised the likelihood that residents could see further cuts in state services and more employee layoffs, some of which could coincide with the first impact next week of the new income tax that was intended to secure those state services.
Among the cuts being considered is a partial closing of some state agencies, which might shut their doors for one or two days every month.


Brandon, a Top Pick, Is Signed by Cavaliers
Rookie point guard TERRELL BRANDON of Oregon, who was the 11th pick in the June draft, signed a seven-year contract with the Cleveland Cavaliers, making him the highest draft choice to come to terms with a National Basketball Association team this year.


Bridge
The triathlon, which tests contestants' skill in three different sports, swimming, cycling and running, has its bridge counterpart.
The skills are individual play, team play and pairs play, which have subtle distinctive nuances.
This event was revived last weekend by the Greater New York Bridge Association and proved generally popular: High-ranked experts who would not dream of competing in an individual under normal circumstances proved willing to do so as one part of a three-session event.
The diagramed deal from the triathlon could be used on either side of a never-ending argument.
Is it better to bid slowly and scientifically in order to improve the chance of finding the best contract, and in the process give the opponents information that will help them find the best defense?
Or is it better to bid briskly, and less accurately, in order to keep the opponents in the dark?


Kansas City Praises Desegregation, But State Officials Say It Isn't Enough
At the start of this school year, Leonarda D'Angelo became a member of a racial minority for the first time in her life.
The sixth-grade student, who is white and attended a largely white Roman Catholic school last year, enrolled in the predominantly black Martin Luther King Middle School.
The primary factor in motivating the girl's mother, Tecla D'Angelo, to send her child to the inner-city school was its emphasis on teaching Latin, part of a districtwide magnet program designed to attract more white students.


Rebuilding the Sphinx With PC's
For more than 4,000 years the Great Sphinx, with its king's head and lion's body, has been standing guard for the Great Pyramids at Giza in the desert outside Cairo.
But centuries of sand, wind and man's intrusions have not been kind to the mysterious sculpture that Pharaoh Khafre commissioned in 2500 B.C.
Now, however, an Egyptologist and an architectural firm have been able to use personal computers to provide a startlingly detailed view of what the Sphinx probably looked like in its heyday -- around 1279 B.C., after the monument was finally completed and before it began its inexorable decline.


On Teen-Age Virginity, Or Its Loss, on TV
Tonight at 9 on ABC, Doogie Howser, M.D., loses his virginity.
Welcome to television's most popular teen club, Doogie.
To do it or not to do it has long been the titillating question on prime-time entertainment.
Today it's merely rhetorical.
And the answer has become dangerously irresponsible.
It used to be that the potential partners, while perhaps not married, were at least comfortably beyond their teens -- Maddie and David in "Moonlighting," that sort of romp.
Now though, demurely professing only to reflect more promiscuous realities, scriptwriters have any television youngster over 16 hopping into bed because, gosh, everybody's doing it.
Other fairly typical examples could be found recently on ABC's "Roseanne" and Fox's "True Colors" and "Beverly Hills 90210."


Food Notes
West Village Farm Stand
New and unusual food purveyors have been opening in the West Village.


U.S. SHIPS MISSILES TO DEFEND SAUDIS
President Bush today ordered American surface-to-air missiles deployed to Saudi Arabia as a prelude to the deployment, perhaps later this week, of about 50 combat aircraft to take part in escort operations inside Iraq, where United Nations inspectors are seeking the remnants of Saddam Hussein's secret weapons programs, Administration officials said.
The deployment was ordered as United Nations inspectors in Baghdad remained locked in a tense standoff with Iraqi military forces over the seizure of documentary evidence of Iraq's nuclear weapons program and the Western companies that helped the illicit effort.


Soviets, at U.N., Back Bush's Call For Repeal of '75 Zionism Edict
The Soviet Foreign Minister, Boris D. Pankin, joined President Bush today in calling for the General Assembly to repeal its 1975 resolution equating Zionism with racism.
But Arab diplomats here and Arab-American organizations reacted coolly, saying that Mr.
Bush's plea, in his address here on Monday, was a purely political gesture aimed at soothing his Administration's dispute with Israel.


Market Place; For Steel, Small Means Healthier
BIG steel companies, which saw some of their brightest days before the recession took hold, are once again faced with plunging profits and outright losses.
But the smaller, second-tier steel producers have generally not seen the profound losses of their bigger counteparts.
Companies like the Nucor Corporation, Birmingham Steel and the Quanex Corporation have been holding their own during the recession, with only a little sagging.
And analysts say their prospects are brighter than those of big steel once the economic recovery takes hold.
The reason, analysts say, stems from fundamental differences between the cost structures of the smaller competitors and those of big producers like the USX Corporation, Bethlehem Steel and the LTV Corporation, which have billions of dollars in sales to many industries and an array of products made in several plants.
The big companies typically have expensive, large headquarters and produce raw materials -- iron ore and coal -- in mines they own outright.


Review/Music; A Tribute for Rudolf Serkin
Rudolf Serkin's friends, family and colleagues, along with a few thousand music lovers who were touched by his work, gathered at Carnegie Hall on Monday morning for a brief but moving concert in memory of the pianist, who died at age 88 on May 8.
The performers included several musicians whose associations with Mr.
Serkin stretch back several decades, and quite a few young musicians who worked with him more recently at Marlboro, the summer festival and music school in Vermont that he helped found in 1949, and directed until his death.


Excerpts From C.I.A. Official's Testimony on Nomination of Gates as Director
Following are excerpts from testimony by Charles E. Allen, a former national intelligence officer for counterterrorism for the Central Intelligence Agency, at the hearing of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on the nomination of Robert M. Gates as Director of Central Intelligence, with questioning by Senators Sam Nunn, David L. Boren and Frank H. Murkowski.
The transcript was provided by the Federal News Service.
STATEMENT BY CHARLES E. ALLEN
. . .
I was involved in the White House Iranian initiative from September 1985 until it became publicly known in November 1986. . . .


Money Market Accounts And C.D.'s Drop in Yield
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts showed further declines in the week that ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication in North Palm Beach, Fla., that focuses on interest rates.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said there had been considerable impact from recent cuts by leading banks in the prime lending rate to 8 percent from 8 1/2 percent.


Senate Votes to Extend Jobless Benefits
The Senate tonight passed a bill 69 to 30 providing extended unemployment benefits for about three million people who have been out of work for more than half a year.
President Bush opposes the $6.1 billion measure, which is similar to one he killed last month, because it would be financed by adding to the deficit.
He urged support of a less expensive bill sponsored by Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader.
But the $2.4 billion Dole measure was defeated earlier, with only Republicans in support.


Some Possible Hit Series In the TV Ratings Race
Network television has gone without a new hit series for two straight seasons, but in the first week of the new television competition, one new series, the ABC comedy "Home Improvement," broke into the weekly Top 10 programs, usually a signal of a hit in the making.
Other new series that did well the first week included ABC's "Step by Step," 22d for the week; "NBC's "Nurses," 23d; NBC's "Torkelsons," 32d, and CBS's "Royal Family," 34th. Another new CBS series, "Brooklyn Bridge," improved the network's previous rating on Fridays at 8 P.M. by more than 80 percent.


Earlier Surge in Oil Prices Is Trimmed by Saudi Move
Oil prices surged for a while yesterday after the United Nations Security Council demanded that Iraq release United Nations weapons inspectors, but the market relinquished most of the gain when Saudi Arabia told fellow OPEC members that it would not curtail production.
On other commodities markets, sugar prices rose sharply, while precious metals furthered their gains, meat and livestock contracts reversed months of losses, and grains and soybeans finished mixed.


Blue-Chip Stocks Rally; Dow Gains 18.56
After drifting listlessly through most of yesterday's session, blue-chip stocks rallied and posted moderate gains in what analysts described as a quick burst of futures-related buying.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which had been down as much as 14 points in the morning, closed up 18.56, to 3,029.07.


U.N. SAYS BAGHDAD AGREES TO PERMIT HELICOPTERS' USE
The Security Council said today that Iraq had unconditionally agreed to allow international inspectors to fly their own helicopters in the country without hindrance as the inspectors search out and destroy President Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction.
But the Council condemned as unacceptable Iraq's renewed detention of 44 United Nations inspectors taken into custody earlier today in Baghdad while they were copying documents related to Iraq's secret nuclear programs.
The inspectors were still surrounded by Iraqi policemen and soldiers tonight.


Ethnic Ideals: Rethinking Plastic Surgery
AS more members of minority groups are seeking cosmetic surgery, doctors are making new efforts to preserve ethnic identity while enhancing beauty.
Since esthetic surgery has historically been tailored to Caucasian faces, surgeons have a two-pronged challenge: first, defining beautiful features for African-, Hispanic- or Asian-Americans and, second, determining how to modify standard operations to achieve these goals.


In Campus Rape, the University Can Help
To the Editor:
"Call the Police, Not the Dean" (Op-Ed, Sept. 11) by Ronald B. Lieber, a junior at Amherst College, raises some important issues about the limits that are faced by universities in dealing with serious crimes such as rape through their disciplinary systems.
However, the picture is more complicated than he portrays, and there may be ways in which a university disciplinary system can fill in gaps in the criminal justice system in a way that promotes, rather than distorts, justice.


Wine Talk
THE 1855 classification of the wines of Bordeaux has been changed once since it was first promulgated: in 1973, when the de facto position of Chateau Mouton-Rothschild as a first growth was given official recognition.
As far as the French authorities are concerned, the judgments rendered 136 years ago were carved in obsidian and rest immutable.
Surprisingly, the list remains for the most part valid.
Even those chateaus that have improved their wines over the years to the point where they challenge the five first growths -- Latour, Lafite, Mouton, Margaux and Haut-Brion -- rarely question the status quo.
They seem happy to remain what they long have been, second growths and in one case, Chateau Lagrange, a third, and another, Lynch-Bages, a fifth.


Motorman Pleads Not Guilty In IRT Crash that Killed Five
Robert Ray, the motorman of the IRT Lexington Avenue subway train that crashed on Sept. 3, killing five people, pleaded not guilty at his arraignment in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday on five counts of second degree murder.
The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said that the 38-year-old defendant had also been indicted on 21 charges of assault and one charge of reckless endangerment as a result of the injuries suffered by more than 200 subway passengers.


Let's Synchronize Zip and Area Codes
To the Editor:
Why not take Charles M. Antin's suggestion in "How About Area Code Lists by Number?" (letter, Sept. 4) one step further?
Have the United States Postal Service and A.T.&amp; T. join forces so that the first numbers in both area codes and zip codes are the same.


RCA Stresses Ease of Use In Electronics Campaign
A BIG advertising campaign for RCA home electronics products is declaring war on high technology's confusing terminology.
And since every war needs a K-9 Corps, the campaign focuses on Nipper, RCA's venerable dog, and his newly named puppy pal, Chipper.
At a news conference this morning, RCA's owner, the Thomson Consumer Electronics Sales and Marketing Company-Americas, will introduce its 1991-92 campaign for RCA television sets, VCR's and camcorders.
The advertisements retain a theme introduced last year, "Changing entertainment. Again," but with a key new element, a series of humorous broadsides against what is called "technobabble."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Easy Victory for Gilbert  The defending champion, Brad Gilbert, led the top three seeded players into the second round of the Queensland Open yesterday with a 6-2, 6-1 victory over Thomas Hogstedt of Sweden at Brisbane, Australia.
Andrei Chesnokov, back after a two-week layoff, defeated Patrick Rafter of Australia, 6-4,6-1.
And third-seeded Aaron Krickstein defeated an Australian doubles specialist, John Fitzgerald, 6-3, 7-6 (7-2). (AP) Skoff Surprised by Nargiso: Diego Nargiso of Italy upset third-seeded Horst Skoff of Austria, 7-6, (7-5), 6-2, in the Association of Tennis Professionals tournament yesterday in Palermo, Sicily.(AP) No Upsets in France: Top-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere eased into the second round of the Bayonne, France, Open yesterday, defeating Nathalie Housset, 6-0, 6-1.
The No. 6 seeded player, Andrea Strnadova of Czechoslovakia, defeated Laura Garrone of Italy, 6-4, 6-2. (AP) Connors Wins in Basel: Jimmy Connors, playing his first match since a loss in the semifinals of the United States Open two weeks ago, beat Laurent Prades of France, 6-3, 6-1, yesterday in the opening round of the Swiss Indoor tournament at Basel, Switzerland.
Connors will play a second-round match against fourth-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, who beat Anders Jarryd of Sweden, 3-6, 6-4, 6-3. (AP)


Frederick L. Hipp, 83; Led Education Group
Dr.
Frederick L. Hipp, executive director of the New Jersey Education Association for 32 years, died on Sept. 17 at his home in Lawrenceville, N.J.
He was 83 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Maybe Somebody Up There Doesn't Like the Jets
It was the kind of game that will haunt the Jets for a long time and give fans something to debate for many seasons.
The Jets' 19-13 overtime loss to the Bears at Solider Field on Monday night was heart-wrenching for the losing players and intriguing to pro football fans.
The fans who went to bed Monday night with the Jets leading, 13-6, late in the fourth quarter must have been wondering what happened when they awoke yesterday to find out that the Jets had lost in overtime.


A State of Emergency Is Declared By Besieged Soviet Georgia Chief
The President of Soviet Georgia declared a state of emergency today and called on his supporters in the republic to mobilize against opposition forces seeking to oust him.
"All of Georgia, come to Tbilisi to liquidate this nest of bandits," Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia told a rally outside his barricaded headquarters.


Richter To Face A Fight For No. 1
Absence has not made the heart grow fonder, nor clinched a spot in the crease.
When Mike Richter finally reports to the Rangers, he will have to prove all over again that he is the No. 1 goaltender on the team.
Coach Roger Neilson said today that he had not decided on his top goalie, between Richter and John Vanbiesbrouck, and that performances in the last few remaining preseason games would decide who will start opening night, Oct. 3, in Boston against the Bruins.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-15
Iraq said it would allow helicopters to be flown by U.N. inspectors looking for evidence of nuclear weapon development.
But Iraq detained those inspectors in Baghdad while they were copying documents related to the Iraqi nuclear programs.
Page A1 More American missiles will be sent to Saudi Arabia as a prelude to the deployment of about 50 combat aircraft to take part in escorting U.N. inspectors inside Iraq, Adminstration officials said.
A14
A British hostage in Beirut was freed by pro-Iranian kidnappers, the fourth Western captive to be released in Lebanon in the last six weeks.
Jack Mann, 77 years old, appeared gaunt and tired as he was handed over to British officials.
A3


Both Sides in the Salvador Talks Express Optimism on Peace Pact
Both sides in the Salvadoran peace talks were increasingly optimistic today that broad agreements were at hand that would soon bring an end to their 11-year-old civil war.
Although an agreement was not ready for signing during the day as had been forecast, the two sides said that was because they had decided to extend the negotiations to cover topics they had previously planned to deal with later.


Review/Film Festival; Agnes Varda's Loving Work About Her Husband
Agnes Varda, who made her first feature, "Cleo From 5 to 7," in 1961, remains one of the most long-lived, productive and difficult to categorize directors associated with France's New Wave.
Though many of her colleagues have lost their momentum or died, she continues, in part, it seems, because she has never become locked into a particular form or dominant ideology.
As the years go by, her focus shifts.
She lives in a present that is ever enriched by the accumulating past.


Course Offers Ryder Cup Players, and Spectators, Plenty to Worry About
No new course in the history of golf has been greeted with more anticipation than the Ocean Course, which -- even more than Europe's and America's best players -- will have its reputation on the line here this week at the Ryder Cup.
Conceptually, the Ocean Course is a convergence of ideal components.
It has been built by Pete Dye, one of the game's most sought after architects, on a strip of wetlands bordering the Atlantic Ocean that has been hailed as a spectacular setting.
And its competitive debut is taking place at center stage of the game, in what is arguably golf's most important event.


Bell Atlantic to Buy Metro Mobile
In one of the largest deals ever in the cellular telephone industry, the Bell Atlantic Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Metro Mobile CTS Inc. for nearly $2.5 billion in Bell Atlantic stock and assumption of debt.
Metro Mobile is considered a well-managed company whose business has been severely hurt by the recession, and analysts say it is one of the last large properties that is likely to come on to the market in desirable urban areas.
The price represents $202 to $206 for each potential subscriber, depending on circumstances at the deal's closing.


Dispute Over Settlements and Loan Deal Is Symptom of a Deeper U.S.-Israel Strain
The dispute between the Bush Administration and Israel over loan guarantees and restrictions on Israeli settlements underscores the stunning lack of communication between two Governments on some of the most sensitive issues between them.
"This whole crisis is symptomatic of our relationship," said an Administration Middle East expert.
"We have this ritualized relationship, with all of the structures of closeness, but people don't really talk to each other or hear each other, because there is no real private honesty. Everyone is afraid to be honest, because they are aware that there are some real underlying differences over the question of the occupied territories."


British Hostage Freed in Lebanon


Patrol Officers in New York To Test Semiautomatic Guns
The New York City Police Department, which has steadfastly resisted the trend toward arming police officers with quicker-loading, more powerful guns, has decided for the first time to let uniformed officers test semiautomatic pistols, a police official said yesterday.
Until now, the department has argued that the extra firepower made the weapons unsafe in densely populated urban areas.
The police union favors 9-millimeter weapons, saying officers need them because of the proliferation of high-power semiautomatic and automatic guns in the hands of criminals.


Armco Resurrects Deal With Cyclops
Armco Inc., the nation's fifth-largest steel producer, said it had resurrected its plan to acquire Cyclops Industries, a Pittsburgh-based specialty steelmaker.
The companies said their boards had approved a definitive agreement, under which Armco would pay $22 in cash and common stock, or about $156 million.
Officials close to the talks said that with the assumption of debt and unfinanced pension liabilities, they valued the deal at about $300 million.


Museum Adds a 500-Pound Indian Artifact


Out of Obscurity Into a Wine Pantheon
FIVE years ago, Muller-Catoir, an obscure winery with obscure vineyards growing obscure grapes in this obscure village in an obscure corner of the Rhineland-Palatinate, exported 2 percent of its production to the United States and Britain.
Today, Muller-Catoir glows in the pantheon of Germany's wineries; the demand for its wines has skyrocketed and last year it exported 20 percent to America and Britain.


Lawyer Pleads Guilty to Fraud
A prominent Manhattan divorce lawyer pleaded guilty yesterday to stealing more than $1.28 million from well-known matrimonial lawyers through a series of fraudulent investment schemes.
The plea from the lawyer, Alvin Ashley, was unexpected, coming just a week after his indictment on grand larceny charges.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly MEETS -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Mexico Pries Open Its Oil Industry
The transformation of Mexico's economy has filled a graveyard with old myths: the inviolable power of big labor unions, the need for trade protection, the importance of state ownership.
The lone survivor would seem to be the sanctity of oil.
Mexican officials still speak in almost mystical terms about the relationship between oil and sovereignty.
And in free-trade talks with the United States, Mexico has done its best to keep the issue of foreign involvement in its oil production off the table.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 25
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams had the day off.


Greenspan Sees Gains At Salomon
The efforts that Salomon Brothers Inc. has made to clean house as a result of the Treasuries market scandal may preserve its status as a primary dealer, a letter by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, indicates.
Salomon's status among the elite group of investment firms has been under review by the Fed since the firm last month admitted a series of bidding violations.
A suspension as a primary dealer, Wall Street executives have said, could drastically shrink the firm and diminish its ability to survive.


Canarsie Real Estate Office Is Firebombed Again
A Brooklyn real estate office, which had sold homes to black and Hispanic families in the mostly white section of Canarsie, was firebombed early this morning for the third time in three months, the police said.
The latest incident occurred shortly after midnight at the Fillmore Real Estate agency at 9301 Flatlands Avenue, which has been under a court order to show homes to black and Hispanic customers.
Fire officials said damaged to the building was limited and that the one-alarm fire was quickly extinquished.s


Memories Belong to Brewers
For Bob Uecker and Cal Eldred, part of the past and the future of the Brewers, tonight was memorable.
For the present Yankees, it was another forgettable evening in a forgettable season.
Eldred made his pitching debut and earned the victory as the Brewers scratched out a 5-4 victory at County Stadium.
The rookie pitched into the sixth and limited the Yankees to three runs and seven hits.
Uecker, the Brewers' announcer since 1970, was honored by the club after recently returning from heart surgery.
The former major leaguer received a standing ovation from the modest crowd of 9,378 spectators before the game.
The fans were able to enjoy the rest of the night as the Yankees squandered several chances.
Although they finished with 13 hits, the Yankees stranded 12 runners.


CHRONICLE
Then it was off to Seventh Avenue for Mrs.
Bush, where she went to the showrooms of ARNOLD SCAASI for fittings, and to BILL BLASS, where she ordered three designs.
This year she has a preference for dresses with coordinating waist-length jackets; she ordered several of them at Blass.
Two are from the spring collection that will be shown Nov. 4.
In addition, Mrs.
Bush couldn't resist a black double-faced wool jacket over a silk chemise from the fall collection with big buttons emblazoned with the designer's initials.
What luck!
They're her initials too.


Yugoslav Cease-Fire Appears to Be Holding
As Croatia accused its Serb-led enemies of mounting air strikes that violated the two-day-old cease-fire in Yugoslavia's civil war, the federal army came under unusual public criticism in Belgrade today for agreeing to the truce when it seemed on the point of decisive victories.
Generally, both sides in the three-month-old conflict said, the cease-fire seemed to be holding as European ministers prepared for peace talks on Thursday that some diplomats say could indicate whether the truce can overcome the bitter and seemingly irreconcilable conflict between Serbs who have taken large pieces of Croatian territory and Croats demanding their withdrawal.


Do Scarlett and Rhett Discover Love Anew? A Sequel Reveals All
"Tomorrow, I'll think of some way to get him back," says Scarlett O'Hara, the feisty, self-centered Southern belle in "Gone With the Wind." "After all, tomorrow is another day."
So ends Margaret Mitchell's 1936 soap opera of a novel, a Civil War epic that became one of the most popular books ever written.


Hybl Appears to Be Just the Candidate the U.S.O.C. Ordered
During his brief career as a White House special counsel in early 1981, a transition period from the administrations of Jimmy Carter to Ronald Reagan, William J. Hybl was assigned to handle problems that resulted from the United States' boycott of the 1980 Moscow Olympics.
It was a tedious job in complicated times that largely meant untangling contractual arrangements between American companies and the Soviet government and seeking an appropriation from the Department of Commerce to offset millions of dollars in projected losses.


Milot Journal; Haitian Fortress Is Saved From Nature's Onslaught
Like a colossal battleship, it seems to crest the waves, forging unshaken through a blinding mist.
But here the waves are the serrated peaks of Haiti's mountainous north, and the shroud consists of puffy clouds floating high in the bright sky.
After many decades of decay, and 10 years of recently completed restorative work, crowds of young Haitians and a sprinkling of foreigners again mill in wonder around the vast ramparts of La Citadelle Ferriere, Henri Christophe's monumental stone fortress.


Departure at Bergdorf
Andrew Basile, the fashion director of Bergdorf Goodman, is leaving the store after three years.
Mr.
Basile, who is 38 years old, said yesterday that he would be starting an independent consulting firm with offices in New York and Los Angeles to assist fashion designers and manufacturers with public relations, merchandising and event planning.


White House Rejects New Compromise on Rights
The White House today put the "quota" issue back into the civil rights debate, assailing Senator John C. Danforth's latest effort to fashion a compromise as a measure that would cause employers to use racial quotas.
Mr.
Bush and his aides had made the same attack on the civil rights bill passed by the House after a bitter, emotional debate in June.
But they have been much milder in their complaints about Mr.
Danforth's bills and had praised him for his efforts to reach a compromise.


Consumer Confidence Falls Further, Index Shows
Consumer spirits, which wilted this summer, continued to droop after Labor Day -- one more sign that the recovery in consumer spending continued to be unusually weak.
"The prime worry is jobs," said Fabian Linden, executive director of the Conference Board's Consumer Research Center.
The closely watched Conference Board index of consumer confidence, released yesterday, logged its third straight monthly decline in September, to 72.7, from 76.1 in August, on a 1985 base of 100.


CUNY Student Leaders Run Up Big Tab
Student leaders at the City University of New York were battling to keep tuition low.
In doing so, they spent $49,000 on a three-day lobbying excursion to the Albany Hilton and $13,000 on a limousine service that chauffeured them around New York City.
The chairman of the University Student Senate, Jean LaMarre, also hired his twin sister and his best friend as his top assistants at annual salaries of $24,000 and $27,000 respectively -- roughly as much as starting instructors at the university make.


New American Express Plan
In trying to increase the allure of its troubled charge card business, the American Express Company yesterday announced a new service of plush, prepackaged events for holders of its platinum cards.
The new service -- "By Invitation Only" -- offers events ranging from a film festival at Robert Redford's ranch in Utah, to front-row seats at Knicks basketball games, to a concert and dinner party with the violinist Isaac Stern and the cellist Yo-Yo Ma in Miami.


Going to School as a Negotiable Activity
To the Editor:
The term "school phobia" in Jane Brody's Sept. 4 Personal Health column assumes that the problem lies in the child and not the school.
This is not always the case.
When my eldest daughter refused to attend kindergarten at our local school after two weeks, I believed she would be fine in a different school.
While her kindergarten teacher gave me the standard line about my daughter's having a hard time with separation, I visited other schools.
When I found a school more stimulating and supportive, she went enthusiastically, to a full-day kindergarten instead of a half-day.


U.S. Blockade Is Cuba's Economic Problem; After Castro
To the Editor:
In "Let Cuba Be Cuba" (Op-Ed, Sept. 6), Ernesto Betancourt propounds falsehoods and distortions about the Cuban American National Foundation and a blue ribbon commission on the economic reconstruction of Cuba that we sponsored.
Mr.
Betancourt faults the foundation for conveying the image that it is working with the United States Government to dictate to Fidel Castro's successors a blueprint for Cuba's reconstruction.
He also suggests that the foundation lacks the legitimacy to discuss Cuba's future publicly.


Turnpike Bonds
The New Jersey Turnpike Authority negotiated the pricing of $78.9 million in turnpike revenue bonds yesterday through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
Yields ranged from 4.5 percent for an issue due in 1992 to 4.9 percent in 1993, 5.15 percent in 1994 and 5.35 percent in 1995.
According to underwriters, none of the revenue bonds are subject to early call by the authority.
Moody's, Standard &amp; Poor's and Fitch Investors Service rate the financing A.


Offer to Be Matched
The Pittsburgh Penguins will keep left wing KEVIN STEVENSby matching the Boston Bruins' $5.375 million offer sheet, according to a broadcast report by WPXI-TV in Pittsburgh yesterday.
Pittsburgh has until midnight Thursday to match the Bruins' offer or lose Stevens, who led the Penguins with 17 goals during their successful drive to the Stanley Cup championship last spring.


Washington Power Prices $540 Million Bond Offering
After an absence of nearly a year from issuing tax-exempt debt, the Washington Public Power Supply System priced $540 million in refunding revenue bonds yesterday for its Nuclear Project's 1, 2 and 3 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Yields offered for short-maturity serial bonds ranged from 4.70 percent for an issue due in 1992 to 5.85 percent in 1996, 6.4 percent in 2001, 6.85 percent in 2006 and 6.90 percent in 2007 and 2008.


Bush Forecasts G.O.P. Victory In Trenton Fight
President Bush came to New Jersey tonight and raised $800,000 for Republican legislative candidates, who he predicted would take control of the State Legislature in November.
"After talking to Republican leaders and reading about what is happening in the state," the President said to about 1,000 Republicans at a fund-raising dinner at the Ramada Renaissance Hotel here, "I believe the Republicans will take both the Assembly and the Senate in the fall."


Johnson Thunders In the Rain
Call them postcards from the abyss:
Last night at Shea Stadium, Howard Johnson, whose remarkable collection of impressive, but empty, accomplishments may yet embarrass the Mets into redoing his suddenly very modest contract, slugged his 37th homer of the season and in so doing, rewrote some records.


Regents Offer New Review Rules
The State Board of Regents, which lost authority over the disciplinary process for doctors after years of complaints that it took too long to make decisions, today proposed streamlining its system for reviewing complaints in 32 other professional fields.
The new rules, which would cover about a half million professionals ranging from nurses to architects to massage therapists, would leave most decisions to boards of peer professionals and consumers appointed by the Regents.
Under the current system, in which complaints often take two to three years to be resolved, the review boards make recommendations that are then reviewed by the Regents.


A Fan's Request for the Knicks to Put the Show on the Playing Floor


Review/Film; Man Who Made Films Under the Third Reich
"The Other Eye" examines the career of G. W. Pabst, the Austrian-born director who is best known for his work with Louise Brooks ("Pandora's Box," "Diary of a Lost Girl") and least well known for those films he made under the auspices of the Third Reich.
This documentary by Johanna Heer and Werner Schmiedel pays particular attention to the latter chapter in Pabst's life, and to the connections between an artist's work and the political climate in which it is engendered.
Interviewing an assortment of film scholars and first-hand observers of Pabst's work, the film makers assemble a meandering but often illuminating portrait.
Among those providing details of Pabst's history are Anne Friedberg of the University of California, who discusses the director's collaboration with Sigmund Freud in the 1920's on "Secrets of a Soul," a film that attempted to dramatize the process of Freudian analysis and included some remarkable dream sequences, which are glimpsed here briefly in film clips.
Ms.
Friedberg, in one of the film's many interesting digressions, also mentions an attempted collaboration between Freud and Samuel Goldwyn that would surely have been bizarre had it come to pass.


Noriega Defense Runs Into Security Roadblocks
Prosecutors and defense lawyers clashed repeatedly today at the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, as the defense sought, for the most part unsuccessfully, to introduce evidence supporting General Noriega's contention that he regularly performed secret missions on behalf of the Central Intelligence Agency and its allies.
Among the items rejected by Judge William M. Hoeveler was a photograph taken at a December 1983 meeting in Panama between General Noriega and George Bush, who was then Vice President.
The prosecution also blocked efforts by General Noriega's lawyers to question a former miltary aide of General Noriega about ties between the Panamanian military and Israel and about American involvement in Panama's 1984 presidential election.


INSIDE
Salvador Accord Seems Near
An accord to end El Salvador's civil war seems at hand.
Both sides agree that the rebels should be part of a new national police force.
Page A12.
Federal Overhaul for Canada
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney proposed a new federal structure aimed at stalling separatism in French-speaking Quebec.
Page A10.
Top East-Bloc Spy Gives Up
Markus Wolf, the master spy of the former East Germany, surrendered to the German authorities after a yearlong flight.
Page A7.
Tryout for a New Weapon
The New York City Police Department, after long resistance, will test semiautomatic pistols.
Page B1.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Activated Deion Sanders, outfielder.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Sent Amalio Carreno, Darrel Akerfelds and Chuck Malone, pitchers, and Sil Campusano, outfielder, outright to Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Signed Terrell Brandon, guard, to a 7-year contract.
MIAMI HEAT -- Signed Carlos Funchess, guard.
World Basketball League  DAYTON WINGS -- Named Mike Sylvester coach; Pat Haley vice president of business operations; Bob Seibert assistant vice president of marketing and corporate sponsors; and Scott Torok assistant vice president for public and media relations.
Continental Basketball Association  ALBANY PATROONS -- Signed Gary Battle, guard, to a 1-year contract.
BAKERSFIELD JAMMERS -- Named Herman Kull coach.
LACROSSE CATBIRDS -- Signed Troy Truvillion and Kato Armstrong, guards, and David Willard, center.
Football  National Football League  HOUSTON OILERS -- Waived Gary Wellman, wide receiver.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Placed Rodney Thomas, cornerback, on injured reserve.
Placed Marcus Dupree, running back, on the practice roster.
Released Corwin Athnoy, tight end, and Trevor Ryals, center, from the practice roster.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Agreed to terms with Greg Lloyd, linebacker.
Re-signed Rick Strom, quarterback.
Hockey  National Hockey League  HARTFORD WHALERS -- Assigned Mario Gosselin and Jim Crozier, goaltenders; Jergus Baca, Corey Beauleau, Vincent Boe, Cam Brauer, Jim Burke, Shawn Evans, Scott Humeniuk, Karl Johnston and John Stevens, defensemen; Blair Atcheynum and Chris Tancill, right wings; Paul Cyr, Scott Daniels and Chris Govedaris, left wings; and James Black, Chris Bright, Denis Chalifoux, Kelly Ens and Kerry Russell, centers, to Springfield of the American Hockey League.
Returned Steve Yule, defenseman, to Kamloops of the Western Hockey League; Martin Hamrlik, defenseman, to Zlin of the Czechoslovakian League; and Mike Lenarduzzi, goaltender, to Sault Ste.
Marie of the Ontario Hockey League.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Returned Steve Staios, defenseman, to Niagara Falls of the Ontario Hockey League.
Assigned Brian Pellerin, Jason Ruff, Yves Heroux, Richard Pion, Derek Frenette, Mark Bassen, Joe Hawley and Dan Fowler, forwards; Greg Poss, Jaan Luik, Terry Hollinger and Rob Tustian, defensemen; and Alain Raymond, David Schill and Francis Ouelette, goaltenders, to Peoria of the International Hockey League.
Soccer  Major Soccer League  BALTIMORE BLAST -- Signed Waad Hirmez, forward, to a 1-year contract.
Track and field
THE ATHLETIC CONGRESS -- Named Dale Neuburger director of administration. College
CITADEL -- Named Bill Spake tennis coach.
OREGON -- Suspended Daryle Smith, cornerback, indefinitely for disciplinary reasons.
ST. MICHAEL'S COLLEGE -- Named Darryl Hilliard men's assistant basketball coach.


Early Indicators of Kuwait Invasion
In his Congressional testimony today, Charles E. Allen, the senior intelligence official, disclosed for the first time that as early as January 1990, he and other Central Intelligence Agency officials began to consider the possibility that Iraq might attack Kuwait.
Under questioning by Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, at Robert M. Gates's confirmation hearing today, Mr.
Allen, a senior analyst at the agency, said he had not received any special instructions in 1990 from the Deputies Committee, a panel of high-ranking Administration officials headed by Mr.
Gates, to keep a closer watch on Iraq.


Review/Television; How the Modern Detective Detects
Mystery fans should get a tingle out of the details of detection reported on in "Clues," tonight's edition of "48 Hours," at 10 on Channel 2.
Although the subject is violent crime, for once the emphasis is not on the violence.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Hughes Aircraft Co., Los Angeles, a unit of General Motors Corp., said it had opened a plant in Torrance, Calif., to design power electronics for G.M.'s electric vehicles program. *
Ivax Corp., Miami, a maker of lubricating oils, said it had entered into a letter of intent with Willen Drug Co. regarding Ivax's acquisition by Willen.


Achille Lauro Appeal Delayed
Greece's Supreme Court today postponed until Oct. 8 a Palestinian's appeal against his extradition to Italy, where he has been sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment term for organizing the hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985.
The court agreed that the Greek lawyer representing the Palestinian, Abdul Rahim Khaled, needed more time to prepare a case.
An Athens appeals court, basing its ruling on evidence provided by Italian authorities, four months ago accepted the Italian request that the 50-year old Palestinian be extradited to serve the life sentence.


Vehicle Sales Fell 16.3% in Mid-September
Sales of American-made cars and trucks dropped 16.3 percent in mid-September compared with a strong period a year earlier, but the annual selling rate improved in recent weeks because of higher sales to rental fleets.
Car dealers and analysts said consumer demand remained sluggish.
For the 10 days that ended on Sept. 20, cars sold at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 6.4 million, compared with 7.8 million a year earlier.
Still, the latest rate is up from the 5.4 million reported for early September.
By category, domestic car sales were off 21 percent in the latest period, to 162,949; domestic truck sales dropped 7.9 percent, to 106,653.


Blue Jays Zero In on Angels to Win, 3-0
The California Angels found themselves on the periphery of a pennant race this week, but they weren't able to slow the Toronto Blue Jays tonight, despite an exceptional pitching performance from left-hander Jim Abbott.
Abbott took a two-hit shutout into the 10th inning, but Pat Borders hit a three-run homer to give the Blue Jays a 3-0 victory and a two-game lead in the American League East with 10 to play.
The second-place Boston Red Sox were rained out in Baltimore.


For Coslet, No X's and O's. Just Lots of Whys.
Bruce Coslet had no apologies today for Blair Thomas's fumble or Pat Leahy's missed field goal, both of which turned what appeared to be a sure victory over the Bears Monday night into a 19-13 overtime loss.
"Let them second-guess. I don't think I would've done anything different," said Coslet, who is in his second year as the Jets' head coach.
"The only thing different is we would've made the field goal and not fumbled."


Harry Sternberg, Accountant, 80
Harry Sternberg, an accountant and an expert on the renegotiation of military contracts, died on Monday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 80 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his wife, Judith, said.


Stevens Decides To Become A Devil
Scott Stevens decided yesterday that he would obey the ruling of an arbitrator and report to the Devils in time to start the regular season.
Stevens, a rugged defenseman who spent one year with the St.
Louis Blues as their captain, apparently decided not to fight the decision in court, an option he had considered.


Alfred E. Moon, Government Official, 73
Alfred E. Moon, a former budget director of Nassau County and budget director of New York City's Housing and Development Administration, died on Sunday at his home in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 73 years old.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


U.S. Blockade Is Cuba's Economic Problem
To the Editor:
The United States-Cuba policy formula in "Fortress Cuba, Lonely Cuba" (editorial, Sept. 8) seems to be reducible to the proposition, let Cuba rot.
I am prepared to accept that your conclusion may be the result of faulty data, and point out mistakes that deserve correction:


In Campus Debate On New Orthodoxy, A Counteroffensive
Professors and administrators on many campuses held their tongues and their noses through much of the last academic year as a national debate about the decline of American colleges focused on the dangers of a new leftist orthodoxy mockingly called political correctness.
But when President Bush warned, in a commencement address this spring, that at some universities free speech was being threatened by "inquisition," "censorship" and "bullying," people who had been criticized as promoting their views of what is politically correct decided it was time to fight back.


Hello, Tomatoes! Goodbye, Columbus
THINK of pasta without tomato sauce, polenta without cornmeal, pommes soufflees without potatoes, ratatouille without peppers and mousse without chocolate.
What you'd have is European cooking without Columbus.
Some will argue that what the Old World brought to the New World -- apples, pears, peaches, milk and sugar cane, not to mention livestock -- was equally significant, but culinary scholars tend to think the Europeans got the better of the deal.
Even if it took them a while before they realized what treasures they had. (For years, they were afraid to eat the tomato.)


Public &amp; Private; Parental Rites
Adolescence is a tough time for parent and child alike.
It is a time between: between childhood and maturity, between parental protection and personal responsibility, between life stage-managed by grown-ups and life privately held.
Past 13, shy of 20, our children seem to fire off from time to time like a barrel full of Roman candles.
Prom pictures show them the way we want them, curled and clean.
A week ago, in his diocesan newspaper column, Cardinal O'Connor wrote of a call from a New York law firm offering to represent Catholic parents of public school students "if condoms are forced on such a youngster without parental consent." It's the verb that is the red flag in that sentence.
The plan to make condoms available in New York City high schools has nothing to do with force.
The scenario of the principal at the school door pressing prophylactics for extra credit on unwilling 14-year-old virgins is useful for those who are opposed to this project.
But it is a fraud.


Review/Opera; The Met Celebrates Itself in Gala Opening
The floodlights that spread their fluorescent homage on the facade of the Metropolitan Opera House on Monday night marked not only the opening of the opera company's 108th year, but the 25th-anniversary celebration of its move to Lincoln Center.
All the trappings for a gala evening were in place, with the carpeted staircase turned into a promenade for the viewers and the viewed, some of whom paid $2,500 for their seats.
Television cameras were trained on familiar faces arriving in black tie and evening dress, and cameras were inside the house, too, witnesses to how the opera company paid tribute to its own house by transmitting itself into viewer's houses in the form of a $34.95 pay-per-view four-hour television broadcast.


Just Tell Me What You Want
TO help overcome language barriers between hospital patients and medical workers, a Texas company has developed a chart of pictographs to which patients can point to make their needs known.
The chart is also useful for patients who know English but cannot speak because of illness or surgery.
Accompanying instructions say "Point to the picture for assistance" in 10 languages.
International symbols for road signs, etc., created by Henry Dreyfus served as examples in the development of the pictographs.
The chart is currently being distributed by Glaxo Inc. and the Upjohn Company to selected hospitals across the country.
The "Patient Request Guide," with 24 pictographs and English and Spanish captions, is made by Eye Talk of Texas, 2701 Westheimer Road, Suite 2D, Houston, Tex. 77098.
The company is considering developing charts for pediatric and maternity wards and for other medical specialities.
For information, call (713) 526-7927.


Treasury Debt Market Could Use an Overhaul
To the Editor:
The apparently criminal mess that threatens United States Treasury debt auctions is not all bad.
We have a chance to redesign an archaic system and save the taxpayers money.


CHRONICLE
Their husbands are here for the most serious of purposes, the 46th meeting of the United Nations General Assembly.
"We're just here to have a good time," SUSAN BAKER murmured yesterday morning to the wife of the Soviet Ambassador to the United States on a receiving line in the Whitney Museum of American Art.
To entertain spouses of high-ranking officials in Manhattan for the opening of the United Nations each fall, the wife of Secretary of State JAMES A. BAKER 3d likes to be the host of morning "coffees" for spouses of international dignitaries.
More than 100 wives from dozens of countries waited in line to meet Mrs.
Baker, going on to greet each other and munch on rugelach, muffins and palmiers to the accompaniment of subdued chamber music.


U.S. Blockade Is Cuba's Economic Problem; Leave Guantanamo Bay
To the Editor:
Now that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has announced the Soviet Union's intention to withdraw Soviet troops from Cuba, isn't this the moment for President Bush to announce withdrawal of our naval and marine forces from Guantanamo Bay in Cuba and begin the dismantling of our base on Cuban soil?


New York City Issue Is Priced
A $575 million tax-exempt issue of water and sewer revenue bonds issued by New York City's Municipal Water Finance Authority was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The maximum yield offered is 7.125 percent for a 7.1 percent bond due in 2013 and a 7 percent bond due in 2016.
Yields on shorter-maturity serial bonds range from 5.2 percent for an issue due in 1993 to 5.8 percent in 1996, 6.5 percent in 2001 and 7 percent in 2006.


2-Year Delay Is Sought in Effort On Protections for Bluefin Tuna
The National Marine Fisheries Service has recommended a delay of at least two years in any action by the United States to place bluefin tuna under international controls as an endangered and threatened species.
But American conservationists, who said they had expected the ruling, reported yesterday that they were working with several other countries in an attempt to persuade one of them to take such action.


S.&amp; P. Lowers Insurer Ratings
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, citing increased asset problems, yesterday lowered its ratings of the claims-paying ability of four life insurers.
The New England Mutual Life Insurance Company saw its rating cut to AA from AA+; the Principal Mutual Life Insurance Company's rating was lowered to AA+ from AAA; the Minnesota Mutual Life Insurance Company's rating was reduced to AA+ from AAA, and the Northwestern National Life Insurance Company's rating was lowered to A from AA.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Salomon's house-cleaning may help it remain a primary dealer in Treasury securities, a letter by Alan Greenspan indicated.
The Fed chairman wrote that the new management has shown "acute sensitivity to the need for absolute integrity."  [ Page D1. ]  At the Treasury auction, many bidders bypassed primary dealers, in an apparent reaction to the scandal.  [ D1. ]
Blue-chip stocks posted moderate gains in a late burst of buying.
The Dow gained 18.56 points, to 3,029.07.  [ D10. ]
Oil prices surged for a while on the U.N.-Iraq tensions, but the rally faltered after the Saudis said they would not cut production.  [ D16. ]  The dollar closed higher; gold rose.  [ D16. ] Companies
Bell Atlantic agreed to buy Metro Mobile for nearly $2.5 billion in one of the largest deals in the cellular telephone industry.  [ D1. ]  Outpacing U.S. regulators, Canada said it would take applications for licenses for wireless pocket telephone services.  [ D2. ]  Etiquette is not keeping up with the spread of cellular phones.  [ A1. ]
A bid for Executive Life is being planned by a group that includes a Texas financier, a Hollywood executive and one of the world's wealthiest families.  [ D5. ]
Pan Am proposed emerging from bankruptcy as a smaller airline in a plan that would wipe out the holdings of shareholders.  [ D4. ] Business Technology
A three-dimensional picture of the Sphinx in its heyday has been created using personal computers.  [ D9. ]
Difficulty in buying advanced Japanese electronics is often cited by American companies, a Government report says.  [ D9. ] The Economy
Sales of U.S.-made cars and trucks dropped 16.3 percent in mid-September, compared with a strong year-earlier period.  [ D1. ]
The nominee to lead the bailouts of financial institutions won broad support in Congress.  [ D1. ]
The F.A.A. eased its plan to phase out noisy airplanes.
The agency said it was concerned about the cost to airlines.  [ A1. ]
The Senate voted to extend unemployment benefits for about three million people out of worke more than six months.  [ A16. ]
Brady and Greenspan offered sharply different prescriptions for reducing fraud in the world's financial markets.  [ D6. ]
The summertime slump in consumer spirits continued after Labor Day.  [ D7. ]
Sen.
Nunn met four times with a leading figure in the B.C.C.I. scandal, but the Senator said the bank was not discussed.  [ D10. ] International
Saudi Arabia served notice on OPEC that it intended to keep its huge share of the group's output.  [ D10. ]
Mexico is re-examining its oil sector's immunity from the changes that have been transforming the nation's economy.  [ D1. ]
Japan's Big Four securities firms will not take part in a Government bond underwriting as punishment for wrongdoing.  [ D5. ]
The Agriculture Dept. is changing Soviet loan guarantees to make them more attractive to commercial banks.  [ A6. ] Today's Columns
Dumping of cut-price imported goods should be celebrated rather than prosecuted in certain cases, some economists contend.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Second-tier steel producers have avoided the deep losses of their bigger counteparts.
Market Place  [ D10. ]
A campaign for RCA electronics is declaring war on high technology's confusing terminology.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D8. ]


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 20
Sept. 13
Sept. 21
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.3
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
213.3
213.2
222.3
Distillate stocks
135.7
132.9
136.5
Crude imports, daily
6.2
5.6
6.0
Product imports, daily
2.5
1.7
1.4
Crude stocks
334.3
336.0
364.0
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
89.0
90.0
92.4
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Nassau Is Sued Over Rights Of Minorities
The New York Civil Liberties Union filed suit today against the Nassau County Board of Supervisors, charging that its weighted voting system unconstitutionally deprives the county's growing minority population of political representation.
The suit, filed in Federal District Court in Uniondale, echoed the civil liberties union's suit 10 years ago that led to the revamping of New York City's government.


Diverse Group May Bid for Executive Life
In a sign of the potential that investors see in the wreckage of the Executive Life Insurance Company, a group that includes one of the nation's savviest investors, one of Hollywood's most successful executives and one of the world's wealthiest families has teamed up in planning a bid for the failed insurer.
The group is made up of Richard Rainwater, the Texas financier, who before setting up his own investment firm several years ago made highly successful investments for the Bass family of Texas in concerns like the Walt Disney Company; David Geffen, the music and movie producer, and the Bechtel family of San Francisco, owners of the Bechtel Group, the worldwide construction and engineering company.


The Brooklyn Cookbook: Mix Ethnic Attitudes and Memories
AT once a densely and diversely populated chunk of New York and a complex tangle of stereotypes and myths, Brooklyn evokes many images to the world beyond its famous bridge.
It's the Dodgers and "The Honeymooners," the faded, honky-tonk luster of Coney Island and the elegance of Brooklyn Heights, and, sadly, the violence and racial tensions now known by code-words like Bensonhurst and Crown Heights.
But with all due respect to Nathan's venerable franks and Junior's mega-calorie cheesecakes, haute cuisine has never exactly sprung to mind when thinking about Brooklyn.
Nonetheless, there is such a thing as "Brooklyn food," at least according to Lyn Stallworth and Rod Kennedy Jr., the authors of a new book that is roughly one part social history and two parts cookbook, with a healthy dab of lore.


Jets Lose in the Ratings, Too
Despite the excitement of the Chicago Bears' 19-13 overtime victory over the Jets on "Monday Night Football," viewers in New York didn't watch in anything remotely approaching a drove.
The game's overnight Nielsen rating from 25 major markets, the first look at a program's performance before national ratings are calculated, was an 18.3, which would have been higher if more New York viewers were tuned in.
The New York rating was a mere 14.4, translating to a million homes.
Chicago, with less than half the number of households with televisions than New York has, posted a 45.2 (or 1.4 million homes).
Several other major cities outrated New York for the game: Houston at 22.2, Dallas at 21.8, San Francisco at 19.4 and Los Angeles at 16.2.


Three People Are Arrested in Protest Over Closed Rhode Island Banks


Books of The Times; Shortchanging the Nation's Children
Savage Inequalities Children in America's Schools By Jonathan Kozol 262 pages.
Crown Publishers. $20.
The schoolchildren who speak to Jonathan Kozol in his accusatory new book, "Savage Inequalities," know something that President Bush, the self-proclaimed education President, apparently does not know and that William J. Bennett, President Ronald Reagan's abrasive Secretary of Education, either excused or ignored.
These children are getting second-rate educations in third-rate schools, and the Government isn't doing much about it.
Minority youngsters living in the devastated zones of urban America are fully aware that they attend unequal schools, read unequal textbooks and lead separate and unequal lives.


CHRONICLE
Who says models have to be toothpick-thin?
Among the male mannequins at a fashion show to celebrate the opening of the Rochester Big and Tall Shop at Avenue of the Americas and 52d Street yesterday evening were the New York Giants players LEONARD MARSHALL (285 pounds), BRIAN WILLIAMS (300 pounds), and JUMBO ELLIOT (305 pounds); representing the New York Jets was KEN O'BRIEN (212 pounds).
ROB MOORE (205 pounds) and IRV EATMAN (298 pounds; his name even sounds like a big guy's) were to have been models, but they were injured on the field Monday night.


European Troops Are Sent to Zaire
France and Belgium sent troops to the central African nation of Zaire today to protect Westerners from a wave of looting led by Zairian troops challenging the 26-year-old dictatorship of President Mobutu Sese Seko.
France and Belgium, Zaire's former colonial master, said their "humanitarian" interventions were approved by General Mobutu.
But by stressing that they would not interfere in the country's internal affairs, they seemed to signal they would not move to sustain the besieged regime as they did in the past.


The Pop Life
A New Cockburn Album
"When you know even for a moment that it's your time/Then you can walk with the power of a thousand generations," sings Bruce Cockburn in "A Dream Like Mine," the first single to be released from his new album, "Nothing but a Burning Light" (Columbia).
The lyric by the 46-year-old Canadian singer and songwriter goes on to praise the beauty of the Western landscape and to declare, "Never thought of possession, but all this was mine."


Aquino May Agree to a U.S. Pullout Over 3 Years
Faced with widespread opposition to her proposal for a national referendum to approve a new 10-year American lease on the Subic Bay Naval Station, President Corazon C. Aquino may accept a compromise allowing for a three-year American withdrawal from the huge military base, Philippine officials and Western diplomats said today.
Despite what appears to be a political defeat for Mrs.
Aquino, diplomats in Manila said that there was still no evidence to suggest that the United States would be evicted from the base anytime soon, and possibly not for several years.


Book Notes
'Just Killing Time'
The story of Derek V. Goodwin and his thriller, "Just Killing Time," is developing into as much of a cliffhanger as the novel itself.
The United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York has opened a grand jury investigation of whether the author committed mail fraud in connection with the sale of the book, which is to be published by E. P. Dutton next year.
If convicted, Mr.
Goodwin could face several years in prison.


In Flight Path, A New Anger Reverberates
With all due sarcasm derived from living under a Kennedy Airport flight path, Joan Artusa said, "Oh, terrific!" when told yesterday that the Federal Aviation Administration had eased its plan to phase out the nation's noisiest airplanes.
"They fly very low," said Mrs.
Artusa, who lives on Randall Avenue in Lawrence, L.I.
"Why are they doing this? Don't they consider the people?"


Quotation of the Day
"My father rode this train and read the papers in peace; so did my grandfather. The code has been shattered, absolutely shattered. There is nothing I can do. I no longer have the privilege of silence." -- Thaddeus Whitmore, a commuter from New Canaan, Conn.  [ C4:3. ]


House Panel and Administration Divided Over Anti-Crime Measure
The House Judiciary Committee dealt the Bush Administration a preliminary setback on anticrime legislation today, rejecting a provision that would have permitted greater use of improperly seized evidence in Federal criminal cases.
In rejecting the White House proposal, which would have allowed courts to use such evidence as long as prosecutors could prove officers had "good faith" reasons for conducting a warrantless search, the House conformed with the Senate version of the bill.


President's Visit Causes Only a Little Chaos


Final Counts in Council Contests; New Winner in Tight Bronx Race
A Bronx school board president who appeared to have lost the Democratic primary race for the District 14 City Council seat ended up the winner by a slim margin after election officials finished their official tally yesterday, election officials said.
But in four other close races in Manhattan and Queens, the winners remained the same after canvassing of voting machines and counting of absentee and emergency ballots, Board of Elections officials said.


Management Citadel Rocked by Unruliness
To its 200,000 readers, the Harvard Business Review is often the last word on the art of management.
To its staff, past and present, it is a poorly run organization, riddled with strife and sorely in need of some management advice itself.
Few people could have seemed better suited to the task of gunning the motor of the scholarly journal and popular business magazine than the Review's new editor, Rosabeth Moss Kanter, the Harvard Business School professor who is a nationally prominent management consultant and an expert on organizational behavior.
So far, though, things seem to have become worse, not better in the year and a half she has been in charge.


Fed Fines Ex-Chairman of a B.C.C.I. Bank
The Federal Reserve Board announced a $20 million civil fine today against the former chairman of a Southern California bank that the Fed says was illegally and secretly acquired by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
At the same time, the Justice Department, at the request of the Fed, obtained a temporary freeze in United States District Court in Los Angeles on the assets of the former bank official, Kemal Shoaib.


Cuomo's Blueprint: Building a Legacy
While intended to breathe life into New York City's moribund economy, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's blueprint for fiscal recovery could also establish a lasting legacy for the third-term Governor.
Like the economy itself, Mr.
Cuomo's record of governmental activism has withered somewhat during the recession.
But the ingeniously packaged plan he presented this week provides an opportunity to resuscitate an image that has been deflated by an ambivalent electorate, devastating budget cuts and conflict with the Legislature.


A Campaign 'Of a Lifetime' By Mercedes
THE most extensive advertising campaign ever for the most expensive line of Mercedes-Benz automobiles ever -- with an expected sticker price as high as $125,000 -- will introduce the redesigned S-Class as "the car of a lifetime."
Beginning on Monday, elegantly understated advertisements by McCaffrey &amp; McCall Inc., will herald the first complete overhaul of the top-of-the-line S-Class in 11 years.
Besides two lushly celebratory television commercials and Mercedes-Benz's largest distribution of magazine inserts, the company will send out brochures and videotapes to pique the interest of affluent car buyers, who are being pursued as never before.


Heavy Energy Tax Is Proposed to Curb Emissions in Europe
The European Community today became the first industrialized region to propose a clean-energy tax in an attempt to curb worldwide emissions of carbon dioxide.
The European Commission, the community's executive body, asked its 12 member nations to begin debate on proposals that would put a surcharge of $10 a barrel on oil by the end of the century, and surcharges of $14 for equivalent amounts of coal and $5 for nuclear power.


John Howlett Is Dead; Opera Press Agent, 41
John Howlett, the director of marketing and public relations for the Los Angeles Music Center Opera and the former vice president for promotion of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, died at his home in Los Angeles on Tuesday.
He was 41 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Marcia Lazar, a staff member of the marketing and public relations department at the Music Center.


'Hammer' Is Big Spark for the Red Sox
Perhaps the very best news the Boston Red Sox received in the second half of this season in addition to Roger Clemens's sprint toward another 20-victory year is that Jack Clark has become a factor.
The batting average alone does not tell the story.
The run production, the power, the fear felt by opposing pitching staffs do.
The Hammer, who hardly hit anything with full force in April and May, is ringing true once again.


Hugh Morrow, 76, Speech Writer And Adviser to Gov. Rockefeller
Hugh Morrow, a speech writer and longtime public relations adviser to Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, died yesterday at his home in Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
It was his 76th birthday.
He died of complications from a stroke, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 9 about the Salem, Mass., witchcraft trials in 1692 misstated the cause of death of one of the defendants.
None of them were stoned to death.
One of them, Giles Corey, was pressed to death, a form of punishment reserved under old English law for those who refused to be put on trial or enter a plea.
Such punishment was carried out by placing a load of iron or stones onto the chest, slowly crushing the defendant.


Gannett Said to Pursue Quiet Sale of Paper
The Gannett Company is quietly pursuing a formal effort to try to sell The Arkansas Gazette, its money-losing paper in Little Rock, several newspaper executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity said yesterday.
They said Gannett had already arranged to sell the paper to its archrival, The Arkansas Democrat, but must first satisfy the Justice Department's antitrust division that The Gazette was unprofitable and that no buyer other than The Democrat could be found.


Peter Bellamy, 47; British Folk Singer Who Wrote Opera
Peter Bellamy, who helped spark a revival of British folk music, died last Thursday near his home in Keighley, in Yorkshire.
He was 47 years old.
He committed suicide, taking an overdose of tranquilizers and alcohol, his family said.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Recalled Chris Cron, infielder, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Kevin Flora, infielder, from Midland of the Texas League.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Shawn Green, outfielder.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Named Gary Hughes director of scouting and special assistant to the general manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  ATLANTA HAWKS -- Signed Rodney Monroe, guard.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Signed Steve Henson, guard, to a 1-year contract.
Continental Basketball Association  TRI-CITY CHINOOK -- Signed Reid Newery, guard, and Jim Usevitch, center.
Football  National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Chris Oldham, cornerback.
Placed J.D.
Williams, cornerback, on injured reserve.
CHICAGO BEARS -- Placed Ron Cox, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Activated Shaun Gayle, safety, and Ron Morris, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Placed Mike Johnson, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Waived Darryl Ingram, tight end.
Signed Cedric Figaro, linebacker, and Mike Elkins, quarterback.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Placed Godfrey Myles, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Activated Rob Awalt, tight end; Ricky Blake, running back, and Dixon Edwards, linebacker, from injured reserve.
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Anthony Bell, linebacker.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Activated Louis Cheek, offensive lineman, from injured reserve.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Waived Frank Giannetti, nose tackle.
Re-signed Cornell Holloway, defensive back.
Assigned Mike Titley, tight end, to the practice squad.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Waived Anthony Parker, cornerback.
Re-signed Mike Bell, defensive end.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Waived Greg Harrell, tight end, from the practice squad.
Placed Vance Mueller and Nick Bell, running backs, on the practice squad.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Signed Ron Brown, wide receiver-kick returner.
Signed Jeff Pahukoa, offensive lineman, to the practice squad.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Waived Ron Heard, wide receiver, from the practice squad.
Placed Tim Gordon, safety, on the practice squad.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Robbie Keen, punter.
Placed Rickey Watters, running back, on the practice squad.
Waived Adam Walker, running back, and Brett Wiese, guard, from the practice squad.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Activated Kelly Stouffer, quarterback, and Jeff Chadwick, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
Waived Rusty Hilger, quarterback.
Placed David Wyman, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Waived Derwin Brewer, wide receiver, from the practice squad.
Canadian Football League  SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Released Paul Bushey, running back, from the practice squad.
TORONTO ARGONAUTS -- Activated Kelvin Pruenster, tackle, from the reserve list.
Placed Michael Clemons, running back, on the reserve list.
Placed John Coflin, center, on the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Returned Vladimir Vujtek, left wing, to Tri-Cities of the Western Hockey League.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Acquired Greg Millen, goaltender, from the Chicago Blackhawks for future considerations.
Called up Steven King and Joe Paterson, forwards, from Binghamton of American Hockey League.


Ex-Manager Surprised by Met Downfall
Davey Johnson, in his first appearance at Shea Stadium since he was dismissed as manager of the Mets, termed "far-fetched" the notion that he would return to replace Bud Harrelson after the season.
"It's not even worth discussing," said Johnson.


Iraq's Letters to U.N.: 'Not Within the Team's Competence'
Following are the texts of letters delivered late Tuesday to the Security Council by
Iraq's
representative, Abdul Amir al-Anbari,
and released
today:.  LETTER ON HELICOPTERS
Ekeus, and the Iraqi side.


The Bush-Hussein Duel; U.S. Aides Admit Iraq Is No Armed Threat But Say That Control Must Be Established
The showdown in a Baghdad parking lot between United Nations inspectors and Iraqi officials was less a struggle over a batch of documents than over who is calling the shots in the Persian Gulf's unstable peace -- George Bush or Saddam Hussein.
With Baghdad's new overture tonight to the United Nations, President Bush may have won the central gamble behind his strategy in the gulf.
Administration officials have said they were betting that Mr.
Hussein would back down and that Mr.
Bush would never actually have to carry out his strongly implied threat of using military force.
Again Using U.N.
Aegis
Clearly, Mr.
Bush is driving the Western approach to the Iraqi President in the latest struggle, although he is careful to do so in the name of the United Nations, as he has been throughout the last year.


Panel Faults Leaders on AIDS Epidemic
After two years of study and testimony from hundreds of people, the National Commission on AIDS issued a report today saying that some progress has been made against the disease but asserting that a great obstacle remains: lack of leadership from President Bush and other officials.
"Our nation's leaders have not done well," the report said.
"In the past decade, the White House has rarely broken its silence on the topic of AIDS. Congress has shown leadership in developing critical legislation, but has often failed to provide adequate funding for AIDS programs. Articulate leadership guiding Americans toward a proper response to AIDS has been notably absent."


Networks Seek Presidential Debate Overhaul
Saying they wanted to improve the quality of televised Presidential campaign debates, the four major broadcast networks proposed today a new format that would involve head-to-head confrontations between candidates rather than question-and-answer sessions with panels of reporters.
The proposal, offered by ABC, NBC, CNN and CBS, was the latest of several modfications suggested for a feature of Presidential campaigns that has been a major factor in several elections but more often has been criticized as including more political grandstanding than substance.


Market Place; Hints of a Deal At Time Warner
THE stock of Time Warner Inc. rose yesterday after its chairman, Steven J. Ross, told shareholders that "serious and meaningful discussions are under way" for an alliance with a foreign partner and that he anticipated an announcement by the end of the year.
On the New York Stock Exchange, the shares added $1.375, to $82.625.
Some analysts took Mr.
Ross's statement as an indication that a deal might be close.
John S. Reidy, an analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, said Time Warner was likely to reach a deal with a foreign electronic-equipment manufacturer that would make a minority investment in the company, particularly since Mr.
Ross took pains to commit to such an alliance at an annual meeting.


Edward Joseph, 72, Noted Psychoanalyst
Dr.
Edward Joseph, a prominent psychoanalyst and professor of clinical psychiatry at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, died at White Plains Hospital on Tuesday.
He was 72 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He died after a heart attack, his family said.


French Retailer Seeks Piece Of the Fifth Avenue Trade
As Galeries Lafayette prepares to open its first American store in Trump Tower on Saturday, two questions seem to be on everyone's lips: Who will Donald Trump escort to the black-tie gala this evening?
And can the fashionable French store survive some of the stiffest competition in American retailing?
The question about Mr.
Trump's sidekick will be answered tonight, but questions about Galeries Lafayette's success will take longer to answer.
After all, other French, Japanese and Italian retailers have faltered badly in the United States.
After the curiosity seekers have browsed through the store, retailing experts say, they wonder whether Galeries Lafayette can attract the jaded and cautious shoppers who have severely cut back their spending at its Fifth Avenue neighbors.


Bridge
The dominance of the three North American teams, which finished first, second and fourth in the World Junior Team Championships in Ann Arbor, Mich., last month, and the relative failure of fancied European Zone squads, which finished fifth, sixth and seventh in a field of 12, was a surprise to many observers.
The American advantage seemed to be primarily in the area of bidding, while some of their rivals proved to be brilliant cardplayers.
Bill Pollack, of Englewood, N.J., reported the diagramed example of their skill from the Spingold Knockout Team Championship in Las Vegas.
He sat West, facing Ilan and Ofir Herbst, members of the Israel junior team, which was en route to Ann Arbor after qualifying in the European Zone championships.


Toxic-Arms Ban Stalls Money for State Dept.
A three-way dispute between the Administration, the Senate and the House of Representatives over a ban on imports from foreign companies that sell chemical and biological weapons has stalled a $5 billion authorization bill for the State Department.
Supporters of the ban, which passed the Senate, contend that it is the only way to restrict the proliferation of poison gas and other chemical and biological weapons, especially in the Middle East.
They say it could affect imports totaling $500 million a year.


Washington Memo; Painted by Numbers, 1980's Are Rosy To G.O.P., While Democrats See Red
There's a story line for sale in Washington these days, and it goes something like this:
In 1981, a Republican President came to town, deeply concerned about social justice.
Over the next decade, he and his successor raised the tax burdens of the rich, expanded social spending for the poor and eased the financial woes of the middle class.
By every important measure, 10 years of Republican rule have made America a fairer place.


Brazil Seeks Credit Deal
Brazil said today that it would present a new plan to foreign creditors next week to reschedule the $52 billion it owes to private banks.
The Brazilian central bank said its top debt negotiator, Pedro Malan, would travel to New York to meet with the banks' steering committee on Monday.


CHRONICLE
What's ARNOLD SCAASI thinking about these days, besides the lunch he had in his apartment with BARBARA BUSH on Tuesday?
About two weddings, those of ELENA FORD-NIARCHOS, daughter of CHARLOTTE FORD, and of ELIZABETH TAYLOR.


Hold It! Hostetler Answers Critics.
Jeff Hostetler sent a message today to all the fans and reporters who have blamed him for the Giants' lethargy on offense.
He said he thought he was doing a good job as the Giants' quarterback and said he would like to pass more.
The Super Bowl champion Giants have struggled to a 2-2 record.
On Sunday, in an unimpressive 13-10 victory over the Cleveland Browns, Hostetler threw only 15 passes and gained only 52 yards net in passing.


Beijing Accuses West of Using 5th Column
In some of the harshest language it has used so far, the leadership warned people today that Western countries were plotting to deprive China of its independence and sovereignty and turn it into a vassal state.
The warning was perhaps the strongest so far in an increasingly xenophobic campaign against what China says is a Western conspiracy of "peaceful evolution" to overthrow the Government.
Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party leader, delivered the message in a major speech on Tuesday that filled the top half of the front page of People's Daily today.


New York To Sather: This Ain't Edmonton
It is the firm and foolhardy notion of Edmonton General Manager Glen Sather that New York sports fans care desperately about preseason hockey.
The way Sather figures things, the fans here should be near hysterics by now over the possibility of acquiring Mark Messier, a dominant National Hockey League player who is not named Wayne Gretzky and is holding out in Edmonton.
The fans should be calling the radio talk shows, devouring the newspaper hockey columns, discussing the subject with their friends.


Rosenkrantz Lyon
Rosenkrantz Lyon &amp; Ross Inc., a brokerage firm, said it intended to acquire nearly all the remaining assets of another broker, Josephthal &amp; Company, for undisclosed terms.
The assets include the rights to the Josepthal name.
Last week, Rosenkrantz bought the assets of 10 Josephthal branches that accounted for about half of Josephthal's total brokerage business.
With the closing of the transaction, expected in a few days, Rosenkrantz would have 500 brokers in 24 offices, handling retail and institutional clients.


CHRONICLE
Yesterday was anything but humdrum in the life of WILLIAM H. WEBSTER, who has been director of both the C.I.A. and the F.B.I., and who is a former Federal apppeals court judge.
He celebrated the birth of his sixth grandchild, BENJAMIN WEBSTER ROESSLE, and he became a senior partner in the law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.
He said yesterday from his new office in Washington that his job is to "help develop a litigation practice in Washington and have a role in international corporate banking, and trade and administrative practices in a number of parts of the world."
"I hope I'll be kept busy," he added.  Probably, Judge Webster.


Clinton Announcement Set
ov.
Bill Clinton plans to announce here on Oct. 3 whether he will join the expanding list of candidates seeking the Democratic Presidential nomination, a spokesman for the Governor said today.
The spokesman, Mike Gauldin, would not discuss Mr.
Clinton's decision, but three advisers to the Governor who spoke on condition of anonymity said they expected him to join the field.


Los Angeles Journal; Helping Drivers Maintain the Habit
In his novel "The Crying of Lot 49," Thomas Pynchon described Los Angeles as an addict, with freeways for veins and cars the drug that kept it happy.
Predictably, the narcotic has made the user ill.
The sickness can be seen in the morning rush-hour crawl where the San Bernardino and Hollywood Freeways merge just east of downtown Los Angeles, forming part of what the State Department of Transportation calls the nation's busiest highway interchange.


Klaus Barbie, 77, Lyons Gestapo Chief
Klaus Barbie died a prisoner yesterday in Lyons, the French city where he led a reign of terror as the local Gestapo chief during World War II.
The last surviving German war criminal of rank to be tried by a tribunal of justice, he was 77 years old and had been in poor health for years.
Recent reports from France said that Mr.
Barbie had been transferred three weeks ago to a hospital from the prison where he was serving a life term on his 1987 conviction.
He was said to be suffering from cancer of the blood, spine and prostate.


New Book: Suspense! Drama! Plumbing!
David Owen has been an imposter for more than a decade.
In 1980, he posed as a high school senior in Stratford, Conn.
Thanks to his baby face, no one suspected he was actually 24 years old and covertly researching a book called "High School: Undercover With the Class of '80." And for the last six years, he has been playing a role far more daunting than any homework at Stratford High.


Town Tries To Save Its Signs
POCATELLO, Idaho, a town of 55,000 founded by railroad workers, has already saved its turn-of-the-century downtown by having it placed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Now Pocatello is taking preservation one step further, by trying to protect its vintage signs from change.
"We especially have great neon," said Matthew Lewis, the town's principal planner, who recently finished videotaping 100 stellar local signs.
"It makes the town look vibrant at night, and without it, it wouldn't be the same place."


Review/Music; Carnegie's Second Century Opens With Japanese Group
There are undoubtedly some who will contend that Carnegie Hall should have opened its 101st season with a conventionally splashy event, perhaps a performance by the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam or a world-class American orchestra.
Instead, the hall began its second century on Tuesday evening with something more unusual and risky.
It presented the North American debut of the Saito Kinen Orchestra, a Japanese ensemble that is little known in the United States (although it recently released its first recording for Philips), and that plays together only a few weeks each year.
And as if to address any doubts that the hall stood behind its choice, Isaac Stern, Carnegie's president, was the orchestra's soloist in a Bartok violin concerto.


Behind the Scenes at the Track
BOTANICALLY and architecturally, racetracks are the best-looking athletic facilities around.
A new book, "Great American Thoroughbred Racetracks" (Rizzoli, $50), to be published in October, shows their sweeping grandstands, lushly planted infields and such marvels as stables that look like Spanish missions and porch brackets shaped like horse heads.
The author, Nancy Stout, took the 300 photographs of 12 top racetracks and wrote essays on each track.
She was given access to almost all corners of the tracks, from the paddocks, where horses strut before races, to back-room sinks, where saddle pads hang to dry afterwards.
Her only obstacles, she said, were the tracks' strict dress codes, which once forced her to buy a skirt just to take pictures of an empty clubhouse room.


Review/Theater; Jean Stapleton Playing Julia Child Set to Music
Anyone who has seen Julia Child on television knows that she is the most theatrical of French chefs, tossing off bons mots with the same panache that she flings eggshells over her shoulder.
Capitalizing on Miss Child's effervescent personality, Lee Hoiby has had the novel notion of taking one of her popular television cooking classes and setting it to music.
The result puts Jean Stapleton in a mock-up of a kitchen onstage at the CSC Repertory, where she sings the recipe.
"Bon Appetit!," the second of two one-woman mini-musicals linked under that title, is airy, as intended in Miss Child's creation of gateau au chocolat, l'eminence brune, the subject of the evening's lesson.


Doctors Drowning in Unnecessary Paper Work; Insurance Competition
To the Editor:
In "Blue and Very Cross" (Op-Ed, Sept. 14) Rhoda Gilinsky tells of her soaring health insurance premiums, but glosses over some key points.


Two States Price Tax-Exempt Debt
Connecticut and Massachusetts priced tax-exempt debt securities yesterday, taking advantage of the current low interest rates.
Connecticut's $266 million special tax obligations were tentatively priced through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette for a top yield of 6.684 percent for an issue due in 2009, the longest maturity, The lowest yield was 5 percent for the 1993 maturity.
Moody's gave the issues an A1 rating, and Standard &amp; Poor's an AA minus rating.


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
The Japanese have begun to retaliate against the 63 percent U.S. tariff on the most advanced screens for laptop and notebook computers, with some companies saying they will stop sending the screens to the U.S.  [ Page D1. ]
OPEC agreed to a Saudi proposal to increase the group's total production ceiling by more than a million barrels a day, which would keep oil prices at their current moderate range, about $19.
The accord was opposed by several OPEC countries.  [ D1. ]


Expos' 1992 Home Schedule Threatened
If the National League receives no guarantee in the next few weeks that Olympic Stadium is safe, there will be no baseball in Montreal next season, CLAUDE BROCHU, the president of the Expos, said yesterday.
"The league hasn't set a deadline as such, but we're going to have to get going, and quickly," Brochu said.


Waterbury Mayor Charged With Corruption
The Mayor of Waterbury was arrested today on Federal corruption charges accusing him of selling his political powers to aid a small group of business associates.
According to a 29-count indictment, the Mayor, Joseph J. Santopietro, entered the conspiracy in February 1986, the month after he took office at the age of 26 and brought the Republican Party into local power with him.


Sudden Vacancies In New York's Jails
For the first time in two years, New York City has vacancies in its jails - as many as 1,100 cells.
The reasons, experts say, include faster transfers of convicts to state prisons and a decline in felony arrests.
Now officials are debating whether the city needs to pursue a $291 million prison expansion program.
Article, page B1.


CHRONICLE
BARRY COMMONER, the environmental scientist, is going to Moscow Monday to discusss ecological problems with Government officials and citizen organizations.
His visit is sponsored by the United States Information Agency, but he says he has no intention of muting his criticisms of American environmental policies.


Waterbury Mayor Arrested on Corruption Charges


Cuts by Air France
Air France, the state-owned airline, said it plans to cut 3,000 jobs by 1994 and reduce annual costs by 1.5 billion francs ($260 million) as part of a broad restructuring.
The carrier also said it had agreed to sell its Paris headquarters for 1.6 billion francs ($280 million).


UKRAINIAN LEADER AND BUSH CONFER
The Ukrainian leader, Leonid M. Kravchuk, met with President Bush today to discuss his breakaway republic's economic needs and nuclear weapons policy.
It was the first visit to Washington by a leading Soviet republic official since the failed coup last month.
A State Department official who specializes in Soviet affairs said the 45-minute discussion in the Oval Office did not signify recognition of Ukrainian independence, but was "part of the process of U.S. contacts with people in the Soviet Union at all levels -- in Moscow and at the republic level."


Kenya Frees Politician After U.S. Protests
The Kenyan Government released an opposition politician today after his arrest drew sharp condemnation from the United States.
The politician, Ahmed Bamahriz, a councilman from the Indian Ocean port city of Mombasa, is a founder of the Forum for the Peaceful Restoration of Democracy, a group that plans to hold a public rally in Nairobi on Oct. 5 in favor of the re-introduction of a multiparty political system.


U.S. Is Asked to Expand Undercover Bias Testing
Scholars and civil rights supporters are calling on the Federal Government to expand the use of undercover investigations to root out discrimination in employment, housing and business.
Arguing that much bias against black and Hispanic people goes undetected, the scholars say such operations would go a long way in documenting the problem and could be an effective tool in enforcing antidiscrimination laws.


Senate Support for Stealth Bomber Is Eroding
Congressional support for the embattled Stealth bomber eroded further today as the radar-eluding aircraft only narrowly survived an effort in the Senate to cancel the program.
In the B-2's closest call with termination, the Senate voted 51 to 48 against an amendment to limit production of the bat-winged plane to the 15 aircraft Congress has already ordered.
The Senate last month defeated the same measure, but by vote of 57 to 42.
The same measure received only 29 votes in favor in 1989.


Oil Output Is Raised By OPEC
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries agreed today to a Saudi proposal to increase the group's total production ceiling by more than a million barrels a day, which would keep oil prices at their present moderate range, averaging about $19 a barrel worldwide.
The accord, calling for a new output of 23.6 million barrels a day, was opposed by several OPEC countries.
The stated Saudi aim is to permit the halting recovery of the world economy to continue without any shocks from higher energy prices.


Alan Lewis, Restaurateur, 70
Alan Lewis, the managing director of the Rainbow Room, died yesterday in the restaurant's office.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan..
He died of heart disease, his companion, Verna Hobson, said.


SALVADORAN CHIEF AND REBELS REACH BROAD AGREEMENT
The Salvadoran President, Alfredo Cristiani, and five guerrilla commanders reached a broad agreement today on the country's political and economic future that was seen as a major breakthrough in the search for peace in El Salvador.
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, who convened negotiations between the two sides in New York 10 days ago, said it was his "firm expectation" that what is called the New York Agreement would break the deadlock in the negotiations.
He said negotiations would resume Oct. 12 for a cease-fire.


Health Benefits Found to Deter Switches in Jobs
Three in 10 Americans say they or someone in their household have at some time stayed in a job they wanted to leave mainly to keep the health benefits, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The survey provides some of the strongest evidence yet of pervasive concern about the costs of medical insurance and care.
The phenomenon becoming known around the country as "job lock" was most prevalent in middle-income households, suggesting the rising potency of health care as a political issue.


Neon Glows, but Bo Is Better
Deion Sanders has given new meaning to the term "two-sport athlete," playing interchangeably this week and next for Atlanta's Braves and Falcons.
But Bo Jackson still reigns as the ultimate athlete.
Even if he doesn't play football this year, which he will only if his ego makes him do it, Jackson has proved that he has few peers.
The commercial man has overcome what many experts said was a career-ending hip injury and is hitting creditably.
The Chicago White Sox, however, expect the rest to follow.


Baker and Israel Agree to Put Loan-deal Differences Aside
Foreign Minister David Levy of Israel and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d agreed yesterday to try to defuse tensions between their Governments over Israel's request for $10 billion in loan guarantees from the United States, apparently not by settling the dispute but by postponing it.
Speaking with reporters after his meeting with Mr.
Baker, Mr.
Levy said, "We can say that all those shadows that were between Israel and the United States have been removed and a better climate has been achieved."


House Panel Compromise On Bank Bill
The House Energy and Commerce Committee, the center of Congressional opposition to the Bush Administration's efforts to overhaul the banking system, approved a compromise proposal today that would allow banks to enter the securities business.
The committee's action clears the way for banking legislation to move forward in the House and presents an arrangement that could permit the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act, the Depression-era measure that prevents commercial banks from selling and underwriting stocks.


Dr. Seuss, Modern Mother Goose, Dies at 87
Theodor Seuss Geisel, the author and illustrator whose whimsical fantasies written under the pen name Dr.
Seuss entertained and instructed millions of children and adults around the world, died in his sleep on Tuesday night at his home in La Jolla, Calif.
He was 87 years old.
The exact cause of death was unclear, said Jerry Harrison, who oversees children's books for Random House, Mr.
Geisel's longtime publishers.
Mr.
Harrison said the author had been suffering from an infection of his jawbone that had become acute in recent months.


Israel Would Free Arabs in Information Exchange
Israeli hostage negotiators said today that they were ready to free more Arab prisoners as part of a sweeping exchange of Middle East captives, but they warned that nothing would happen until they get more information about Israeli servicemen missing in Lebanon.
In effect, the Israelis are refusing to have the ball passed back to them in the complex hostage-release arrangements, even though some Shiite Muslim clergymen in Lebanon say it is Israel's turn to keep the momentum going.
A British hostage, Jack Mann, was freed by his Lebanese kidnappers on Tuesday.


Corrections
A report in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to an acquisition involving the Ivax Corporation and to the company's business.
Ivax is acquiring the Willen Drug Company, not being acquired by it.
Ivax is in the pharmaceutical and medical diagnostics business; it is not a maker of lubricating oils.


From Lumbar to His Lumber, Yanks' Hall Feels the Pain
The bat has not moved through the strike zone with as much zip.
Pitches that used to rocket into right field are fluttering into left.
Mel Hall has a bad back and it has caused him to swing a bad bat.
No longer is he pushing toward 25 homers or 100 runs batted in.
Thoughts of hitting .300 for the first time in his career have frozen as the back grew stiffer and the weather grew colder.


Cuomo Says Bush Can Be 'Handled'
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York came to the nation's capital today and said that he was weary of the endless questions about his Presidential ambitions.
But he gleefully took on the role of Democratic challenger for an hour, ridiculing President Bush as an opponent who could be easily handled on foreign and domestic issues.
"What makes you think President Bush is going to be impossible to handle in an intellectual disputation?" Mr.
Cuomo demanded at a luncheon meeting with political reporters.
"That he won the Persian Gulf war? What's he going to say -- 'I won, I won, I won, shuddup?' "


School Buildings Play Vital Role in Education
To the Editor:
I was sorry to read (news article, Sept. 16) of the resignation of Charles E. Williams as president and chief executive officer of New York City's School Construction Authority.
Design, construction and maintenance of school buildings play a vital role in education.


Noise Plan Delay Irks Airport Neighbors
They are well used to nights without sleep, to conversations that escalate into indecipherable shouts, and to car alarms that go off in the wake of low-flying jets.
For the people who live closest to the metropolitan area's airports, Tuesday's news that the country's noisiest airplanes will not be grounded as soon as expected provoked a familiar mix of anger and quiet resignation -- quiet, that is, except for the roaring of the jets flying overhead.
"It's criminal for them to continue to increase volume at these airports and to allow old aircraft to incessantly bombard people in these communities," said Ira Gordon of Cedarhurst, L.I., trying not to lose his temper as he described what it is like to live in the shadow of John F. Kennedy International Airport.


Unisys-Timeplex
The Unisys Corporation, the financially troubled computer maker, is within days of concluding a delayed deal to sell its computer-networking division, according a person in the industry.
The division, Timeplex Inc., has scheduled a news conference for Tuesday.
The source, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Timeplex is expected to announce the closing of its $207 million sale to a joint venture led by Ascom Holding A.G. of Switzerland.
The sale, announced June 10, was originally scheduled to be completed by Aug. 31 but encountered delays, including securing government approvals.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Skull and Bones Society at Yale misattributed a comment about efforts by a group of alumni to block admission of women to the club.
In a court petition, it was P. Jay Fetner who said that if women were admitted, "Date rape, I assure you, lies in our medium-term future."


Centre Street Journal; Bar's Battlers for Bail: Advocacy, Day or Night
Frank J. Citrano's storefront law office at 77 Baxter Street is just across the street from the rear of the Manhattan Criminal Courts Building, at 100 Centre Street, which gives him an edge in practicing a courtroom specialty that many criminal defense lawyers tend to look down on.
Mr.
Citrano represents defendants at their moment of entry into the chaotic world of the courts, their first appearance before a judge for arraignment.
It is a specialty that places him on what many regard as the lowest rung of the criminal justice ladder.
But don't pine for him.
Mr.
Citrano says he likes it.
So thank you very much.
"I'm like the telephone company," said Mr.
Citrano, whose office is in earshot of the holding cells where the defendants are kept before their court appearances.
"I can almost reach out and touch them." A sign on the door of his storefront office says he will do it 24 hours a day.
Years ago, many of the lawyers who handled first arraignments often waited outside the courts jockeying among themselves in a kind of legal bazaar in the hope that a lawyerless defendant would hire them.
But the advent of the Legal Aid Society and a panel of state-appointed lawyers who handle most arraignments on a per diem basis ended that method of finding clients.
For the 62-year-old Mr.
Citrano, who also handles hearings, plea bargains and an occasional trial, representing defendants he has never seen before and might never see again is no problem.
As far as he is concerned, the Spences, Kunstlers, Slotnicks and Dershowitzes can have all those high profile, splashy trials, the ones where legal brillance and personality can determine a client's fate.
"Sure, the arraignment courts are the pits," Mr.
Citrano said recently while gazing across Baxter Street at the Manhattan House of Detention.
"But I'm proud of handling arraignments because if it wasn't for lawyers like me practicing meat and potatoes law those people inside over there would never have a lawyer who really knows how to get them out.
"You can put the F. Lee Baileys of this world in a Manhattan arraignment court and they wouldn't know what to do," he said.
William M. Kunstler, a prominent defense lawyer and civil rights advocate, agreed.
"I'd probably be lost at an arraignment because I never do them," he said.
Ira London, the defense lawyer who represented Joel B. Steinberg, concurred, saying that the Frank J. Citranos of the criminal-justice system "perform a valuable service to the courts and their defendants because they know arraignments better than anyone else."
"I never take an arraignment without consulting with one of them first because they know better than I what alternative non-jail programs are available," Mr.
London said.
"It's not the most sought-after legal practice because the issues are not that complicated," said Judge Charles H. Solomon, who presides over Manhattan Criminal Court and has handled his share of arraignments.
"They are a very necessary function in which procedural skills are a key to success."
Prosecutors and defense lawyers also say it does not hurt to know the various clerks and court officers who keep the cases moving.
Mr.
Citrano seems to know most of them by their first names.
As a consequence, they might be willing to make sure his case gets on the docket a little faster.
Most of the cases that Mr.
Citrano, a New York Law School graduate, handles are drug related.
His clients are sometimes street dealers.
Criminal justice experts say that there is only one legal issue to argue at arraignments in felony cases; whether defendants are denied bail.
That's when a Mr. Citrano can come in handy.
"In a matter of seconds," Mr.
Citrano said, "I can read the complaint and the defendant's record and get an immediate sense if I can argue for release without bail or ask for one low enough that my client can make it immediately.
"I also make sure that if the defendant has a family that they're there in court for the judge to see," he said.
"What gives me an edge is I like the circus atmosphere."


Electric Cars? Cut the Cord
Technicians trying to develop electric cars are focusing on two practical concerns: the distance the car can go before its battery needs a charge and the time required to recharge it.
This assumes that owners would recharge them in their own garages, most likely overnight.
This approach is a nonstarter because such cars would be used only for short distances and rarely by apartment dwellers.
They would appeal primarily to suburban families.


Cut at New Jersey Paper
Hurt by high debts and low revenues, the company that owns The Record in Hackensack and The News Tribune in Woodbridge laid off 195 people today.
The cuts by Macromedia Inc. affected 12 percent of the papers' total work force, or 59 full-time and 79 part-time employees at The Record and 30 full-time and 27 part-time ones at The News Tribune.
Newsroom layoffs totaled 16 full-time and 11 part-time workers at The Record, and 12 full- and part-time workers each at The News Tribune.


A Touch Of the Alps In an East Village Loft
IN 1983 Annatina Miescher, a Swiss psychiatrist, moved to New York City to study at Beth Israel Hospital.
She had two pieces of luggage.
One held her clothing; the other, her favorite pliers, hammer and wire cutters.
Now, Dr.
Miescher is the chief of the alcoholism clinic at Bellevue Hospital by day.
At night, she is a woodworker.


Tentative Approval On Pan Am-Delta Deal
The Transportation Department today tentatively approved the proposed purchase by Delta Air Lines of most of Pan American World Airways' trans-Atlantic routes.
Pan Am, which has been operating under Federal bankruptcy protection since Jan. 8, would receive $416 million for the routes if the deal received final approval, a department spokesman said.
The department has given interested parties until Oct. 7 to offer any arguments against approval.


Hospital Refuses to Help Woman Set to Give Birth
Although she was in labor and bleeding, just minutes away from giving birth, Charlesetta Brown was refused treatment at Harlem Hospital early Sunday because, she was told, the obstetrics ward was too crowded.
In no condition to be moved, she gave birth in the hospital's admissions room, her son delivered by the ambulance crew that brought her there, as three hospital employees looked on, she said.


Laker Star Asks for Resignation
MAGIC JOHNSON has asked for the resignation of the school board member who described the National Basketball Association star as "a big, dumb black kid" during his school years in Lansing, Mich.


Lincoln Officers Settle Case
Three former officers of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association have settled civil charges stemming from the sale of $275 million in junk bonds issued by Lincoln's parent, the American Continental Corporation.
Two of the defendants, Ray C. Fidel, the former president of Lincoln, and Robin S. Symes, the former chief executive, have already pleaded guilty to securities fraud and are expected to be witnesses against their former boss, Charles H. Keating Jr., the chairman of American Continental.
The Securities and Exchange Commission announced the settlements on Tuesday.


Mayor Strongly Attacks Race Hatred
In unusually strong language that invoked the legacy of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Mayor David N. Dinkins appealed yesterday to New Yorkers to overcome their differences and denounced the racial hate -- among blacks as well as whites -- that erupted last month in Crown Heights.
Mr.
Dinkins made his remarks at a forum on race relations during which he announced a new city program to train volunteers in conflict resolution.
But for the Mayor, who is not generally considered the most stirring of speakers, the event was equally notable for the force of his oratory.


High on a Carpet, A Heavenly Scene
MEL CHIN'S Turkish carpet nearly flies.
It depicts swirling clouds, and until Oct. 26 it is suspended from the ceiling of the Storefront for Art and Architecture, a nonprofit gallery at 97 Kenmare Street, near Lafayette Street, in the SoHo section of Manhattan.
Part of Mr.
Chin's inspiration, he said, was that the Sanskrit word for heaven also means wool cover, and in a dialect used in Iran, the word for paradise refers to the flower-filled gardens often represented in rugs.
Last year, aided by meteorologists and a Philadelphia rug dealer, Woven Legends, he sent a photo of the Earth's weather patterns to Kurdish weavers in Turkey, and asked them to make a carpet.


Review/Dance; The Moiseyev Company Visits With Its Legendary Bravura
Indefatigable at the age 0f 85, Igor Moiseyev came onstage to acknowledge an ovation at the opening of his famed folk ensemble's three-week season at Radio City Music Hall on Tuesday night.
On this ninth United States tour, as on virtually every other, the members of the Moiseyev Dance Company from the Soviet Union swung into a good-will American encore -- a square dance to "Turkey in the Straw," ending with "Hail, Hail, the Gang's All Here."


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 26


Inmate Count In Some Jails Drops Sharply
Two months after New York City officials warned that they were running out of jail space, the city's prison population has decreased so sharply that as many as 1,100 cells were vacant this month.
It is the first time in two years that any significant number have been empty.
City officials and criminal-justice experts point to a variety of reasons for the decrease: faster transferring of convicted inmates to state prisons, and rearranging of court vacation schedules to avoid the traditional summer slump in resolving criminal cases.
Also, fewer felonies are being reported and fewer felony arrests are being made.
In addition, more of those arrested for misdemeanors are being given desk-appearance tickets instead of jail time.


For Simple Things, an Opulent Style
LOUIS CARTIER designed a pen not as a tool but an art object.
He studded pens with rubies, made pencils of jade and carved letter-opener handles from coral.
"Writing and Cartier," an exhibition of 40 writing instruments and desk accessories, all but two designed by Cartier between 1899 and 1942, opened Tuesday at the Cartier store on Fifth Avenue (52d Street).
It introduces a lacquered, spotted Panther Pen, and runs through Oct. 10.


Strange Little Packages
FOR the last two years, the music industry has gone wild with compact-disk special packages, promotional items sent to the media or limited editions sold in stores.
Spencer Drate, a graphic designer, collects them.
His office on lower Fifth Avenue in Manhattan is crammed with boxes containing 200 of these objects, which include CD's housed in miniature candy tins, caskets, lockers, diaries and boxes for pizza and apple pie.
Record company art directors and record store owners know of his obsession and send him fresh material, either free or at "a very special price," Mr.
Drate said. (Consumers pay as little as $4.99 for a creatively packaged single and as much as $25 for an elaborately boxed album.)


Books of The Times; The Alpha and the Omega of Norman Mailer
Harlot's Ghost  By Norman Mailer 1,310 pages. Random House. $30.
Norman Mailer's huge new novel, "Harlot's Ghost," about life in the Central Intelligence Agency, comprises three books written by Mr.
Mailer's alter ego, Herrick (Harry) Hubbard, an officer in the C.I.A.


European Soldiers Restore Calm In Zaire Capital as Foreigners Flee
French and Belgian troops helped restore calm to the Zairian capital today after two days of looting, but thousands of foreign residents prepared to flee the central African nation amid reports of continuing unrest in provincial cities.
According to a Reuters report from the capital, Kinshasa, French troops took over operations of the ferry service and shuttled some 3,000 people, among them French, Belgian, Portuguese and Lebanese citizens, across the Congo River to Brazzaville, the calm capital of Congo.


Sports of The Times; Flinching For Darryl At Midnight
THIS was a tiny little moment of truth.
It took place last Saturday night round midnight in New York.
It involved Darryl Strawberry and a writer who is supposed to be neutral about these things.
The writer came in from dinner and flipped on the tube and saw Darryl taking his hacks against a lefty pitcher, bases loaded, two out, game tied, bottom of the eighth.
And suddenly baseball in New York still had some energy, still had some meaning.


U.N. Bars Weapon Sales to Yugoslavia
The Security Council, meeting at ministerial level, unanimously adopted a resolution today embargoing the sale of weapons and military equipment to Yugoslavia.
The resolution, based a on draft by the European Community whose discussions on a Yugoslav peace conference are scheduled to resume tomorrow, is a toothless document since there is no provision in it that would enable the United Nations to back up the embargo.
It does, however, ask Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar to offer his assistance to resolve the Yugoslavian crisis, thereby further internationalizing efforts to stop the fighting and harden the three day old cease-fire.


Florida State Isn't Intimidated by High Places
When Casey Weldon's family moved to the capital city of Florida more than a decade ago, the Florida State Seminoles were in the process of spending two consecutive New Year's nights in Miami, in the high-profile surroundings of the Orange Bowl.
Long before Weldon became the starting quarterback in garnet and gold, the idea of the Seminoles appearing high in the national polls became a natural and happy part of his adolescence.


Defeating Hussein, Once and for All
I support the President's moves to force Saddam Hussein to comply with the terms of the gulf cease-fire.
But I disagree with the President's policy at a more fundamental level -- namely, his persistent view of Saddam Hussein as an acceptable part of the landscape, if and when we finally get him cut down to size.
The only way we can hope for long-term relief from Saddam Hussein is if Saddam Hussein ceases to hold power, and if his Baathist regime is dismantled as well.
Realizing that the burden of proof rests with those who say that Mr.
Hussein can be toppled, I think it possible to describe how that might be done.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Wonder Stuff  The Marquee
The Wonder Stuff walked onstage last Thursday night at the Marquee with broad grins and plaid and polka-dotted clothes, and proceeded to play songs with jaunty, folksy guitars and fiddle.
It was all camouflage.


Banks' Adviser Wrote the Rules
At age 37, William M. Isaac was the boy wonder of banking.
The youngest person to be named the nation's top banking regulator, he guided the Continental Illinois Bank rescue and helped write today's rules of banking.
Now, at age 47 and with a few more gray hairs, Mr.
Isaac has parlayed his former career in Government into a profitable business advising banks on how to deal with regulators.
As more banks face tougher Government scrutiny, Mr.
Isaac's business is booming.
The former chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and his 14-member band of former top regulators have carved a profitable niche telling banks, in large part, how to survive bank examinations.
In fact, Mr.
Isaac's firm, the Secura Group, boasts in its advertising that it can "guide you through the regulatory process as no other firm can."


An End to Making Welfare Policy by Anecdote
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 9 front-page account of the beginning phase of the Family Support Act, which requires states to place a rising percentage of welfare recipients in work, training or education programs, describes the experience of two Oklahoma welfare recipients.
One is a 28-year-old mother of four, the other a 30-year-old mother of six.
Neither seems to be making much progress.
A Washington-based commentator suggests we may be putting people into "a never-ending stream of self-esteem classes."


President of Primerica Surprised by Promotion
When he graduated from Harvard Business School in 1982, James Dimon faced the same question as many of his classmates: Where should he work as an investment banker?
Mr.
Dimon asked the question of an old family friend, Sanford I. Weill, who had just merged the firm now known as Shearson Lehman Brothers with the American Express Company.


Tokyo Journal; Sniping in Japan Signals Battle for the Leadership
Shifting uneasily in his chair, former Deputy Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa admitted to feeling uncomfortable, even pained, in denigrating the man who leads Japan.
"I don't want to appear as though I am criticizing my friend, the Prime Minister," he said with a thin smile.
But the criticism of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu is unmistakable.
To Mr.
Miyazawa, Mr.
Kaifu lacks the stature and resolve that Japan needs if it is to be taken seriously as a major force in world politics.


Realty Building In Canarsie Hit By Firecrackers
The Canarsie real-estate office that had been firebombed twice this summer in bias attacks was vandalized again early yesterday, bringing back to the surface the racial tensions that had flared after the earlier attacks.
Rumors swept through the streets of the Brooklyn neighborhood today, accompanied by a small group of reporters and camera crews.
By late afternoon, the tensions were palpable, as close to 50 stick-wielding white teen-agers gathered on Flatlands Avenue after they heard that a group of blacks would be arriving to retaliate for a rumored racial attack at a local school.


Canadian Tests Positive for Steroids
A Canadian wheelchair athlete has tested positive for using steroids and suspended from competition for two years, officials said yesterday in Ottawa.
Weight lifter JACK McCANN, of St.
Albert, Alberta, tested positive for the banned substance stanozolol, and metabolites which can be steroid byproducts.


Stocks Gain in Tokyo
Stocks were up today on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 390.66 points, or 1.66 percent, to close at 23,968.08.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei rose 243.72 points.


Criminal Query Is Begun in Care Given to Hasid
The Brooklyn District Attorney began a criminal investigation yesterday into the medical treatment received by a Hasidic scholar who bled to death in Kings County Hospital.
The scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum, was stabbed repeatedly during a racial disturbance in Crown Heights last month, and died after two surgical residents, working without supervision, failed for 45 minutes to detect a chest wound that eventually caused his death.


Inventors in Search Of New Must-Haves
MEMORABLE dates in the annals of home improvement. 1860: Li- noleum. 1938: Teflon. 1945: Tup- perware. 2001: Floating furni- ture.
History marches on.


INSIDE
Arms Embargo on Yugoslavs
The United Nations Security Council unanimously approved an embargo on the sale of weapons and military equipment to Yugoslavia.
Page A3.
Clash in th Caucasus
Four people were killed and five wounded ina gun battle between mutinous and loyalist security units in the republic of Georgia.
Page A8.
Riots in Romania
Three people were killed in Bucharest as thousands of protesting miners stormed into the capital and clashed with the police.
Page A3.
A Trade Boomerang
After the United States imposed a tariff on some advanced computer screens, the Japanese cut off shipments in retaliation.
Page D1.
Recruiting Minority Lawyers
Thirty-five New York City law firms have pledged to try to double hiring of minority lawyers and to treat them equally once they arive.
Page B1.
Klaus Barbie Is Dead
Klaus Barbie, who led a reign of terror as the Gestapo chief in Lyons during World War II, died at a French hospital.
Page D22.


35 Law Firms in New York Pledge More Minority Hiring
Seeking to combat the persistent underrepresentation of minorities in their offices, 35 major law firms in New York City pledged yesterday to hire more black, Hispanic, Asian-American and American Indian lawyers and to treat them equally in assignments and promotion once they arrive.
The law firms set a goal of hiring one minority lawyer for every 10 new lawyers they recruit over the next five years -- almost double the current rate.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
BUILDING a window seat is not difficult for an amateur with moderate carpentry experience and a basic kit of hand and power tools, including an electric drill and a circular saw.
The design shown here consists of two-by-four-lumber framing, like what's inside a wall.
The front is covered with half-inch-thick wallboard and the top with removable pieces of three-quarter-inch-thick plywood.
They provide storage space underneath.


Adios, Weeds, Hello, Flowers
THE most publicly accessible effort of New York's Adopt-A-Highway program now abuts the Belt Parkway near Bay 17th Street in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn.
The two-year-old program uses corporate donations to rejuvenate landscapes along highways.
It has already given a wildflower meadow to the Staten Island Expressway and flower beds to the Van Wyck Expressway.
Neither of these projects, however, lie near pedestrian areas.
The Belt Parkway's new plantings surround the bases of a pedestrian bridge.
Brooklyn Union Gas, with a gift of $30,000, was the major donor to the project.


Halle Orchestra's New Head
Kent Nagano, the 39-year-old American conductor who recently led the New York premiere of "The Death of Klinghoffer," has been appointed music director of the Halle Orchestra in Manchester, England, one of Britain's oldest symphony orchestras.
Until recently it was uncommon for American conductors to hold prestigious British directorships.
Mr.
Nagano joins a list that includes Michael Tilson Thomas, the 46-year-old principal conductor of the London Symphony Orchestra, and Andrew Litton, the 32-year-old principal conductor of the Bournemouth Symphony.


Events: Glimpses of the Past and Present
Pennsylvania Show House
Kutz Elementary School, 1950 Turk Road (Route 611), Doylestown, Pa. (215) 345-6656.


Review/Television; Looking Racism in the Face in St. Louis
Tonight "Prime Time Live" uses hidden cameras to catch some common affronts by white Americans that keep reminding black Americans that the colorblind millennium has yet to be achieved.
Diane Sawyer goes to St.
Louis, Mo., with two 28-year-old men, Glenn Brewer, who is black, and John Kuhnen, who is white, and assigns them to shop in the same stores, try to rent the same apartment and apply for the same job.
The results, visible at 10 on Channel 7, will shock only the most naive viewers but should distress everybody.
At several stores, Mr.
Kuhnen gets instant service; Mr.
Brewer is ignored except at a record store, where a salesman keeps a close eye on him without offering any assistance.
When they go for a walk, separately on the same street, a police car passes Mr.
Kuhnen but slows down to give Mr.
Brewer a once-over.
At a car dealership, Mr.
Kuhnen is offered a lower price and better financing terms than Mr.
Brewer.
Inquiring about a job at a dry cleaner that has advertised for help, Mr.
Kuhnen is told jobs are still available; Mr.
Brewer is told, "The positions are taken." Following up a for-rent sign, Mr.
Kuhnen is promptly offered an apartment, which he does not take; 10 minutes later, Mr.
Brewer is told it has been rented for hours.
It adds up to a quick course for whites in the run-of-the-mill indignities that many blacks endure day after day.


Polish Cardinal Served A Summons in Albany
A summons opening a lawsuit for defamation was served on Jozef Cardinal Glemp, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Warsaw and Primate of Poland, yesterday outside the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception in Albany.
According to Aline Frisch, a process server from New York City, the Cardinal said, "No, no, no," as she tucked the legal papers under his arm.
The suit will be filed in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan by Rabbi Avraham Weiss of the Hebrew Institute of Riverdale, the Bronx, who led demonstrators onto the grounds and porch of a convent located adjacent to the Auschwitz death camp in July 1989.
Rabbi Weiss says he was slandered and defamed when Cardinal Glemp expressed relief in a homily that the demonstrators had been stopped before they could kill the nuns or destroy the convent.


Union Carbide Plans Job Cuts
The Union Carbide Corporation said today that it would cut some 5,500 jobs to achieve $250 million in cost reductions by 1994.
It said the cuts would lead to a fourth- quarter charge of $100 million to $150 million to cover severance and other costs.
Of the total job cuts, 3,700 were already accounted for in a previously announced restructuring of Union Carbide's various businesses.
The cost-cutting steps, the company said, are part of an effort that began late last year to improve financial and business performance.


India Approves Ventures With Americans
India's Commerce Minister announced today that his Government had approved two joint ventures between American multinationals and local companies, and preliminary plans for two others.
The minister, Palaniappan Chidambaram, said India had given final approval for a joint venture by I.B.M. and the Indian conglomerate Tata Industries to produce I.B.M.
Personal System 2 computers and computer programs, and by the Indian auto maker Maruti Ltd. and the Ford Motor Company to produce aluminum radiators for cars.


Salvadoran Rebels Adjust to Fall in Political Power
Not so long ago in the arid hills that straddle El Salvador's northern border, it seemed that the Marxist guerrillas who died fighting the Salvadoran Government would simply be replaced by their sons and daughters.
So profound was the feeling of injustice in the region, rebel leaders insisted, that the civil war could go on forever unless the Government made profound political concessions.
In the pockets of Salvadoran territory that the guerrillas controlled, boys carrying semi-automatic rifles echoed those assertions.


Essay; Breaking the Cartel
A little band of willful academics, representing no interest but their own arrogant selfishness, have for 40 years kept clutched to their scholastic bosoms a substantial portion of the Dead Sea Scrolls.
These treasures are the ancient documents found in a West Bank cave that cast light on the religious politics roiling the world between 200 B.C. and a century after the birth of Christ.


Utilities Deregulation Will Hurt Consumers
To the Editor:
"Regulatory Overhaul Advancing" (Business Day, Sept. 9) refers to attempts to dismantle the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935.


National Ski Official Rips Steinbrenner and Stance
The animosity between the leadership of the national ski federation and the United States Olympic Committee was fueled again this week by comments attributed to a senior official with the ski federation, who described George Steinbrenner, a U.S.O.C. vice president, as a "bumbling idiot" and "a disgrace to sport" in a current issue of a skiing publication.
The remarks by Thomas J. Weisel, a director of the United States Ski Association and president of the board of the United States Ski Team, were part of an interview he gave to Ski Racing International, a newspaper published 20 times a year in Waitsfield, Vt., that is highly regarded by those involved in competitive skiing.


Giant Plan: Stop Smith, If They Can
A year ago, when the Giants played the Dallas Cowboys twice in the first four weeks of the season, Emmitt Smith was no factor.
The Cowboys' rookie tailback had missed training camp because he was unsigned, and he carried 6 times for 11 yards in the first Giants-Cowboys game and 12 times for 28 yards in the second.
"I remember those games," Smith said today by telephone.
"I remember seeing the Giants' defense in our backfield."


Republican Honor, More and Less
"I'm very proud to be a Republican on a day like this," Senator Mark Hatfield of Oregon said Tuesday as his colleague, John Danforth of Missouri, unveiled the latest attempt at a compromise civil rights bill, which included two dozen concessions to the Bush Administration.
That was before the White House issued a statement denouncing even this bill as a "quota bill."
The Danforth proposal, which is designed to attract enough Republicans to survive another civil rights veto by President Bush, is in the noble tradition of bipartisanship that has produced stronger rights laws over four decades.
The White House position is part of a more recent pattern of resistance within the G.O.P. to moderate advances in civil rights.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Tony Bennett  Blue Note 131 West Third Street
Tony Bennett recently celebrated his 40th anniversary as a recording artist by releasing an 87-song boxed set on Columbia/Legacy Records.
The impressive retrospective showcases the metamorphosis of a voice over four decades from a traditional Mediterranean-style belter into a sophisticated pop-jazz interpreter.


Accounts
*
Jenn-Air Co., Indianapolis, a division of Maytag Corp., to Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago, which handles the company's Maytag brand account.
The previous agency was Young &amp; Rubicam, Chicago.
Billings were not disclosed, but last year's spending was estimated at $5.5 million. *
Kinder-Care Learning Centers Inc., Montgomery, Ala., to Tracy-Locke, Dallas, for advertising and direct marketing.
The account has billings of $6 million to $7 million.
The image advertising portion of the account had previously been handled by Hutcheson-Shutze, Atlanta, which was acquired last year by BBDO.
Tracy-Locke Direct has handled Kinder-Care's promotions and direct marketing.


U.S. Tariff Appears to Backfire
A month and a half after the United States imposed a 63 percent tariff on the most advanced screens for laptop and notebook computers, the Japanese have begun to retaliate.
Some companies have said they will stop sending the screens to the United States, and the Toshiba Corporation, one of the largest Japanese companies to make computers in the United States, has said it is moving its operations abroad to obtain the screens without paying the tariffs.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
American Medical International Inc., a unit of American Medical Holdings, filed for $100 million in senior notes to be offered through First Boston.


Paramount's TV President
Paramount Pictures today named Kerry McCluggage president of its television group.
Mr.
McCluggage, a former president of MCA Inc.'s Universal Television, replaces Mel Harris, who is leaving after more than 14 years at Paramount.
Mr.
McCluggage will report to Brandon Tartikoff, who became chairman of Paramount Pictures in July.
Mr.
Harris has said he was leaving to give Mr.
Tartikoff the opportunity to name his own top television executive.


4 Die in Soviet Georgia as Rival Military Units Clash
Four men were killed and five were wounded in a gun battle here today, the fiercest in a series of clashes between pro-democracy rebels and the elected but increasingly autocratic Government of the republic of Georgia.
The battle, the first between rival military units in the deepening confrontation here, took place early this morning at a state electricity installation defended by police officers loyal to the Government of President Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia.
Rebel national guardsmen reportedly approached the site and shooting began, though accounts of who fired first, and why, were conflicting and sketchy.


Intact Asbestos Poses Little Risk for Most Building Occupants, Study Says
Undisturbed and undamaged asbestos is likely to expose office workers and most building occupants to no more health risk than if they were outdoors, an independent panel of scientists has concluded in a study ordered by Congress.
The risk of exposure is considerably higher for custodians, maintenance workers, firefighters and others who might disturb asbestos in their work, the scientists concluded.
The risk is highest, they said, for workers who remove asbestos from buildings.


EXECUTIVES
*
Delmarva Power and Light Co., Wilmington, Del., an electricity and gas company, named Howard E. Cosgrove president and chief operating officer, succeeding Nevius M. Curtis.
Mr.
Curtis, who remains chairman and chief executive, said he plans to retire in the second half of 1992. *
General Mills Inc., Minneapolis, appointed Michael A. Peel senior vice president-personnel.


To Open Door for Anderson, Nets Ask Players to Defer Pay
The Nets may ask several veterans to restructure their contracts to give the team more financial flexibility to sign Kenny Anderson.
Norman Blass, the attorney for Sam Bowie and Roy Hinson, said the Nets have asked if either player would consider deferring some of their current salary to later seasons.


Germany and Britain Split on Larger Community
The German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, urged today that the European Community be expanded to include former East bloc nations.
"We want all democratic states in Europe to be able to accede to this community," Mr.
Genscher said to the General Assembly.
"For the new democracies in Eastern Europe who introduce the market economy, the way must be opened, through association, to full membership," he said.


Iraq Appears Ready to Yield Over U.N. Inspectors
Iraq seemed to open the way tonight to resolving its dispute with the Security Council over the detention of 44 United Nations inspectors who had been copying documents relating to President Saddam Hussein's secret nuclear weapons program.
In a new letter sent to the Security Council this evening, Iraq indicated that the inspectors would be freed after they and the Iraqi authorities guarding them have jointly prepared a record of all the documents and photographs they want to remove from the site where they are being held.


BRIEFS
*
Abbey National P.L.C., London, has agreed to buy the Scottish Mutual Assurance Society, an insurance and pension-fund company, for about $493 million in cash. *
American Equine Products Inc., Wilmington, Mass., parent of Docktor Pet Centers Inc., a pet store franchisor, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors.


Corrections
A brief article by Reuters on the Company News page of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to a divestiture plan of the Champion International Corporation.
Champion is exploring the sale of only its wood- products operations in Montana.


Ojeda Relishes The Race
Poor pitching and sloppy defense cost Los Angeles a chance to extend its lead over Atlanta in the National League West tonight.
The Dodgers committed three infield errors, victimizing starter Bob Ojeda, as the San Diego Padres coasted to an 8-2 victory at Jack Murphy Stadium.
The loss cut the Dodgers' lead to one and a half games over the Braves, who split a doubleheader with the Cincinnati Reds.


Review/Opera; Noting the Producer's Touches And What They Add to the Show
Mounted provocatively above the stage at the Metropolitan Opera on Tuesday night was a massive emblem, seemingly carved out of stone.
In ornate script it gave the composer of the opera (Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart), its title ("Don Giovanni") and the place and date of its first performance (Prague 1787).
Below it, on the stage floor, another such emblem appears with writing too small to read, but just as ornamented and all the more obvious because throughout the performance everybody had to walk around it.
Like the final scene of the opera in which all the characters are displayed in a frozen silhouette against a backdrop of sky and clouds, these emblems seem to have the function of light bulbs in cartoons.
They represent the production designer's "ideas." Ah yes, we are meant to think about the emblems: this is a "framed" production, one self-conscious about the work's past.
Ah yes, we are meant to think about the final tableaux: Don Giovanni had an impact on the characters he came in contact with, stirring ineffable desire, perhaps, which can either lead to the Commendatore's hell or to the backdrop's heaven.


Jays Nudge Farther Ahead By Roughing Up Langston
While it poured in Baltimore today, the Toronto Blue Jays played here and won, then packed and left for their long flight home, still clinging to first place after a grinding road trip.
But can they keep their lead at the Skydome?
Good question.
After beating the California Angels, 7-2, and closing a 4-5 Western swing with two straight victories, the Blue Jays acknowledged that their next big test is winning at home, where they are 15-17 since the July break for the All-Star Game.


Borden Official Moves Up To Post of Chief Executive
Anthony S. D'Amato was elected chief executive of Borden Inc., the company announced yesterday.
He has been president and chief operating officer of the food and industrial products company since July 1990.
Mr.
D'Amato, who succeeds R. J. Ventres on Nov. 1, said in a telephone interview yesterday that his priority for the company was completing a two-year-old restructuring plan intended to streamline its business and shed unprofitable operations, particularly in the dairy industry.


Chief State Judge Is Suing Cuomo To Get More Money for the Courts
Transforming a political feud into a constitutional drama, New York State's Chief Judge said today that he is suing Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to force Mr.
Cuomo to spend more money on the state's overburdened court system.
The lawsuit, by Chief Judge Sol Wachtler, could wind up being settled in the court over which he presides, the New York Court of Appeals, the state's highest court.
He said he would excuse himself from the case if it gets that far.


Taxable Money Funds Off; Tax-Frees Up
Yields of tax-free and taxable money market funds moved in different directions for the week ended yesterday, with tax-free yields moving up and the yields on taxable funds going down.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/Donoghue's Money Market Fund Report, which monitors the funds, pointed out that "tax-frees are affected more by supply and demand, while the taxables are influenced primarily by monetary policy."


New Name for Magazine
After 57 years of being known as Bride's Magazine, the Conde Nast publication is changing its name to Bride's &amp; Your New Home.
The change will take effect with the December/January issue.
"Everyone is talking about the home, the home, the home," said Barbara Tober, the editor in chief for 25 years.
"Well, we said to ourselves, We have analyzed the future and it is -- the home!"


RESULTS PLUS TENNIS Grabb Advances  Jim Grabb of the United States and Gianluca Pozzi of Italy upset seeded players yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the Queensland Open in Brisbane, Australia. Grabb beat sixth-seeded Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan, 7-5, 5-7, 6-3, in their second-round match. Pozzi struggled past fourth-seeded Todd Woodbridge of Australia, winning, 6-4, 0-6, 6-1. In other matches, second-seeded Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet Union beat Robbie Weiss of the United States, 3-6, 6-2, 6-0, and Richard Fromberg of Australia, seeded eighth, defeated Jason Cask, 6-0, 6-1.(AP) Bruguera Beats Engel: Third-seeded Sergi Bruguera of Spain struggled past a Swedish qualifier, David Engel, 2-6, 7-5, 7-6, yesterday in the first round of the Swiss Indoor tournament in Basel. Kevin Curren of the United States beat Marc Rosset of Switzerland, 2-6, 7-6, 6-1. (AP) Sanchez Tops Jaite: Top-seeded Emilio Sanchez of Spain overcame Martin Jaite of Argentina, 2-6, 7-6, 6-4, last night to advance to the quarterfinals of the A.T.P. tournament in Palermo, Sicily. Marian Vajda of Czechoslovakia upset fifth-seeded Guillermo Perez-Roldan of Argentina, 6-2, 6-4, to reach the quarterfinals along with Diego Nargiso of Italy and eighth-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria. (AP) Meshki Defeats Herreman: Second-seeded Leila Meskhi of the Soviet Union advanced to the third round of the Bayonne Open yesterday by defeating Nathalie Herreman of France, 6-3, 6-2, in Bayonne, France. In a first-round match between French players, third-seeded Nathalie Tauziat eliminated Agnes Zugasti, 6-4, 4-6, 7-5. (AP) HORSE RACING Lure Is Defeated Three months after breaking a track record in his debut, Lure, the Claiborne Farm's promising 2-year-old colt, was outrun on a sloppy track at Belmont Park yesterday by Robert Brennan's Devil on Ice. It was a disappointing race for Lure, a son of Danzig and grandson of Alydar, who has been resting bucked shins since he broke the track record for five furlongs in June. He went off the 2-to-5 favorite yesterday, but could not rally in the muddy homestretch and finished more than a length behind Devil on Ice, who ran the seven furlongs in 1:23 2/5 and paid $10.80 for $2 to win.


'48 Hours' Quietly Succeeds at CBS
Quietly, "48 Hours," the other CBS news-magazine program, has become a vital part of that network's prime-time schedule.
Two weeks into the new television season, "48 Hours" is now firmly established as CBS's anchor at 10 P.M.
Wednesday night.
Its success is a big surprise, not least to CBS: the program, which examines one topic intensively over a two-day period, was only an official announcement away from being canceled last spring.


Depending on How You See It, Rain Can Provide Music to the Eyes


Whittaker Spinoff
The Whittaker Corporation said it would spin off to shareholders all its shares in the company's biotechnology business, Biowhittaker, and sell newly issued shares in the unit to Boehringer Ingelheim of Germany, which would hold a 19.9 percent stake.
Boehringer has tentatively agreed to form a joint venture with Biowhittaker.


Talking Deals; Private Company Embraces ESOP
IF the ideal deal is win-win, the Todd Products Corporation of Brentwood, L.I., appeared headed for success last week when it established an employee stock ownership plan, suggests Frank Lourenso, executive vice president of Chemical Bank, which advised the company and provided financing for the plan.
Among the winners he foresees are the company, which hopes to see a more highly motivated work force; its owner-managers, who are able to take out some equity without selling the business, and the 240 employees, for whom the ESOP will provide retirement benefits.


2 Islander Standouts Still Demand Trades
As the Islanders sent 28 players from their training camp to the minor leagues today, their two best players -- through the words of their agents -- reaffirmed their desire to be traded from the stagnant, for-sale franchise.
None of the roster cuts were unexpected, nor were the stances of Pat LaFontaine, the superstar, and Brent Sutter, the veteran captain.
Neither practiced today, the first day they were to report after playing in the Canada Cup.
Sutter arrived at the Coliseum after the workout.


The Salvador Menace
Remember El Salvador?
Now it is the charred husk of a country, victim of a pitiless 11-year civil war and a Reagan-era obsession that made it the focus of a thousand inflated declarations.
Now, finally, sheer weariness has dispelled the delusions and brought the promise of peace.


2 Top Miller Beer Jobs Filled by Philip Morris
The Philip Morris Companies yesterday announced the appointment of Leonard J. Goldstein to the previously vacant position of chairman of its Miller Brewing Company subsidiary and the promotion of Warren H. Dunn to president and chief executive of the Milwaukee-based brewer.
Mr.
Goldstein, who is 64 years old, had been chief executive since 1988 and engineered a steady expansion of Miller's share of the fiercely competitive and generally stagnant beer market.
Mr.
Dunn, who is 57, was previously executive vice president for marketing, sales, strategic planning, and legal and corporate affairs.


Copper at Five-Month High On News of Zaire Violence
Copper futures prices jumped to a five-month high yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange amid reports that violence in Zaire had spread to the copper-rich southern tip of the central African nation.
Copper for delivery in September climbed 2.85 cents, to $1.1025 a pound, the highest settlement of a near-term copper contract since April 18.
Other copper contracts finished 1.75 cents to 2.65 cents higher.


Regular Bidding Pattern Returns
Customers returned to their regular bidding patterns at yesterday's auction of $9.25 billion worth of new five-year Treasury notes.
The notes were sold at an average yield of 7.05 percent, down from the average yield of 7.37 percent at the last five-year note sale on Aug. 28.


Georgia Inmate Is Executed After 'Chaotic' Legal Move
Warren McCleskey, whose two unsuccessful appeals to the United States Supreme Court helped define death penalty law, was executed this morning after an all-night spasm of legal proceedings that played out like a caricature of the issues his case came to symbolize.
Mr.
McCleskey, a black, 44-year old factory worker who was convicted of killing a white police officer here during an attempted robbery in 1978, was electrocuted at the state prison in Jackson, Ga., after a series of stays issued by a Federal judge was lifted.


Dollar Off in U.S. Trading; Iraq Move Eases War Fears
The dollar fell in quiet domestic trading yesterday after posting gains overseas.
Gold prices were mixed.
Analysts attributed some dollar selling to an Iraqi promise to allow unimpeded helicopter flights by United Nations nuclear inspection teams.
The move by Baghdad helped ease some concerns of traders about a possible renewal of conflict in the Middle East.


Miners' Rally in Romania Stirs Riots
Fierce rioting erupted here today as thousands of miners clashed with the police after descending on the capital and storming the Government building.
Three people were killed and 25 others were wounded, Romanian television reported.
The miners demanded higher pay, lower prices and the resignation of the Government.
Thousands of Bucharest residents joined the rioting in Victory Square, throwing stones and gasoline bombs that set a corner of the Government building ablaze.
Policemen in riot gear used tear gas to disperse the crowd, which Romanian television estimated at 10,000.


U.N. Inspection-Unit Leader Seems Tailored for the Job
A co-worker says David A. Kay, the cool-headed American nuclear inspector who is standing off Iraq's military in a Baghdad parking lot, is just "a regular guy thrust into extraordinary circumstances" -- circumstances, she might have added, for which he appears well suited by training and temperament.
The 51-year-old Texan's resume almost suggests that he has been prepping for a crisis between United Nations inspectors and a developing-world dictator since his days as a Columbia University graduate student, 25 years ago.


Citicorp May Sell Citibank Italia
Citicorp has agreed to sell one of its Italian operations to Banco Ambrosiano Veneto, in a deal valued at 360 billion lire ($290 million), according to people close to the talks.
The sale of Citibank Italia S.p.A. to Ambrosiano, Italy's biggest private bank, would be part of the restructuring of Citicorp's global business in response to huge losses in the past year.
The sale is expected to be announced next week.


Rockefeller Home Is Gussying Up for New Owner: the People
SOMETIMES big old houses just gracefully fade away.
Sometimes they are converted into condominiums.
And sometimes they become part of the National Trust for Historic Preservation and are opened to the public.
Such is the case of Kykuit (pronounced KY-cut), the pristine 40-room mansion in Pocantico Hills in Westchester County that has been the home to four generations of Rockefellers since 1908.


Review/Film Festival; Cast Adrift by Disaster In Egoyan's 'Adjuster'
Atom Egoyan, the director of "The Adjuster," takes quiet glee in laying out the individual elements of his film as if they were clues in a detective story or pieces of a puzzle.
Mr.
Egoyan, whose earlier "Speaking Parts" and "Family Viewing" employed a similar method, finds even greater satisfaction in the off-balance, mischievously witty way in which those pieces finally fit together.
With an approach like this, it isn't likely -- or even necessary -- that the final effect will be as fascinating as the deadpan, perfectly controlled manner in which the film maker permits information to be released.
What matters is that Mr.
Egoyan directs with utter confidence in a style that grows more polished and accessible with each new effort, and is unmistakably his own.


Garden Calendar: Talks, Sales and Exhibitions
Lectures and Plants
Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; (212) 757-0915.


18th-Century Furniture And Art to Be Auctioned
The collection of 18th-century French furniture and European paintings put together by Elizabeth and Howard B. Keck of Los Angeles is to be auctioned in December at Sotheby's in New York, the auction house announced yesterday.
The Keck collection -- 300 pieces of furniture, decorations and paintings -- was assembled over the last 15 years by Mr.
Keck, the 78-year-old son of the founder and the former chairman of the Superior Oil Company, and his wife.
The couple were divorced this year.
Sotheby's identifies Mr.
Keck as the seller of the collection it estimates will total more than $20 million.


Burmese Cry Out Against Their Rulers
To the Editor:
The United Nations 46th General Assembly, with its 166 members, opened Sept. 17, symbolizing the worldwide movement of democratic freedom.
The victorious outcome for people power in the Soviet Union encourages those of us in Burma whose dreams were crushed by the power of guns three years ago.


For Marble Makeovers
New York Marble Works
1399 Park Avenue (104th Street), New York, N.Y. 10029; (212) 534-2242.
Part of marble's appeal is that it is relatively easy to care for and repair, says Louis Gleicher, whose 91-year-old New York Marble Works manufactures and repairs marble.
Owners can usually bleach out ink, grape juice and other stains using a stain-removal kit.
But scratches and ring marks need to be sanded and repolished professionally.


Brooklyn Republicans Elect New Chairman
In a vote that could have implications for the 1993 mayoral election, Brooklyn Republicans last night elected a new county chairman with ties to a party faction that might oppose a second mayoral bid by Rudolph W. Giuliuani.
Robert DiCarlo, an investment banker with close ties to Ronald S. Lauder, Mr.
Giuliani's opponent in the 1989 Republican primary, defeated Rosemary Millus, an official with the New York City Board of Elections, who had backed Mr.
Giuliani.
Mr.
DiCarlo received 641 votes to Mrs.
Millus's 474.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
CHILDREN who are old enough to know what they want, but not yet aware of how much things cost, sometimes become angry and confused when their parents cannot afford to buy things their friends have.
Their innocence allows them to ask questions and make statements that can upset parents or make them feel guilty.
Sandra Bou-Assi remembers the confused look on her 8-year-old son Bashir's face this summer.
They had invited another boy to their home in Arlington, Mass., to play.
The boy refused because they did not own a Nintendo game.


Home Video
A 'Doors' Nay-Sayer
Now and then the real-life subjects of movies don't like the way they come across on screen.
"Oliver Stone has missed the whole point of the Doors," said Ray Manzarek during a recent conversation.
"He made Jim Morrison a drunk and a jerk and reduced the Doors to a peripheral place in the story." The keyboardist of the 60's group, Mr.
Manzarek said he liked nothing about Mr.
Stone's film "The Doors" (released today by LIVE), including the depiction of himself by Kyle MacLachlan.
"It was wooden," he said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17
A Salvadoran accord on political and economic issues was signed at the United Nations by President Alfredo Cristiani and five guerrilla commanders.
The agreement may help break a deadlock in negotiations to settle the country's 11-year-old civil war.
Page A1


Two Fighters Are Still in Comas
Fighters in California and Britain were still in comas yesterday four days after bouts in which they received blows to the head that apparently caused the blood clots for which they needed surgery.


Drought Watch Declared for New York City
Citing declining reservoir levels, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday declared a drought watch for New York City and the upstate communities served by the city's water system.
The drought watch, the fourth since 1980, carries no restrictions on water use but is intended to encourage New Yorkers to begin conserving.
As of Wednesday, the city's 18 reservoirs were at 53.4 percent of capacity.
Under normal conditions for this time of year, water levels would be at 76 percent.


Corrections
An article and picture caption in some copies yesterday about President Bush's appearance at a New Jersey fund-raiser misidentified the locality where the event took place.
It was East Brunswick, not New Brunswick.


Race Engulfs Study on Using Death Penalty
The recommendations in a long-awaited report on how to apply the death penalty in New Jersey, released today, were almost immediately swallowed up in a debate over a different subject: an analysis of the impact of race that was added to the study at the last minute.
The aim of the report, based on a study of all homicide cases in New Jersey since the death penalty was reinstituted in 1982, was to devise a system for weighing the fairness of each death sentence.
Since United States Supreme Court decisions in 1972 and 1976 that called for "evenhandedness" in applying the death penalty, 21 other states have established such a system, called a proportionality review.
Interim Versions
Two interim versions of the New Jersey report did not mention race, concentrating instead on a system for comparing death sentences with other homicide cases to assess the fairness of the sentences.


Durables and Resales Of Homes Off in August
Factory orders for durable goods and sales of existing homes fell last month, according to reports released today, prompting concern about the sectors that were expected to lead the economy out of recession.
"The reluctant recovery does not look too durable at the moment," said John M. Albertine, the head of an economic forecasting firm here.


Bath Official Resigns 2d Post
William Haggett, who stepped down last week as chief executive of Bath Iron Works for violating business ethics, resigned today as chairman, severing all ties with the shipbuilder.
Two vice presidents, David N. Packhem and Allan L. Fairfield, who were also involved in the photocopying of a sensitive Navy document containing information about a rival shipyard, have also resigned, the company said.


A Bit of France Even in the Ads
The advertising campaign for the opening of the first Galeries Lafayette store in the United States heralds the retailer's Parisian roots.
The store has bought advertisement space in Vogue, Elle and other magazines and in The New York Times.
One ad describes the store as the "Paris fashion rendezvous," specializing in women's clothing from both classic and avant-garde French designers.


Golf Illustrated Revived
A Phoenix media and marketing company has agreed to buy Golf Illustrated, making it the second magazine in the defunct Family Media operation to be revived this month.
VP International did not disclose terms of its purchase of the magazine Tuesday.
Family Media, a New York-based publisher of six magazines, closed in early August after advertising sales slumped.
The Walt Disney Company bought Discover magazine in early September.
VP International also owns a cable program station on golf, an Arizona golf magazine, a sports marketing company, a tour company specializing in golf vacations and a wine reference guide.


Doctors Drowning in Unnecessary Paper Work
To the Editor:
Rhoda M. Gilinsky's "Blue and Very Cross" (Op-Ed, Sept, 14) tells the consumer's side of the health-insurance blues very well.
The provider's side is every bit as joyless.


In a Mental Game, Europeans Have a Psychological Edge in Ryder Cup
The 12-member European team that will begin its defense of the Ryder Cup against its American counterpart on Friday is armed with not only what many feel to be the four best players in the world, but also a psychological advantage as well.
Europe's big weapon will be the core of Ian Woosnam, Jose Maria Olazabal, Nick Faldo and Seve Ballesteros, four of the top five players on the Sony Rankings, who have a combined record of 28-13 in the last two Ryder Cups.


Making an Art of the Met Tour
The recorded voice is droning on about the Metropolitan Museum of Art: "You should now be in the sunlit 16th-century Spanish patio." Suddenly the voice pauses, then comments slyly: "Isn't it sunlit? Isn't it Spanish? What a patio!"
O.K., this is not "Masterpieces With the Director," the classic Acousti-Guide tour of 19 of the Met's priceless treasures, the officially sanctioned tour so sonorously conducted by Philippe de Montebello, director of the museum.


Universities Seen Headed on Right Course
Six months after issuing a report proposing ways of returning integrity to college sports, members of the Knight Foundation Commission on Intercollegiate Athletics concluded a two-day meeting yesterday in Washington and pronounced themselves reasonably satisfied that universities were taking their work seriously.


Coslet Is Matched Against a Legend
For Jets Coach Bruce Coslet, the past two weeks have produced the combined score: Goliath 2, David 0.
So how does his next opponent -- the legendary Don Shula, coach of the Miami Dolphins -- compare with the giants of the game?
"He measures up very well," said Coslet, trying to put Monday night's 19-13 overtime loss to the Bears behind him and go on with his football life.
"He's going for win No. 301 and I'm going for No. 8."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Mingus Big Band  Time Cafe 380 Lafayette Street Thursdays through Oct. 10 (returning Nov. 14)
What might just be the jazz repertory event of the season is unfolding on Thursday nights in the basement of the Time Cafe.
There, a raucous big band is digging into the repertory of Charles Mingus, playing old and new arrangements that capture the best parts of the Mingus legacy: the muscle, the affection for history, the willingness to take chances, the guts and soulfulness.


After 2 Tough 10-Inning Games, Braves Split
The Atlanta Braves played two tough 10-inning games tonight only to find themselves in the same position at the end as when they started seven and a half hours earlier -- two games behind the Western Division-leading Los Angeles Dodgers.
But they did picked up a half-game when the Dodgers lost to the Padres, 8-2, later in the evening in San Diego.


Quotation of the Day
"I cannot help but think how sad Dr. King would be to know that in New York in 1991, the mob that had to be restrained was not wearing hoods but came from the 'hood, and that the man of God they lynched was not a black preacher who gave a fiery talk but a Jewish divinity student out for a quiet walk."
-- Mayor David N. Dinkins.  [ B7:1. ]


Ponderosa Steak Chain Moves Account to Ayer
Ayer Inc., New York, has won the Ponderosa Inc. steakhouse chain's account, with estimated billings of $10 million to $15 million.
This is Ayer's first restaurant account since it lost Burger King in April 1989.
The Richards Group, Dallas, which had handled Ponderosa's account for almost two years, was the only other finalist in the review, advertising executives said.


Family Leave: Fine, in Modest Doses
The idea of guaranteeing unpaid leave to workers who must cope with family emergencies has great appeal.
It also carries hidden economic costs.
Now, two Senators have created a sensible plan that respects both humanitarian needs and business realities.
Sponsored by Christopher Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, and Christopher Bond, Republican of Missouri, the bill would guarantee many workers 12 weeks of unpaid leave to care for babies or seriously ill family members.
But by scaling back the number of eligible employees and toughening the definition of "seriously ill," the Senators hope to avoid the fate of last year's bill: a Bush veto.


McReynolds Is the Biggest Flop In Mets' Year of Disappointments
The flop of the season for the Mets?
The clubhouse has more candidates than Iowa in an election year.
Depending on how you define qualifications, you could do worse than starting from the top: General Manager Frank Cashen, the mastermind of the Vince Coleman signing and the brains behind the decision to do nothing daring during the season to reconfigure the Mets, certainly ranks among the season's most depressing performers for the Mets, who were rained out last night against the Pirates.
The game will be made up tonight as part of a twilight-night doubleheader beginning at 5:10 P.M.


Banks in U.S. Ply Soviets With Loan Offers
Exporters began buying more than $200 million in grain and soybeans today for delivery to the Soviet Union after commercial banks flooded the Soviet authorities with offers to lend money, grain and banking industry officials said.
The banks came forward after the Department of Agriculture announced late Tuesday that it had sweetened guarantees for the loans, a decision that drew a mixed reaction from Congress today.


Chevron to Split Oil and Gas Unit
The Chevron Corporation said today that it would split its domestic oil and gas division, known as Chevron U.S.A., into two pieces early next year in an attempt to streamline operations and eliminate layers of management.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.25
5.25
8.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.17
5.19
7.31
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.21
5.23
7.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.37
7.35
8.85
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.89
7.88
9.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.97
8.97
10.13
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.91
6.91
7.82
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate
**Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer
Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


News Media's Libel Costs Rising, Study Says
News organizations are increasingly likely to lose libel suits that go to a jury, and if they lose they are increasingly likely to face multimillion-dollar damage judgments, according to a new study by a New York-based organization that tracks libel law.
The organization, the Libel Defense Resource Center, said in a report to be released today that news organizations lost two-thirds of the libel trials in which they were involved in 1989 and 1990, and that the average award was just under $4.5 million.
That was a tenfold increase from the average award of $432,000 in 1987-88, when defendants won half of such trials.


GATES SUPPRESSED DISSENT, A WITNESS IS SAID TO TESTIFY
A former Central Intelligence Agency official asserted in Senate hearings today that Robert M. Gates actively suppressed dissent, slanted intelligence conclusions and intimidated analysts who disagreed with his views in his years as a senior intelligence official, according to people familiar with testimony he presented before a closed session of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.
Democrats on the committee immediately seized on the accusations, documented with classified internal agency analyses and memorandums made available to the Senate panel.
They asserted that the material was too important to be dealt with behind closed doors.
In private session, they demanded that the hearings be opened to the public, according to people attending the hearing.


Dow Off 8.05 as Nasdaq Index Sets Record
Blue-chip stocks fell slightly in rudderless trading yesterday, while smaller issues reached record levels for the second time in four sessions.
The Dow Jones industrial average dipped 8.05 points, to 3,021.02.
But the Nasdaq composite index, which tracks the performance of smaller stocks traded over the counter, rose 1.34, to 527.81, shattering the record set on Friday.
In that session, the index surged 4.52, to 527.19.


AIDS Videotape In High Schools Draws Criticism
Sex, lies and a videotape were the subjects yesterday of the latest skirmish in a war of nerves between Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and Dr.
Irene H. Impellizzeri, the Board of Education's staunchest foe of condom distribution.
Dr.
Impellizzeri contended at the board's regular meeting that a 20-minute videotape being used in AIDS-prevention classes in more than 60 New York City high schools is not strong enough in urging students to abstain from sex.


Military Is Faulted on Effort to Stem Drug Traffic
Questioning the Bush Administration's strategy in the war on drugs, Congress's chief investigative agency said yesterday that anti-smuggling efforts costing billions of dollars had failed to reduce the flow of cocaine into the United States.
Cocaine traffickers have been shipping the drug into the United States with relative impunity, the General Accounting Office said in a report that focused specifically on the Administration's increased reliance on the Defense Department to detect and monitor drug trafficking.
The report, issued in Washington, said this was taking place even though spending for assistance from the armed forces increased to $1.08 billion in the current fiscal year from $300 million in the fiscal year 1989, with an increase to $1.16 requested for 1992.


A.T.&amp; T. Contract Is Blocked
The General Services Administration, agreeing with a protest by I.B.M., has blocked the Internal Revenue Service from signing a big computer contract with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
When the I.R.S. awarded the contract for computers, software and service in July, A.T.&amp; T. said it could be worth $1.4 billion over seven years, while the International Business Machines Corporation's bid was $708 million.


On Stage, and Off
Macaulay Culkin in a Play
Macaulay Culkin, the 10-year-old star of "Home Alone" and the Robert Redford of the kindergarten set, can be seen in the flesh at Ensemble Studio Theater, 549 West 52d Street, on Oct. 9 and 10 for the opening of its annual Octoberfest.
He will appear in a reading of "Sam I Am," a new play by Keith Reddin, directed by Billy Hopkins.
The play uses two short one-acts previously produced at the theater, "The Big Squirrel" (1987), in which Macaulay made his acting debut at the age of 6, and "Mister Softee" (1988), along with new material.
"Sam I Am," which co-stars Lois Smith, John Christopher Jones, Leslie Lyles and Victor Slezak, is described as a dark comedy about a young boy affected by the events of the adult world, both real and surreal, including the fact that his mother has an affair with that big squirrel.
There is a happy ending, though, as there may be for the reading: tentative plans are being made for a limited run Off Broadway later in the fall.
Rehearsals by Invitation
They're calling it hidden theater, but if you try hard enough, you might just find it.
Andre Gregory ("My Dinner With Andre") has been directing a rehearsal of Chekhov's "Uncle Vanya" for over a year in loft spaces around the city.
Mr.
Gregory's "Dinner" co-star, Wallace Shawn, plays the title role, and the cast includes Larry Pine, Ruth Nelson, an original member of the Group Theater, and Brooke Smith.
Starting on Nov. 11 and running through Dec. 20, the rehearsal will move to the Victory Theater for five performances a week.
It's still a rehearsal, not a production, only now people can watch and it's free.
Well, at least some people.
There are only 35 seats a night -- onstage with the performers -- and they are by invitation only.


2d Revision Puts G.N.P. Still Lower
The economy contracted at a pace of five-tenths of 1 percent in the spring quarter as merchants and producers slashed inventories even more than previously thought, the Commerce Department reported today.
At the same time, corporate profits were weaker than initially reported by all four measures, with three measures that were positive a month ago slipping into negative territory.


Lily Tomlin, Translated From Stage To Screen
"The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe," Jane Wagner's one-woman Broadway play written for Lily Tomlin, has now been transferred to the screen, amplified but more or less intact.
Though the experience of watching it is different, the show is pretty much all there.
On the screen as on the stage, "The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe" is a breezily convoluted, pertinent and sometimes hilarious rundown on the lives and times of a dozen characters.
Mostly it's a record of how these characters have interfaced (as some of them might say) with the last 20 years of women's liberation, sexual revolution, dome houses, political commitment, having-it-all, Cuisinarts and two-timing husbands.


Scimed Life Stock Slides
The share price of Scimed Life Systems Inc., a fast-growing maker of medical devices, plunged nearly $30 today after the company said an important new product might have to be removed from the market because of patent infringement lawsuits.
The company's stock, traded over-the-counter, lost more than a third of its value, closing at $57.25 a share, down $29.75.
Some 6.3 million shares were traded, about 40 percent of the company's total shares outstanding.
In a statement released late Wednesday after the market had closed, Scimed said it was evaluating the "future commercial status" of the product, a cardiac catheter, in light of patent infringement suits filed against it this year by subsidiaries of Pfizer Inc. and Eli Lilly &amp; Company.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Connors Still Ticking Jimmy Connors outclassed fourth-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday to reach the quarterfinals of the Swiss Indoors tournament in Basel.
No. 8-seeded John McEnroe, the defending champion, advanced to the round of eight with a 6-2, 6-4 victory over younger brother Patrick.
Connors's quarterfinal foe will be unseeded Amos Mansdorf of Israel. (AP) Gilbert Advances: The defending champion, Brad Gilbert, and a fellow American, Aaron Krickstein, advanced to the quarterfinals of the Queensland Open with straight-set victories yesterday in Brisbane, Australia.
The top-seeded Gilbert crushed Niclas Kroon of Sweden, 6-2, 6-1, and Krickstein, seeded third, eliminated Mark Woodforde of Australia, 6-3, 7-5.
Gilbert next meets Jason Stoltenberg of Australia. (AP) Make Way for the Champion: The defending champion, Nathalie Tauziat of France, advanced to the quarterfinals of the Bayonne Women's Open in France yesterday with a 6-4, 6-3 victory over unseeded Karina Habsudova of Czechoslovakia.
Tauziat will next face eighth-seeded Eva Sviglerova. (AP) CYCLING The Gallop in Galway German cyclist Olaf Ludwig edged Johan Museeuw of Belgium in a mass sprint to the finish line to win yesterday's second stage of the Tour of Ireland in Galway.
John Talen of the Netherlands broke out of a tie with his countryman, Adri van der Poel, for the overall lead. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL Bruins Over Aztecs Tommy Maddox threw for 303 yards and two touchdowns and scored once himself as U.C.L.A. routed San Diego State, 37-12, last night in San Diego.
It was the Bruins' 11th consecutive victory over the Aztecs.
The Bruins (2-1) lead the series 14-0-1, including eight consecutive victories since the series was resumed in 1984.
The tie was in 1924.
San Diego State (2-2) committed four turnovers, three of which set up U.C.L.A. touchdowns.
U.C.L.A. was coming off a 30-16 loss at Tennessee, in which Maddox completed 17 of 34 passes for 196 yards.
Against the Aztecs he was 17-for-26, including 9-for-15 for 170 yards in the first half.
He was intercepted once. (AP)


Review/Art; Gilbert and George 20 Years Later
With its current exhibition of the British art team of Gilbert and George, the Sonnabend Gallery in SoHo has turned back the art world clock exactly 20 years.
Inside the show, it is September 1971 and Conceptual art and performance art are on the rise.
The SoHo art scene is just getting started, and Gilbert and George, barely out of London art school, are virtually unknown in this country.
That September, Sonnabend inaugurated its downtown gallery in a loft building at 420 West Broadway, opening with a Gilbert and George show that combined 23 enormous satirically captioned drawings with a vaudeville-flavored performance piece called "The Singing Sculpture." Also opening that day at 420, as SoHo's first gallery building came to be known, were three other uptown dealers -- Leo Castelli, John Weber and Andre Emmerich.
Thus, the SoHo gallery rush began in the moment that Gilbert and George's wry, stylized, ultra-British version of Conceptual art crossed the Atlantic.


CHRONICLE
The renovation of two floors of the old United States Custom House in lower Manhattan is about to begin, and to mark the occasion, JACK SWAMP, the chief of the Wolf Clan of the Mohawk Nation, turned up yesterday to perform a rite normally overlooked in construction projects: purifying the building.
The landmark site is to house the New York branch of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of the American Indian, so no one there thought it a bit strange when Chief Swamp invoked his blessing.


CHRONICLE
As book parties go, the one Wednesday evening to celebrate LETTY COTTIN POGREBIN'S "Deborah, Golda, and Me," had few of the hallmarks of publishing soirees.
There were no circulating waiters, no celebrities jockeying for photographers and little small talk in the headquarters of the National Council of Jewish Women, New York Section.


Richter Shows Up on Ice, but Talks Are Cold, Too
Mike Richter reported today, sort of, to the Rangers.
The free-agent goaltender was not yet close to signing a new contract, and most of his teammates had left to play an exhibition match tonight in Atlanta.
But Richter donned a Ranger practice jersey, skated on the Playland ice rink, and stopped some shots from injured teammates who had been left behind.
His brief appearance did not indicate a break in negotiations between Richter's agent, Herb Pinder, and the Rangers' general manager, Neil Smith.
It represented a fragile tryout agreement, arranged between two sides that are stuck miles and mega-bucks apart.


If the Senate Doesn't Confirm Judge Thomas; A Court Out of Step
To the Editor:
"How Much Advice and Consent?" (editorial, Sept. 19) points out that the Senate has a constitutional duty under the advice and consent clause to "pass independent judgment on nominees to the Court." I submit that the Senate's duty goes even further.


Standoff on 43d Street


No Nose Is Bad News as Giants Put Howard on Injured Reserve
Because Erik Howard's ailing back has not responded to four days of bed rest, the Giants placed their Pro Bowl nose tackle on injured reserve today.
Although Howard may undergo surgery, possibly Friday, Coach Ray Handley said doctors had told him that even with surgery, Howard should be able to play again in December.
To fill the roster vacancy and to shore up an already depleted defensive line, the Giants signed Greg Meissner, a 32-year-old free agent.
Meissner spent eight years with the Los Angeles Rams and two with the Kansas City Chiefs as a nose tackle, the position he will play for the Giants.


Laura Ashley Net Off 93%
Laura Ashley Holdings P.L.C., the British maker of clothing and household goods, yesterday reported a 93 percent drop in first-half earnings.
The company said earnings were $:272,000, or about $470,000 at current exchange rates, in the six months that ended on 27 July, compared with about $:3.7 million, or about $6.3 million, in the period a year earlier.
Sales dropped by about 11 percent, to $228.5 million from $258.1 million.


Chief Is Toppled at British Aerospace
Sir Roland Smith, the chairman of British Aerospace P.L.C., is resigning after a reported rebellion by large shareholders and the board of the company, which is Britain's largest military contractor and exporter of manufactured goods.
By several accounts, Sir Roland's downfall is a result of a clumsily handled share offering now under way, a sharp drop in the company's profits, an autocratic management style and differences over the company's efforts to diversify from the military and aerospace businesses.


Nintendo and Minnesota Set A Living-Room Lottery Test
In Minnesota, all you will need is a dollar, a dream and a Nintendo set.
The state plans to test a system that will allow people to use Nintendo equipment to play the state lottery in the comfort of their living rooms.


Textron Picks Officer As Heir to Top Positions
James F. Hardymon, the president and chief operating officer of Textron Inc., will become chief executive in January and chairman at the end of 1992, the company said yesterday.
Mr.
Hardymon, 56, will succeed Beverly F. Dolan as chief executive.
Mr.
Dolan will be 65 when he retires as chairman at the end of 1992.


Art in Review
David Smith and A. R. Penck  Salander-O'Reilly 20 East 79th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 5
This two-part exhibition juxtaposes an impressive array of ink drawings by the American Abstract Exprssionist sculptor David Smith with a number of recent paintings by the German Neo-Expressionist A. R. Penck.
It's a pairing that could have made a certain sense, despite the obvious differences in generation and style, given the calligraphic impluse shared by the two artists.


Green Eggs, and Virtue's Reward
For one parent, and doubtless millions more, to read of the death of Theodor Seuss Geisel -- Dr.
Seuss -- is to remember countless nights of reading aloud.
The skies dimmed, the children's eyes grew heavy, but no stopping was allowed before that final, exultant  I do so like
Green eggs and ham!
Thank you!
Thank you,
Sam-I-am!


Wider Band for AM Radio
In an effort to save the money-losing business of AM radio, the Federal Communications Commission overhauled its rules.
Page D1.


Sounds Around Town
MTV a Step Further
Big Audio Dynamite II, Sound Factory, 530 West 27th Street, Manhattan, (212) 643-0728.
"The Globe" (Columbia), the latest manifesto from Big Audio Dynamite II's leader, Mick Jones, goes MTV one better: This is music
as
television, a 50-minute, commercial-free show in which beats, samples and lyrics are punched together like sound bites from the evening news.
Blipping seamlessly through samples from the Who, Queen, Bob Dylan and Wings, Mr.
Jones gives his incidental history of rock-and-roll.
It's continuous entertainment for a generation defined by a short attention span.
The debut single, "Rush," is perhaps the first hit song to make truly brilliant use of a toy piano.
Tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $25.


In Soviet Georgia, the Rumors and the Threats Fly
As loyalist and rebel Georgian militias faced each other in a tense standoff here tonight, a group of women suddenly marched into a cobblestone no man's land, waving a white flag and imploring the men not to shoot each other.
"Don't shed your brother's blood!" they shouted in this republic's ancient language.
"Don't commit any action you may regret!"


Dow Falls 3.80 as Small Investors Stay Out
Stocks were slightly lower yesterday in moderate trading, as investors with little interest in buying trudged to the sidelines.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 3.80 points to close at 3,017.22.
Big Board volume was 160.3 million shares, compared with 153.9 million on Wednesday.
Advancing issues outpaced declining ones, 877 to 709.


What the Opera 'Klinghoffer' Achieves
To the Editor:
Two accusations have been leveled against the John Adams-Alice Goodman opera "The Death of Klinghoffer": that it is anti-emotional and that it is anti-Semitic (review, Sept. 7).
Both are misjudged.


What the Opera 'Klinghoffer' Achieves; Batonless Masur  To the Editor:   In "Headliners" (The Week in Review, Sept. 15), we read: "With banners flying outside and television lights blazing inside, Kurt Masur picked up his baton last week to signal a new chapter in his life, and that of the New York Philharmonic." Problem: As your photograph shows, Mr. Masur does not use a baton when conducting. DAVID LASS Deerfield Beach, Fla., Sept. 15, 1991


Hill &amp; Knowlton Chief Makes an Abrupt Exit
Robert L. Dilenschneider, the ambitious architect of Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc.'s drive to become one of the world's largest public relations agencies, abruptly turned his job over yesterday to Thomas E. Eidson, the chief operating officer.
Hill &amp; Knowlton, a subsidiary of Britain's WPP Group P.L.C., said Mr.
Dilenschneider had resigned, which he denied.
"All I am free to say is that I left and that I will finalize my new plans shortly," Mr.
Dilenschneider said.


Review/Photography; Portraits of Aristocrats In Their Natural Habitat
For several years, the young French photographer Patrick Faigenbaum has photographed aristocratic families in various cities in Italy, starting in Rome (where he was in residence at the French Academy), then moving on to Florence.
Now he has turned his lens on the south, producing a dramatic series of images of the haute monde of Naples.
An extensive selection of these works makes up a fascinating show at the Barbara Gladstone Gallery, which reveals the continuing development of Mr.
Faigenbaum's vision.
Far from providing a flattering image of the sitters, the photographs are drenched with the deliciously ominous air of a gothic novel.
The people in them look as if they've stepped out of a story by Alberto Moravia, or, in some cases, a Charles Addams cartoon.
At the same time, they offer a thought-provoking reworking of the familiar genre of the portrait.
Every portrait takes its place on a spectrum between the social and the personal.
By focusing on the face, the portraitist emphasizes the individual characteristics of the sitter; by pulling the easel or camera back, he or she focuses on the surroundings.
Mr.
Faigenbaum's photographs are close in spirit to the work of August Sander, who in the 1920's and 30's attempted to form a pictorial catalogue of German society by photographing people not for themselves, but as representative of social types.
In a similar way, Mr.
Faigenbaum shows no particular interest in his subjects as individuals and makes little attempt to get to know them or pose them in such a way as to suggest their personal relationships.


If the Senate Doesn't Confirm Judge Thomas
To the Editor:
The discussion over the Senate's role in approving Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court would be simplified if, instead of trying to predict how Judge Thomas would vote on particular issues, the senators would consider alternatives.
If Judge Thomas were not confirmed, is it likely that a more "liberal" nominee will be presented by this Administration?
Is it not more likely that a person equally or more "conservative" would be nominated, probably from the Hispanic or other minority community?
Is the Senate prepared to refuse to confirm any nominee for two to six years whose orientation is more "conservative" than what they believe to be the American mainstream?


Japanese Finance Minister Reportedly Sets Resignation
Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto has told elders of the ruling party that he will resign to take responsibility for Japan's ongoing financial scandals, but not until after an important meeting of world financial leaders in Bangkok, Thailand, next month, according to reports here today.
Just about every major newspaper and television news broadcast carried the reports.
Mr.
Hashimoto's office refused to comment, but a member of Parliament from the ruling Liberal Democratic Party and some senior Finance Ministry officials said they understood the reports to be correct.


Getting the Goods on Iraq
One aim overrides all others in the confrontation between the U.N. and Saddam Hussein -- halting Iraq's secret nuclear weapons program, which now appears far more extensive than previously suspected.
The inspectors detained in Baghdad this week appear to have found much of the evidence needed to understand Iraq's effort and identify its outside suppliers.
From that information, analysts can figure out what's needed next to produce nuclear bombs.
The significance of this data goes far to explain Mr.
Hussein's crude interference.
Through a deft combination of threats and restraint, the Bush Administration and its allies now appear poised to bring that evidence to the outside world.


Sihanouk, at U.N., Urges Ban on Land Mines
With thousands of Cambodians being killed or maimed by land mines left over from two decades of warfare, Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia asked the United Nations today to ban the use of mines.
"These land mines have already handicapped a great number of our compatriots of both sexes and pose a permanent threat to our existence," the Prince said.
"I wish today to call for a worldwide ban on mines, beginning in Cambodia."


Review/Pop; Old-Style Entertainer In a New Concert Hall
Barry Manilow has always straddled two musical worlds.
As a recording star and arranger, he helped invent the modern, made-for-radio pop ballad in which crashing drums and soaring strings inflate greeting-card lyrics into tear-jerking bombast.
As a theatrical showman, he is more of a traditional Broadway entertainer, one of the latest in a long line of likably hammy showmen that stretches back to the days of vaudeville.
Those two worlds blended reasonably well on Wednesday evening at the gala opening of the Paramount, the new 5,600-seat theater at Madison Square Garden, where Mr.
Manilow performed "Showstoppers," his two-hour salute to Broadway.
His engagement coincides with the release of his 23d and musically most satisfying album, also called "Showstoppers," in which he sings Broadway standards accompanied by a 50-piece orchestra.
For his four Paramount shows, the last of which is tomorrow night, Mr.
Manilow unfortunately chose to substitute a small, cheesy-sounding ensemble consisting of synthesizers and a rhythm section for a full orchestra.


Doctor Suspended for Barring Mother
New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation yesterday suspended the medical privileges of a Harlem Hospital doctor who, witnesses said, refused admission to a woman in the final stages of labor because the hospital's obstetrics ward was full.
Assisted by the ambulance crew that brought her to the hospital before dawn last Sunday, the woman, Charlesetta Brown, gave birth to a baby boy as she lay on a stretcher on the floor of the admissions room at the hospital at 135th Street and Lenox Avenue, while several hospital employees looked on.


2d Nordstrom In New Jersey
Nordstrom, the Seattle-based specialty retailer, will open its second store in the New York metropolitan area today.
The new Nordstrom, in the the Menlo Park Mall in Edison, N.J., is just 35 miles from the first metropolitan area store, which opened a year ago in Paramus.


Agents in Queens Seize a Suspect In 40 Drug Slayings in Colombia
A Colombian suspected of killing at least 40 Colombian police officers and helping to plan a presidential candidate's murder was tracked to a pay phone in Queens Wednesday night and arrested by a squad of Federal agents.
The suspect, Dandeny Munoz-Mosquera, was described by the authorities as an assassin for Colombia's most violent drug cartel.
As he spoke into the phone in Jackson Heights, leaning in close for shelter against a drenching rain, the agents swarmed in with guns trained at his head.


Senate Backs Bill on Abortions in Military Hospitals Abroad
In passing a 1992 military spending bill, the Senate today voted to lift a three-year-old Defense Department ban on allowing abortions in United States military hospitals overseas.
The action put the Senate on collision course with the Bush Administration.
The measure was included in the $270.4 billion military spending bill for the next fiscal year that the Senate approved on a voice vote.
The abortion provision was not included in the version of the bill the House of Representatives passed in June, and thus becomes a bargaining item that negotiators from both chambers will consider in a conference committee.


Tandy Shipping 'Multimedia' PC
The Tandy Corporation said it had become the first personal computer maker to ship PC's that comply with an industry standard for "multimedia" use, or the combination of text, images and sound.
Tandy said its models were available immediately through its Radio Shack and Computer Super Center stores.
They are powered by Intel Corporation microprocessors and contain a built-in version of the Microsoft Corporation's Windows software that is specially designed for multimedia use.


Reviews/Film Festival; A Road Movie About Male Hustlers
With "My Own Private Idaho," his third feature, Gus Van Sant Jr. makes a big bold leap to join Jim Jarmusch and the Coen brothers in the front ranks of America's most innovative independent film makers.
"My Own Private Idaho" is essentially a road movie that, in its subversive way, almost qualifies as a romantic comedy except that its characters are so forlorn.
The film itself is invigorating -- written, directed and acted with enormous insight and comic elan.


Apollo Goes Nonprofit to Survive
Seven months after the entrepreneur who rescued the Apollo Theater from bankruptcy declared that he could no longer afford it, the New York State Urban Development Corporation announced yesterday that the historic Harlem theater would be taken over by a new nonprofit group.
The announcement was accompanied by encouraging financial news.
The corporation said that Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company was forgiving a $2.9 million debt from the private company that has been running the 1,477-seat theater.


Sports of The Times; Ryder Cup: Limos, but No Leader
JUST when Steve Pate's greatest fear figured to be a three-putt green, it turned out to be a three-limo crash.
Fortunately, Pate, a member of the United States team, wasn't seriously hurt in the accident that interrupted a caravan of limos heading to a Ryder Cup gala in nearby Charleston on Wednesday night.
Just a bruised right side.
Enough to bench him for this morning's opening alternate-shot matches against the Europeans, but he's expected to tee off in the afternoon better-ball matches.
If you're wondering who Steve Pate is, you've also asked the question that's surrounding the United States' biennial bid to regain the trophy that the Europeans have held since their 1985 triumph in England: Who are these guys on the American team and what have they accomplished?


U.S. SCRAPS PLANS TO SEND COPTERS AND JETS TO SAUDIS
The Bush Administration halted plans today to send attack helicopters and additional warplanes to Saudi Arabia as tensions seemed to ease in the confrontation with Iraq.
Administration officials said the Saudi Defense Minister had told Washington that he saw no need for additional firepower to be sent to his country.
The pause in military planning came as the United Nations Security Council, with the concurrence of the Bush Administration, agreed to an Iraqi compromise solution to end the standoff in a Baghdad parking lot where 44 United Nations inspectors were being prevented from leaving with a load of documents they seized detailing Iraq's nuclear weapons program.


James J. Fahey, a Garbage Man And Published Author, Dies at 73
James J. Fahey, a garbage-truck driver who became a best-selling author and gave his royalties to charity, died on Monday at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Bedford, Mass.
He was 73 years old and lived in Marco Island, Fla.
No cause of death was given.


Charles Stuart's Brother Indicted In Murder Case
Concluding a 22-month investigation, a Boston grand jury today indicted the brother of the late Charles Stuart for helping in the murder of Mr.
Stuart's pregnant wife in 1989, a case that transfixed Boston and increased racial tension in the city.
The Suffolk County grand jury accused Matthew Stuart of conspiracy to obstruct justice, compounding a felony and unlawfully carrying a firearm, according to a statement released by District Attorney Newman Flanagan.
A friend of Matthew Stuart, John McMahon, was also indicted, as an accessory to murder after the fact.


People
*
Tom Witt, 33, and Michael Rylander, 30, have resigned from Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, where they were vice presidents working on BMW.
They said they had experienced "creative differences" with the group creative directors, Brent Bouchez and Andy Dijak, who were hired this summer to oversee the account.
Their departure completes a turnover in the account's creative team.


U.S. Is Building Up a Picture Of Vast Iraqi Atom Program
From spy satellites, defectors and United Nations inspections, the Bush Administration has assembled the outline of an Iraqi nuclear-weapons program that is far grander and more sophisticated than first suspected and that President Saddam Hussein is still working to shield from destruction, officials say.
Government and private experts who have reviewed that outline estimated today that the Iraqi program employed 10,000 or more scientists, technicians and other workers.
They said it consumed billions of dollars in the 1980's, when Iraq was struggling for survival in a war with Iran.


Books of The Times; In 'Scarlett,' Only the Names Are the Same
Scarlett The Sequel to Margaret Mitchell's 'Gone With the Wind' By Alexandra Ripley 823 pages.
Warner Books. $24.95.
"WHAT is broken is broken -- and I'd rather remember it as it was at its best than mend it and see the broken places as long as I lived," Rhett Butler had the good sense to tell Scarlett O'Hara on the occasion of what should have been their final parting.
Obviously, such wisdom is nowadays in short supply.
So here is "Scarlett," the fearless act of cultural cannibalism that dares to dust off these famously star-crossed lovers and thrust them forward into the worlds of "Dallas," daytime soap opera and Judith Krantz.
Tomorrow is indeed another day.


Morales's Alcohol Level
FERNIE MORALES, who underwent emergency brain surgery Saturday after a bantamweight fight, tested positive for alcohol and might have been legally drunk during the bout, a newspaper reported today.


Review/Film; Fumbling The Ball In 'Necessary Roughness'
Stan Dragoti's "Necessary Roughness" is a comedy based on the dubious assumption that the same audience that buys videotapes of sports bloopers might enjoy a film about one of the most unlikely fictional teams in the history of college football.
When the members of the Armadillos, the championship team at the fictional Texas State University, are expelled after a scandal, they are replaced by a ragtag lineup that includes a nearly middle-aged quarterback (Scott Bakula), a female place kicker (Kathy Ireland), and a wide receiver who chants "The ball is my friend! The ball is my friend!" before invariably bungling a pass.


Art in Review
Lynn Davis  Hirschl &amp; Adler Modern 851 Madison Avenue (at 71st Street) Manhattan Through Oct. 12
Egypt has exerted a fascination for photographers since the 1840's, when Maxime Du Camp, a French pioneer who specialized in the paper prints known as calotypes, traveled there with the novelist Gustave Flaubert.
Lynn Davis, a photographer who lives in New York City, is only the most recent in the long line of artists who have tried their hand at depicting the stark beauty of this ancient land.


Editorial Notebook; What Judge Thomas Squandered
Clarence Thomas's slippery performance in his Supreme Court confirmation hearings spread discomfort across the political spectrum.
When he dummied up about his conservative views on abortion and affirmative action and masked his well-known contempt for Congress, Judge Thomas dismayed not just liberals, who had hoped to use these views against him, but conservatives too.
Conservatives especially, because he squandered a television first: a black conservative's chance to make his case before an audience of millions.


Economic Scene; A Japanese Shift Away From U.S.
TO diversify the risks to its economy, Japan is shifting the focus of its global strategy away from the United States and toward Southeast Asia and Europe.
The shift results in part from a decision to resist what the Japanese Government and many business executives regard as a rising threat of American protectionism.
This week, Japanese companies said they would retaliate against a 63 percent United States tariff on advanced screens for computers.
Citing the tariff, the Toshiba Corporation said it was moving its manufacturing operations out of the United States.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Dallas Independent School District priced $75 million in tax- and revenue-anticipation notes through First Boston Corp. to yield 4.35 percent.
They mature in August 1992, and won a MIG-1 rating from Moody's. *
Illinois plans to proceed with a $937 million bond program to expand the McCormick Place convention center in Chicago, which has been approved by Gov.
James Edgar.
The bonds will be issued by the Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authorty and will be paid off by additional taxes.


Understaffing Led to Death, Fire Union Says
The New York City Firefighters Union contended yesterday that understaffing caused by budget cuts had led to the death of a probationary firefighter in a Brooklyn fire two weeks ago.
A kink in a fire hose that prevented water from going to the rescue of the firefighter, Kevin Kane, could have been avoided if an extra firefighter had been on duty at Engine Company 236, said James J. Boyle, president of the Uniformed Firefighters Association.


If the Senate Doesn't Confirm Judge Thomas; Conception Seminary
To the Editor:
Judge Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee, states he quit his studies for the Roman Catholic priesthood at Immaculate Conception Seminary in Missouri because he overheard a fellow student say the day the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was shot, "Good, I hope the s.o.b. dies" (transcript, Sept. 14).


Black Officers Fight to Retain Results of Test
For more than eight years, black police officers in New York City have fought a series of legal battles challenging the sergeant's test, saying it discriminated against blacks.
Now black transit police officers are fighting to keep the most recent test from being thrown out, after city investigators claim to have found evidence that a handful of black officers cheated by obtaining test questions in advance.


Dollar Advances in the U.S. After a Mixed Day Abroad
The dollar advanced yesterday in hectic domestic trading after finishing mixed overseas.
The dollar settled mixed overseas and headed lower when trading shifted to domestic markets.
Traders sold the dollar after the release of worse-than-expected economic data that indicated the recovery might be waning.


CHRONICLE
JAMES A. MICHENER, in print a man of many words -- his books run to 600 or more pages -- took only 12 lines to inform his alma mater, Swarthmore College, that he is giving it a gift of $5 million.
The note recently received by the 1,300-student college in Swarthmore, Pa., a Philadelphia suburb, contained a check for $3 million with the promise of $2 million more and asked only that the money "be put to good use."


Mets Take Their Time To Split
The season that can't conclude fast enough for the Mets last night was sabotaged by a doubleheader that didn't seem to want to end.
The Pirates, after having a 2-0 lead vanish in the ninth inning and then a 3-2 advantage turn to mist in the 14th inning of the opener at Shea Stadium, ultimately prevailed, 4-3, over the Mets in 15, the longest game of the season for both teams.
The Mets won the second game, 2-1, finishing the doubleheader a little before 1 A.M.


Ameritech Is Offering Its Own Mastercard
Following the success of A.T.&amp;T. and its Universal card, Ameritech yesterday became the first "Baby Bell" to offer a credit card that can be used for consumer purchases and to pay for telephone calls.
The new card, to be called The Ameritech Complete Mastercard, will be offered to most of the phone company's 10 million residential customers in the Midwest, depending on credit history.


Economists Vote, But There's a Catch
A group of the nation's top business economists has determined with statistical precision -- a vote of 72 to 13 -- that the Dodgers will beat out the Atlanta Braves to win the National League West championship.


Treasuries Up After Jobless Report
An unexpectedly large rise in weekly unemployment claims in the week ended Sept. 14 helped to push up prices of Treasury notes and bonds and caused interest rates to fall yesterday.
The release of the Labor Department figures is timely because President Bush is scheduled to meet today with key economic advisers, including the Federal Reserve Board chairman, Alan Greenspan.


Art in Review
Nancy Grossman  Exit Art 578 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 12
Nancy Grossman is best known for the leather-hooded heads she started making in the late 1960's; these works, creating an atmosphere of sexual violence and domination, were exquisitely crafted as objects and crudely sensational as art.
"Collages, Constructions, Drawings, Sculptures, 1965-90,"
the survey of Ms.
Grossman's art at Exit Art, is bisected by a row of six of these hooded heads on pedestals, as if by a line of snarling warriors.
Also on view are the drawings of elaborately bound and tethered figures that make Ms.
Grossman's work a precursor of Robert Mapplethorpe's most extreme images.


Review/Theater; 'Macbeth' Without Witchcraft
Foul is fair in Gus Kaikkonen's vaguely updated version of "Macbeth" for the Riverside Shakespeare Company.
The three witches have been transformed into attractive, nun-like Army nurses who begin the play by ministrating to the needs of wounded soldiers in a World War I field hospital.
This is a confusing overlapping of the first and second scenes of the play.
Later the unweird sisters appear in Macbeth's nightmare, hovering around his bed along with a ubiquitous doctor to give him a shot of an unknown substance.
In other words, in this quasi-interpretation, drugs may be the cause or the aftermath of Macbeth's mania.
There is no cauldron in sight, no witches' brew, thunder or mystery.
There is not much of a "Macbeth" on this stage, despite Stephen McHattie's performance in the title role.


Shifting Points of View In a Thrice-Told Tale
In "Woman of the Port," the Mexican director Arturo Ripstein tells the same Guy de Maupassant story from three different viewpoints, tarting it up considerably in the process.
Set in a dank, dreary brothel in a harbor town, the film begins from the perspective of Marro (Damian Alcazar), a small, glum-looking sailor.
On a visit to the brothel, Marro finds himself falling in love with Perla (Evangelina Sosa), who sings onstage wearing a mermaid's tail.
Perla has also been taught by her mother, Tomasa (Patricia Reyes Spindola), and Carmelo (Alejandro Parodi), who plays piano in the club, to perform humorously in other ways that are best not described here, but are connected with Carmelo's ability to hold the note of high C.


F.C.C. Bid To Revive AM Radio
In an effort to save the money-losing business of AM radio, the Federal Communications Commission overhauled its rules today, seeking to reduce both congestion on the dial and the annoying interference it produces.
The new rules will add frequencies, stretching the upper limit of the AM band to 1705 kilohertz from 1605 kilohertz.
To receive the new frequencies, consumers will have to buy a new generation of radios, because today's radios go only to 1600 kilohertz.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


F.C.C. Proposes Limited Privacy For Callers in Number ID System
Moving to protect individual privacy in the face of new telephone technology, the Federal Communications Commission proposed today to give telephone callers limited ability to block Caller ID, the service that reveals the caller's phone numto the person answering the telephone.
But the move is likely to pit the Federal Government against some state regulators, who advocate stricter protections for callers who want to protect their identities when using the phone.
Rules for '900' Numbers
In a separate action, the F.C.C. adopted rules intended to protect consumers from unscrupulous providers of pay-per-call "900-number" telephone services.
The new rules essentially enact a proposal the commission made earlier this year, and would force companies that provide information over "900" numbers to fully disclose the cost of each call and give customers a chance to hang up without incurring charges.


8 More Are Laid Off At Levine, Huntley
In another round of layoffs as it struggles to cope with the loss of several large accounts, Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver has dismissed eight more employees.
The layoffs leave the agency with about 65 employees, Elizabeth Mason, senior vice president and director of business development, said yesterday.
Half of those let go were in positions like account executive and media buyer, she added, and half were support staff like secretaries.
The agency had as many as 120 employees as recently as June, when a third of the staff was laid off.


U.N. Accepts Iraq Proposal To Free Detained Inspectors
The United Nations Security Council today accepted Iraq's offer to release 44 United Nations nuclear inspectors if they sign a list of the secret documents regarding President Saddam Hussein's nuclear-weapons program that the inspectors plan to remove for analysis.
But the Council warned Iraq that this concession would not weaken its determination to see all of President Hussein's secret nuclear, chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction hunted down and destroyed.


European Captain Defends Choice of 'Rookies' to Meet U.S. Veterans
Going against the book, European captain Bernard Gallacher today entered a team of two rookies among the four twosomes he will throw against a hungry United States team Friday in the opening round of the 29th Ryder Cup.
Gallacher picked Colin Montgomerie and David Gilford, two veteran European Tour players who have never played in the biennial matches, as the second pairing in a morning round of foursome matches over the Ocean Course.
The two Englishmen will be matched against United States veterans Lanny Wadkins and Hale Irwin, who between them have played in 10 Ryder Cups.


Where Does Clemens Keep Cape?
According to Yogi Berra, only in baseball can it be deja vu all over again.
So it goes in Boston that, at this time of year, more than a fair share of the Red Sox pennant hopes rest on Roger Clemens's shoulders.
Rarely does the right-hander buckle under the load.
He did not last year when, in spite of shoulder problems, he was 7-1 from August to the end of the season.
He hasn't faltered this year in this second half, either, willing the Red Sox forward with his increasing tenacity and increasingly unhittable fastball.


'Babe Ruth,' on NBC, Isn't Any 'Life of Riley'
William Bendix in "The Babe Ruth Story." O.K., stop laughing before you read any more.
You, unfortunately, remember Hollywood's only version of the Babe's life.
To paraphrase Bendix's "Life of Riley" catchphrase: "What a revoltin' development." Robert Creamer wrote: "For thousands of people, maybe millions, WIlliam Bendix in a baseball suit is what Babe Ruth looked like. Which is a terrible shame because lots of men look like William Bendix, but nobody else ever looked like Babe Ruth."


U.S. Policy on Yugoslavia Shifts to Curbing Serbs
In vehemently denouncing Serbia before the Security Council on Wednesday and accusing it of special responsibility in Yugoslavia's intensifying civil war, the Bush Administration has abandoned its earlier policy of finding blame on all sides and has decided to try to use its influence to limit further expansion by the Serbs.
The United States and its allies apparently chose to raise the intensity of their warnings to Serbia at this time, after the current Serbian offensive againt Croatiabogged down, hoping that the Serbs can be disuaded from making any new drives on areas beyond Serbia where there are significant Serbian populations.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about the effect of President Bush's visit on Manhattan traffic misidentified the street shown.
It was East 50th Street.


Salomon Forms Committee To Watch Rules Compliance
Salomon Brothers has established a committee of its outside directors to monitor the firm's compliance with trading rules, the firm disclosed yesterday in a report submitted to Congress.
The report also disclosed the preliminary findings of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm that Salomon retained to review the new compliance measures put in place since the Treasuries market scandal began to unfold in August.


Two Democrats on Senate Panel Say They Will Oppose Thomas
Two more Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee declared today that they would oppose the confirmation of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, and some Republican Senators said the panel could reach a 7-to-7 tie when it votes on the nomination Friday.
Even if that happens, the committee chairman, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, has vowed to send the nomination to the Senate floor, where Judge Thomas is expected to be confirmed.
Still, the mounting opposition to the judge left little doubt that the floor debate would be far more contentious than many lawmakers had predicted.


Judge Wachtler Files His Suit To Get Courts More Money
New York State's Chief Judge, who announced on Wednesday that he would sue Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to force him to spend more money on the state's courts, filed the suit in State Supreme Court in Albany yesterday.
Later, Chief Judge Sol Wachtler and the Governor had what Mr.
Cuomo's press secretary described as "a pleasant and friendly conversation." But the press secretary, Anne Crowley, said, "They still totally disagree."


Traffic Alert
Broadway Mall Association Street Fair: The west side of Broadway between 66th and 71st Streets will be closed tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
North West Central Park Block Association Street Fair: The west side of Central Park West between 100th and 106th Streets will be closed tomorrow from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Genetic Systems Test Approved
The Genetic Systems Corporation said it had received approval from the Food and Drug Administration to market a product that will allow blood banks to test simultaneously for two viruses known to cause AIDS.
The company, based in Redmond, Wash., and owned by Sanofi, the French pharmaceutical company, said the product was the first combination test of its kind to be licensed and would "make it easier and less expensive for blood banks and other labs to test for both viruses."


NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN POVERTY SHOWS SHARP RISE IN U.S.
The poverty rate rose sharply last year and the incomes of Americans declined, according to a Census Bureau report that provides the first detailed look at suffering in the current recession.
The report immediately touched off a debate about how much pain the recession would ultimately inflict, on whom, and for how long.
But by the bureau's estimate, 2.1 million more Americans were living in poverty in 1990 than in the previous year.


Wachtler v. Cuomo = Two Losers
Intransigence and petulance -- hardly qualities that should characterize high public officials -- have flared out of control in Albany.
New York State's Chief Judge, charging high-handed budget treatment by Governor Cuomo and the Legislature, yesterday filed a lawsuit that escalates an umseemly feud into a constitutional crisis.
Whatever the outcome in court, both parties have much to lose.
So does the public.
Judge Sol Wachtler's suit claims that the Governor and Legislature have violated a legal obligation to provide the judicial branch with adequate funding.
But the legal issue is beside the point.
The question remains what it was last spring: Given the state's plunging revenues and rising needs, what's the judiciary's fair share?


Texts of Iraqi Letter to U.N. and the Council President's Reply
Following is the official United Nations translation of an Arabic letter by the Iraqi representative, Abdul Amir A. al-Anbari, delivered to the President of the Security Council, Jean-Bernard Merimee, on Wednesday evening, and Mr.
Merimee's reply in English today: IRAQI LETTER
On instructions from my Government, I have the honor to inform you as follows:


Big Board Seat Price Off
The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that an exchange seat had been sold for $400,000, down from $435,000 in a previous sale on July 31.


Contenders Are Stumbling Near the Finish Line; Boston Takes A Step Forward And a Step Back
Jeff Reardon is as depended upon to save games for the Boston Red Sox as Roger Clemens is depended upon to win them.
Their efforts, the 40 saves, the 18 victories, are major reasons why the Red Sox are still tenaciously dogging the Toronto Blue Jays.
Take one of the two away and the Red Sox can be had.
Take one away with a division title on the line and it just may be fatal for the American League East team.


Tinguely's Machines Refused to Play in Texas
To the Editor:
May I add a personal postscript to your Sept. 1 obituary of the artist Jean Tinguely?
In the 1950's, the Houston Museum of Fine Arts invited him to exhibit his works in its great glass-walled space designed by Mies van der Rohe.
Tinguely arrived in Texas with a dozen or so sculptures, black machines in all shapes and sizes.
He set them up, plugged one in -- and nothing happened.
Electricians were consulted.
Tinguely's motors worked only on direct current.


To Our Readers
Starting on Monday, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on weekdays will be increased to 50 cents in New York City, within 75 miles of the city, and on all of Long Island.
The change is prompted by increasing costs.
The Sunday price will not change, nor will the weekday price outside the 75-mile area.


Art in Review
Andreas Gursky  303 Gallery 89 Greene Street SoHo Through Oct. 12
Andreas Gursky is one of a number of former students of the German photographers Bernd and Hilla Becher who have attracted the attention of the art world in recent years.
Mr.
Gursky's pictures, like those of Thomas Struth and Thomas Ruff, two other widely shown students of the Bechers, rely on the dispassionate attention to photographic detail that characterizes his mentors' work.
But as the large color prints shown here demonstrate, his sensibility is much more attuned to the storytelling possibilities of the medium.


If the Senate Doesn't Confirm Judge Thomas; Perpetual Obligation?
To the Editor:
"Judge Thomas Takes the Stand" (editorial, Sept. 8) describes Judge Clarence Thomas's criticism of affirmative action programs as "mystifying" on the ground that he was a "deserving beneficiary" of such a program at Yale.
Your assumption, evidently widely shared, is that those who benefit from a Government program are morally obligated to support it afterward, even into the indefinite future.


Pop/Jazz; A Band That Deals In Apathy
There are many things the members of Nirvana don't care about.
"Nervermind" (DGC), the band's second album and first for a major label, offers a catalogue of them.
"Sunday morning is every day for all I care," intones the guitarist and lead singer Kurt Cobain in "Lithium," a song about a man who sits alone in his room after his girlfriend rejects him.
Mr.
Cobain closes "Smells Like Teen Spirit," a study of generational apathy, with the line, "I found it hard, it's hard to find, oh well, whatever, never mind." "Breed," a song that seems to be about the difficulty of starting a family, opens with the words "I don't care" stated six times for emphasis.


The Salvador Accord: Conflict Is Far From Over
The two sides in the Salvadoran civil war have agreed, in the accord signed Wednesday evening, that their country should become a fairer place in which to live.
But the transformation of this hope into reality will essentially rely on the good faith of two foes who have given each other no quarter until now.
Pressures born of a shift in the global political balance brought the guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front and the Government of President Alfredo Cristiani to this breakthrough, but the rank and file on each side is deeply distrustful of the other.


Market Place; Investors Flock To Bond Funds
INVESTORS searching for higher yields are continuing to pour money into bond mutual funds.
Stock funds are also doing well, but it is the action in bonds that has the industry cheering.
"The story is identical to last month, but more dramatic," said Gavin Quill, a spokesman for the mutual fund company Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark.
"We had another all-time high in net sales, surpassing last month's. Trees do seem to be growing to the sky."


INSIDE
Economy Shrinks 0.5%
The economy contracted at a pace of five-tenths of 1 percent in the spirng, the Government said, with corporate profits weaker than first reported.
Claims for jobless benefits rose in the week ended Sept. 14.
Page.
D1.
Charges in Boston Killing
In a transfixing murder case, a grand jury indicted a brother-in-law of Carol Stuart and said her husband, now dead, probably killed her.
Page A12.
Questions About a Doctor
A Brooklyn doctor who treated a Hasid before he died had been dropped from two surgical training programs, hospital officals said.
Page B1.
Romania to Step Down
Romania's Prime Minister resigned as violent protests over his policies continued in the capital.
Page A3.


Dr. King's Rights Group Backs Court Nominee
The Southern Christian Leadership Conference today endorsed the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, becoming the first major civil rights group to back his candidacy.
The organization's president, the Rev.
Joseph E. Lowery, said Judge Thomas offered the best hope available to those seeking "a strong voice for justice on the Court."


Police Department Names Minister Citizen of the Month


An Edge for Burnett In Beef Council Review
Advertising executives speculating as to which of four agencies might win the estimated $25 million-plus Beef Industry Council account are citing two factors that could favor Leo Burnett U.S.A. in the review.
One is that Bill Engelbrecht, Burnett's executive vice president for administration, is a member of the council.
He runs what Wally Petersen, a Burnett spokesman, called "a small cattle ranch" in Henry, Ill., near Peoria.
Though Mr.
Engelbrecht is not leading Burnett's efforts to win the account, Mr.
Petersen said, he has had some involvement in Burnett's pitch.


Noriega's Ex-Pilot Tells Of Medellin Drug Links
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's former pilot testified today that the Panamanian leader personally authorized him to tell leaders of the Medellin cocaine traffickers that they would be allowed to ship cocaine through Panama to the United States, an arrangement he said that eventually earned General Noriega at least $5 million.
In his second day on the witness stand, Floyd Carlton Caceres said two of the principal organizers of the cocaine traffickers, Pablo Escobar and Gustavo Gaviria, approached him through an intermediary in 1982 and asked him to "go and talk with Noriega" about an arrangement that would allow Mr.
Carlton to fly cocaine from Medellin to airstrips in Panama with General Noriega's protection.
After several weeks of negotiations, Mr.
Carlton said, General Noriega agreed, but with one condition.


Police Honor a Preacher For Fight Against Crime
To save the residents of a Brooklyn building from drugs, prostitution and shootouts, the Rev.
Hardy Smallwood, a pentecostal minister and former professional boxer, decided he had no choice but to move in himself.
Searching for a superintendent, he tried to persuade a young man living in a similar building to take the job.
"You're getting shot at and you're paying rent," Mr.
Smallwood told him.
"In my building you get shot at and you don't have to pay rent."


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about the foods of American Indians misidentified a troupe of dancers performing in New York City.
It is the American Indian Dance Theater.


Balancing New With Tried and True
SOME of the most venturesome performers at this year's Next Wave Festival, which opens tomorrow at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, are new to the series, but not to New York.
Garth Fagan, a Rochester-based choreographer, and the performance ensemble known as the Urban Bush Women, have appeared on many occasions in the city.
Even Wim Vandekeybus, a Belgian choreographer on the festival's 10-week schedule, has made two New York visits.
But to be included in the Next Wave has come to be a special distinction, for the festival has achieved international renown.
That very success may cause some theatergoers to worry whether the festival, which has introduced daring, experimental artists to New York audiences since 1983, has begun to play it safe.
Yet as long as its emphasis is on new productions, it cannot be accused of failing to take risks.
As in the past, several of this year's premieres are large-scale collaborations of a sort that only such a splendidly equipped theatrical institution as the academy can make possible.
One of the most ambitious of them is Mr.
Fagan's "Griot New York," a commentary on physical and psychological aspects of exile, which will include sculptures by Martin Puryear and the first dance score composed by Wynton Marsalis, who is known as both a jazz and a classical musician.
"Praise House," the Urban Bush Women's collaborative effort, chronicles the struggles of a visionary artist.


Review/Television; David and Ben Chat in Shirtsleeves
The spirit of tonight's conversation on "Talking With David Frost," at 9 on Channel 13, between Mr.
Frost and Benjamin C. Bradlee, the former executive editor of The Washington Post, is established at once.
The two men are seated in facing armchairs in Mr.
Bradlee's Georgetown house for a shirtsleeves, ties-loosened chat.
Since this is Mr.
Frost, who knows everybody, it's first-name time.
Katharine Graham, the former publisher of the Post, is Kay; Alexander M. Haig Jr. is Al Haig.
Speaking to Sally Quinn, who is married to Mr.
Bradlee, Mr.
Frost refers to her husband as Ben, and speaking to viewers, he calls her Sally.
Hi, David.
Within a minute, the men are onto Watergate, but Mr.
Bradlee is not about to give away the identity of Deep Throat, the anonymous source who fed information to Bob Woodward, the Post reporter who broke the Watergate story with Carl Bernstein.
He says the press "eased off" after Watergate and has not been tough enough on Ronald Reagan or George Bush.
He comes down particularly hard on the way the Pentagon controlled the news coverage of the Persian Gulf war, "the most sophisticated manipulation that ever was."


Money Fund Assets Fall
The assets of the nation's 558 money market mutual funds fell by $254.3 million in the week that ended on Wednesday, to $460.54 billion, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 205 institutional funds increased by $2.7 billion, to $139.60 billion.
The assets of the 261 general-purpose funds were down by $2.1 billion, to $174.05 billion.
The 92 broker-dealer funds decreased by $861.5 million, to $146.89 billion, the institute said.


8 Sealed in a World Beneath Glass for 2 Years
The hummingbirds, galago monkeys, earthworms and 3,800 other species of animals and plants were already sealed inside, hunting, flowering, feeding, reproducing.
This morning, four men and four women joined them in a giant airtight greenhouse and pulled the door shut behind them, thus inaugurating a flamboyant $150 million experiment in ecological correctness that is controversial in some scientific circles.


Shift in View on Housing All the Homeless
In the first sign of a shift in New York City's longstanding policy of sheltering all families who claim to be homeless, two high-ranking Dinkins administration officials said yesterday that it was time to limit emergency shelter eligibility.
The officials, speaking at a City Council committee hearing, said that over the last year a growing proportion of those declaring themselves homeless were not in an "immediate crisis" because they had alternatives like living with relatives or friends.


Testimony of 3 Is Seen as Hurting Gates
The critical testimony of three former Central Intelligence Agency officials has sown new doubts in the minds of some members of the Senate Intelligence Committee over whether Robert M. Gates should be confirmed as Director of Central Intelligence, senators and their aides said today.
Disturbed by charges made in closed testimony that Mr.
Gates had slanted intelligence in a number of instances, the senators say they intend to find out whether the accusations were true and whether the nominee was truthful in his own testimony before them.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about vandalism at a real estate office in Canarsie misidentified a police official.
The official, Assistant Chief Thomas Gallagher, is the patrol commander for the southern part of Brooklyn.


On My Mind; Again, the Death Trade
In Baghdad, United Nations inspectors struggle to hold on to Iraqi nuclear-power documents.
The importance of the papers could go far beyond Iraq.
The documents include the names of the Western companies that created Saddam Hussein's nuclear capacity and details of the technology, plans and material they sold to him.


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 27


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.37
5.25
8.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.14
5.17
7.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.17
5.21
7.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.34
7.37
8.73
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.87
7.89
9.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.99
8.97
10.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.91
6.91
7.81
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


West Reluctant to Quell Zaire Unrest
Western Governments, including those that have sent troops to help evacuate foreigners from riot-ravaged Zaire, expressed reluctance today to help quell disorder that is endangering the rule of their longtime ally, President Mobutu Sese Seko, as civil unrest reportedly spread across the country.
American and French officials said Kinshasa, the capital of Zaire, appeared calm today after unpaid troops sacked the city on Monday and Tuesday.


Christening the Paramount


Kodak Selling Software Unit
The Eastman Kodak Company said it had agreed to sell its Systems Products division, which develops and markets software for computers based on Intel Corporation microprocessors, to a division of Sun Microsystems Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.
The sale gives Sunsoft, the Sun Microsystems division, an immediate product to sell for Intel-based personal computers.


Moscow Journal; West Sets Up Store and the Russians Are Seduced
Since midsummer, people have been crowding one of the hottest Western shows in town.
It's the new Republic of Ireland store on Kalinina Prospekt, where the feature attractions are shelves piled with boxes of Rice Krispies, thick slabs of Irish beef and row after row of imported milk and butter and fresh fruit.
On the second floor, above the Irish flag hanging over the sidewalk, there is an annex selling Western electrical appliances and clothing, and a full-size working replica of an Irish pub, faithfully reproduced right down to the taps serving Guinness and the videos of Irish football on a television set in the corner.


U.S. Inquiry Into Salomon Is Expanded
The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether Salomon Brothers' efforts to corner the government securities market were also an attempt to manipulate foreign exchange rates, Richard C. Breeden, the commission's chairman said today.
"It is possible to manipulate interest rates and seek to profit from that manipulation in the foreign exchange market," Mr.
Breeden told the oversight subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee.
"We're looking at it," he added, "because it would be possible to use one market to attempt to influence the other."


Auctions
La Belle Epoque
The sumptuous collection of turn-of-the-century European furniture, porcelains and sculpture to be auctioned today at Sotheby's in London was to have served as the core of a belle epoque museum in Manhattan, according to a statement in the sale catalogue.
Sotheby's press release states that the owner was "forced to abandon the plan when safety officials insisted on numerous structural changes to allow public access."


Review/Art; Joys and Terrors On the Home Front
THE photograph by Philip-Lorca diCorcia presents a stout figure, a seeming giant in bare feet and cutoffs whose head almost touches the ridiculously low ceiling he is sanding.
Or perhaps he is holding up the ceiling, preventing it from squashing him and everything else in the disheveled room.
For Mr. diCorcia, as for many of the photographers in "Pleasures and Terrors of Domestic Comfort," the big, provocative and groundbreaking exhibition that has just opened at the Museum of Modern Art, the American home is no safe haven.
It is a kind of psychological and sociological war zone, the battles no less intense for being waged bloodlessly in the trenches of the bedroom.
The fire of a barbecue in a backyard is a conflagration in a photograph by Mary Kocol.
And in another of Mr. diCorcia's magnificently stagy photographs, a man stands before an open refrigerator at night.
"We see," observes Peter Galassi, the curator, in his essay for the exhibition's catalogue, "not a banal search for a snack but a man confronting the chaos and dissolution of his life."


Review/Film; Chinese Girl Sold Into Slavery in Old West
Lalu Nathoy, or China Polly, as she is nicknamed in "1,000 Pieces of Gold," overcomes almost as many perils as Pauline in the cool, clear-eyed historical drama that opens today at the Angelika Film Center.
As an adolescent in famine-stricken northern China in the 1880's, she is pulled out of bed one morning by her father and summarily sold to a marriage broker, who ships her across the Pacific in chains.
In San Francisco, she is auctioned off to an agent (Dennis Dun) for Hong King (Michael Paul Chan), a rapaciously greedy saloonkeeper in the gold-rush mining village of Warren's Diggens, Idaho.


Burt Back in Business
Nose tackle JIM BURT came out of retirement yesterday and re-signed with the San Francisco 49ers.
Burt, who officially retired on July 12, passed his physical Wednesday.


TV Weekend; Unlikely Royalty in a Fifth Avenue Fairy Tale
Remember Twiggy, the scrawny British model who became fashionable for a few minutes a decade or two ago?
She's back in -- what else? -- an American sitcom.
Twiggy Lawson, as she is now billed, is one of the three engaging stars of "Princesses," a new CBS series having its premiere at 8 this evening.
Close your eyes and you'll swear it's Julie Andrews.
"Princesses" is set in Manhattan.
Tracy (Julie Hagerty) is a lovely but dizzy English teacher who has come to the big city to find romance.
She does, with a questionable businessman named Michael DeCrow (James Read), whose real first name turns out to be Moe.
Getting to the church on time, Tracy discovers that Moe has already gone through two marriages that he failed to mention.
She cancels the ceremony and is consoled by her best friend, Melissa (Fran Drescher), who specializes in being a brash New Yorker desperately in search of a man who can handle her.
"I don't have time for subtle," Mel explains.
"If I could, I'd wear a sign."


Carolyn Elsinger, Executive, 46
Carolyn Elsinger, executive vice president of CKDC Steel Inc., died on Tuesday in New York.
She was 46 years old and had homes on Shelter Island, L.I., and in Avon-by-the-Sea, N.J.
She died of pancreatic cancer, family members said.


Devils and the Deep, Deep Roster
Scott Niedermayer, the third player taken in the National Hockey League draft last June, and Valery Zelepukhin, a Soviet international standout, exemplify the kind of depth the Devils have this season.
The 18-year-old Niedermayer has left teammates, coaches and management drooling over his skating ability and composure.
The 23-year-old Zelepukhin, who was taken in the 11th round of the 1990 draft and joined the team this week, has already proven his ability with the national team of the Soviet Union.


Restaurants
Canton is a fine restaurant for those who feel insecure ordering from encyclopedic Chinese menus.
The document provided here is only one page, and you don't even have to look at that.
"You want to order or you want to talk to me?" inquires the brisk, self-assured Eileen Leang, who owns Canton with her husband, Larry, the chef.
You would be wise to listen to Mrs.
Leang, for the menu is merely a sketch, the Cliffs Notes of her culinary script.


David A. Dreiling, 73, Surgeon and Professor
Dr.
David A. Dreiling, a retired surgery professor at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in Manhattan, died on Tuesday in his apartment in Hollywood, Fla.
He was 73 years old and lived in Florida after retiring last year.
He died of prostate cancer, said a friend, Dr. Arthur Aufses.


Review/Opera; The Met Offers Its 'Ballo' in a Frame
The Metropolitan Opera, which opened its season with a gala program on Monday and began its Mozart mini-festival with "Don Giovanni" on Tuesday, finally got down to the ordinary business of the season on Wednesday evening, with a performance of Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera." And there are few productions more ordinary, for all its striving, than the Piero Faggioni staging of this work unveiled last year at the Met.
Mr.
Faggioni, quite literally, frames the work in Zeffirellian grandiosity, with green marble side columns supporting a segment of ceiling near the front of the stage.
Obviously part of Gustav's palace, the work's basic setting, this false proscenium sits oddly on Anckarstrom's mansion, to say nothing of the forlorn rocky gorge.
These are mere details, of course, intended to be obscured by the glare of effects like the stunning arrival at the ball, a fit rival in sheer glitziness for the showstopping scene changes in Mr.
Zeffirelli's "Turandot" and "Tosca" at the Met.


Public Relations Expert Will Head Ketchum
Ketchum Communications, Pittsburgh, yesterday named Paul H. Alvarez, a vice chairman whose primary experience is in public relations, to be its next president and chief executive.
As of Jan. 1, Mr.
Alvarez, 49 years old, will succeed William H. Genge, 67, as chief executive and Gerald J. Voros, 61, as president.
After that, Mr.
Genge will remain as chairman for a transition period, while Mr.
Voros will serve Ketchum as a consultant.


At the Bar; A Stalwart Conservative Looks at the Supreme Court and Sees a Majority of Mediocrity
It has been called the Rehnquist Court, the Reagan Court, and now, the Bush Court.
But according to the constitutional commentator Bruce Fein, another name would be more apt: the Hruska Court.
Of all the lapidary utterances about the United States Supreme Court over the past two centuries, it is the observation of Roman Hruska, the late Republican Senator from Nebraska, that is etched most indelibly in the American mind.
It has even secured a niche in the forthcoming edition of Bartlett's "Familiar Quotations."


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-10
Weapons meant for Saudi Arabia are no longer going to be shipped there by the Bush Administration as tensions seemed to ease in the confrontation with Iraq over the confinement of U.N. inspectors.
Page A1
Iraq's terms for releasing inspectors from the United Nations looking for evidence of nuclear programs -- that they sign a paper listing the documents they plan to remove for further analysis -- was accepted by the U.N.
Security Council.
A8


Fund-Raiser Shows Florio Still Draws
Gov.
Jim Florio may be an unpopular Governor, but he is the Governor nonetheless, and he has managed to raise $2.5 million for Democratic candidates, close to three times what President Bush raised for the New Jersey Republicans two nights ago in precisely the same setting.
"We've got $2.25 million in the bank, and some guests are bringing checks tonight," said Karen Kessler, Governor Florio's chief fund-raiser for the last three years.
"It will be closer to $2.5 million."


Anthony Bliss Memorial
A memorial service for Anthony A. Bliss, the former general manager of the Metropolitan Opera, is to take place on Oct. 7 at 5 P.M. at the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street.
The service is open to the public.
Mr.
Bliss died of a cerebral hemorrhage on Aug. 10 in Fort Augustus, Prince Edward Island, Canada.
He was 78 years old.


Honoring A 'Maven' of The Industry
MORE than 30 longtime advertising executives who call themselves the Chinese Gourmet Society took chopsticks in hand yesterday to honor one of their friends and founding members, the late Martin X. Solow.
Mr.
Solow, who died last month at the age of 71, helped form the loosely knit organization of closely knit men -- and one woman -- who have worked together, and competed against each other, for four decades.
He is best known for popularizing the use of Yiddish words in mainstream English, through campaigns like the one for Vita herring that created the "Beloved Herring Maven" character.


Yugoslavs Said to Agree to Halt Spread of Fighting
Yugoslavia's federal authorities were reported tonight to have struck a deal with Bosnian officials to prevent the civil war from spreading to the neighboring republic and to begin pulling troops back from flash points in eastern Croatia.
In the Hague the European Community renewed an effort with Yugoslavia's six republics to bring the three-month conflict to an end.


Threat to Clarke Tenure At Nomination Hearing
As the Senate Banking Committee took up the nomination of Robert L. Clarke to a second five-year term as Comptroller of the Currency today, a split along party lines threatened Mr.
Clarke's tenure as one of the nation's senior banking regulators.
Many of the panel's Democrats have sought to use the consideration of the Clarke renomination as a referendum on the supervision of the industry.
Although a handful of the members were absent from today's hearings and others hedged their statements, the sentiments clearly did not bode well for his reappointment.
The committee has 12 Democrats and 9 Republicans.


Scofflaws Face a Posse of Computers
Forget about wanted posters and blazing guns.
Philip A. Crimaldi, New York City's sheriff, will soon be using handheld computers and tow trucks to go after vehicles with millions of dollars in unpaid fines.
Beginning at an undisclosed location in Manhattan next month, he says, he will begin seizing cars with a backlog of unpaid parking tickets in what city officials describe as the biggest scofflaw roundup ever tried.


Senate-House Conference Agrees To Extend Unemployment Relief
Senate and House conferees reached quick agreement today on a $6.4 billion measure to provide extended unemployment benefits for people who have been out of work at least half a year.
The measure, which would provide up to 20 weeks of additional benefits in the states hit hardest by the recession, faces an almost certain veto by President Bush, but Democrats hope to override a veto by him for the first time.


Clarke's Tenure as Comptroller of the Currency Is Threatened


Englewood Public Schools Prove Themselves
To the Editor:
In response to your Sept. 10 report on the New Jersey Board of Education's interest in redistributing the balance of races in eastern Bergen County schools, where Englewood's Dwight Morrow High School has become nearly 90 percent black and Hispanic: Let me present the view of a white professional who faced a choice about our children's education in this community.


New Doubts on Gates
Testimony by three former C.I.A. officials has planted doubts in some senators on whether Robert Gates should head the agency.
Page A15.


Prime Minister of Romania Steps Down
Prime Minister Petre Roman announced his resignation today in the face of violent street protests.
But riots in the capital continued unabated, with demonstrators insisting that the President step down as well.
The violence, which began on Wednesday when thousands of miners descended on Bucharest to demand higher pay and better working conditions, has left at least 3 people dead and 137 injured.


Reviews/Film; A Woman, Her Husband And Secrets He Didn't Tell
Goldie Hawn stalks through "Deceived" wearing a watchful scowl, which is understandable, since this story of intrigue is so strewn with incriminating evidence that there's a danger she might trip.
The guilty party is obviously Jack Saunders (John Heard), the dashing, smooth-talking, slightly unsavory husband of Adrienne Saunders (Ms. Hawn), who works at art restoration when not doing amateur detective work about her spouse.
Jack's trespasses are gradually revealed during the course of the story.
He has, among other things, turned up with other men's American Express receipts in his suit pockets, faked out-of-town business trips, created some confusion at the Social Security office and been very, very bad to his mother.


Critic's Choice/Opera; Nozze Here, Nozze There
Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro" is a work that seems more miraculous -- and usually more revealing -- with every hearing.
Its subject is love, more or less, but it takes in a great many variations on that theme, including lust, jealousy, deviousness, pain and forgiveness, all expressed in music that could not be more heavenly.
This weekend, "Figaro" fanatics can go on a binge.
The Amato Opera Theater, at 319 Bowery, at Second Street, is presenting it tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 2:30 P.M.
And the New York City Opera, whose production was televised on Wednesday evening, is offering it on Sunday at 2 P.M. for the last time this season at the New York State Theater.


Abroad at Home; Arkansas Traveler
Can the Governor of one of the smallest, poorest states in the South win the Democratic nomination for President?
Can he if he is an intellectual, a one-time Rhodes Scholar, a Yale Law graduate?
If he has a certain detachment, a sense of humor about his ambition?
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas is about to find out.
He has scheduled a press conference for next Thursday to announce his plans, and nobody doubts that he is going to run.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Express Information Services Corp., New York, an American Express Co. subsidiary, appointed Mary M. Cagney senior vice president of human resources. *
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., New York, named William H. Elliott managing director of A.T.&amp; T. Ventures Corp., a new internal venture capital unit.


AIDS Patient Urges Testing of Medical Workers


Doctor's Past Is Questioned Over a Death
The ranking surgical resident who, according to state officals, failed to detect a stab wound that led to the death of a Hasidic scholar at Kings County Hospital had been dropped from two other surgical training programs before she was hired, hospital officials say.
The doctor was left in charge of the emergency room's trauma unit for a critical hour after the scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum, was brought in with stab wounds inflicted during a racial disturbance on Aug. 19 in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.


Niagara Mohawk's Bonds Upgraded
Fitch Investors Service Inc., said it had upgraded the Niagara Mohawk Power Company's first mortgage bonds to BBB from BBB-minus, affecting $2.47 billion of debt.
Fitch also said its rating on $454 million of preferred stock had been raised to BBB-minus from BB.


Contenders Are Stumbling Near the Finish Line; Sloppy Braves Fall to 2 Games Behind Dodgers
Although Atlanta Braves center fielder Ron Gant entered tonight's game against the Cincinnati Reds with 20 game-winning hits, he failed four times in two-out, two-on situations and the Reds went on to an 8-0 victory.
With the loss, the Braves fell two games behind the National League West-leadingLos Angeles Dodgers, who were idle today.
With nine games remaining for each team, Atlanta travels to Houston for a three-game series beginning Friday night while Los Angeles will be at home for three games with San Francisco, also starting Friday night.


Unrest in Police Precinct Is Not 'Mutiny,' Commissioner Says
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown, responding to reports of insubordination by disgruntled officers in a Brooklyn precinct, said yesterday that only a few officers were involved.
But he warned that improper actions would be sharply punished.
"We have no mutiny in the 79th," Commissioner Brown said, referring to the Bedford-Stuyvesant precinct.
"We have a very small number of persons doing things that are illegal, against the principles of our organization and against the rules and regulations of our organization."


Palestinian Meeting: Chaos Cloaked in Ceremony
The gathering of top Palestinian leaders here to rule on whether to accept Palestinian participation in a proposed peace conference has all the trappings of a momentous occasion.
The road leading into the Club des Pins, a pleasant conference center on a stretch of beach along the Mediterranean coast about 20 miles outside Algiers, is lined with roadblocks and armored personnel carriers.
A steel-gray warship is anchored in the harbor and army troops, incongruously wearing white gloves, stand guard with automatic weapons.


Teachers to Keep Bargaining After Their Contract Expires
Aware that New York City's cupboard is bare, representatives of the city's 65,000 school teachers decided yesterday to continue negotiations even after their contract expires in four days.
Sandra Feldman, president of the United Federation of Teachers, said the union was forsaking its policy against working without a contract because "the city's labor relations are in total chaos," with several municipal unions still negotiating contracts that expired more than a year ago.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Julia Jackson Christian Preston, a granddaughter of Stonewall Jackson, misidentified her mother.
She was Julia Thomas Jackson Christian.


Municipal Debt Ratings Fell In 3d Quarter, S.&amp; P. Says
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said yesterday that the quality of municipal debt declined sharply in the third quarter.
The rating service said $17.4 billion in municipal debt received lower credit ratings in the quarter, while only $1.9 billion in debt received higher ratings.
A hundred issues were downgraded, while 30 were upgraded.
Most of the municipal issues were general-obligation and housing debt.


Kelly Is Ready to Pack Bags But Seems to Forget Glove
Roberto Kelly has made a neat transition from center field to left field, has smoked a career-best 18 homers and leads the Yankees in outfield assists.
The team must believe Kelly is an integral part of the future.
Kelly is not so sure about what seems obvious.
Scanning the roster, he sees Bernie Williams, Mel Hall, Jesse Barfield and Hensley Meulens contending for outfield positions.
Five does not fit into three and Kelly wonders if he may be playing his final games with New York.


A Huge Pothole Swallows Hopes of a Smooth Rush Hour


Quotation of the Day
"We are going into another space. We are going into another time." -- Mark Nelson, before starting a two-year stay in Biosphere 2.  [ A14:1. ]


Sale of Yosemite Concessions Is Announced
The National Park Foundation said today that it had agreed to acquire the concessions at Yosemite National Park.
Sale of the concessions, which are currently operated by Yosemite Park and Curry Co., a unit of the Los Angeles-based entertainment concern MCA Inc., comes a year after a furor arose over their ownership.


Negative Collusion Numbers
Even a roster full of mathematicians would have trouble with this nontheoretical problem: how to make $1.32 billion fit into $280 million.
The Major League Baseball Players Association completed its own mathematical exercise yesterday, determining that 843 players who say they were affected by the owners' three-year period of collusion have filed 3,173 claims amounting to $1,321,948,295.
The union has $280 million from its settlement with the owners to pay the claims.


F.A.A. to Be Able to Seek Bids on Phone System
Two Federal agencies have resolved a dispute that has been delaying a new and more reliable network of leased telephone lines for the nation's air traffic control system, officials said today.
The agreement will allow the Federal Aviation Administration to seek bids from long-distance telephone companies for a network of nearly 14,000 circuits used by air traffic controllers to talk with each other, to tie their computers together, and to send instructions to pilots using phone calls that are relayed to planes by radio.


Appeals Court Backs Resentencing of Barry
A divided Federal appeals court today cleared the way for former Washington Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. to be resentenced Friday on his conviction of cocaine possession.
The issue that the court ruled on today was whether the trial judge, Thomas Penfield Jackson, should be disqualified from passing sentence because he had complained to a Harvard Law school audience that, while he "had never seen a stronger case," the jury failed to fulfill its duty, acquitting Mr.
Barry on some of the charges.


Survey on U.S. Job Cuts
Nearly one of two companies has trimmed its work force since the start of the current decade, according to a survey released yesterday by a business consulting firm.
The survey of 1,800 businesses by Towers Perrin found that work forces were reduced by an average of 11 percent between the start of 1990 and mid-1991.


AIDS Patient Urges Congress to Pass Testing Bill
Kimberly Bergalis, wearing pale flowers and the strands of short, sandy-colored hair she has remaining after her treatments for AIDS, was wheeled to the witness table in Congress today to utter 15 seconds of testimony.
In a weak, slurred voice, the 23-year-old woman said: "AIDS is a terrible disease that we must take seriously. I didn't do anything wrong, but I'm being made to suffer like this. My life has been taken away. Please enact legislation so other patients and health care providers don't have to go through the hell that I have. Thank you."


At the Movies
Tribute to Director
A memorial service for Sir David Lean, the celebrated film maker who died on April 16 at the age of 83, is to be held at St.
Paul's Cathedral in London on Thursday at 11 A.M.


5 Held in Brooklyn Asbestos Removal Scheme
Polish immigrants, many of them here illegally, have been buying counterfeit asbestos removal licenses and using them to get jobs removing the hazardous material at businesses and residences without proper training, city investigators said yesterday.
Joined by F.B.I. agents and immigration officials, city investigators arrested five workers at four private employment agencies in Brooklyn yesterday on charges of forging and selling the licenses.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The F.C.C. proposed rules intended to protect individual privacy in the face of new telephone technology.
Telephone customers would have limited ability to block Caller ID, the service that displays the phone number of an incoming call.  [ Page A1. ]
The faltering AM radio business received an offer of help from the F.C.C., which revised its rules in an effort to reduce congestion on the dial and improve signal quality.  [ D1. ]
The economy contracted five-tenths of 1 percent in the second quarter, the Commerce Department reported in its second revision of the gross national product figure.
Corporate profits were also weaker than initially reported.  [ D1. ]  The Census Bureau reported a huge increase in the number of people living in poverty.  [ A1. ]
The Commerce Department ruled that Brother Industries did not qualify as a domestic producer and dismissed the company's complaint against Smith-Corona.
The ruling moves to limit the ability of foreign companies to file anti-dumping actions.  [ D1. ]
Japan's Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto says he will quit next month to take responsibility for Japan's financial scandals, according to news reports in Tokyo.  [ D2. ]
Robert L. Clarke's tenure as Comptroller of the Currency was threatened by a split along party lines as the Senate Banking Committee took up his nomination to a second five-year term.  [ D2. ] Companies
Minnesota will test a Nintendo lottery system that will enable people to play the lotteries at home.
With the growth of lotteries falling, this approach could draw more people to the games.
The experiment may also help the company encourage people to use the computers to tap into information and services available over the phone lines.  [ A1. ]
British Aerospace's chairman is resigning amid reports of shareholder criticism of the company, Britain's largest military contractor and exporter of manufactured goods.  [ D1. ]
The S.E.C. is investigating whether Salomon Brothers was trying to manipulate foreign exchange rates through its effort to corner the government securities market.  [ D1. ]  The firm created a committee of outside directors to monitor the firm's compliance with trading rules, the firm said in a report to Congress.  [ D4. ]
The man who led Hill &amp; Knowlton's climb in public relations abruptly quit as chief executive.
There have been reports of strife between the agency and its parent, WPP.  [ D1. ]
The General Services Administration blocked the I.R.S. from buying A.T.&amp; T. computers and software.
The proposed contract was protested by I.B.M.  [ D3. ]
Ameritech became the first Baby Bell to offer a credit card, following the success of A.T.&amp;T.'s Universal card.  [ D3. ] Markets
Stocks were slightly lower in moderate trading as investors with little interest in buying trudged to the sidelines.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 3.80 points, to close at 3,017.22.  [ D6. ]
Treasury notes and bonds were higher because of an unexpectedly large rise in weekly unemployment claims.  [ D12. ]
Silver futures prices fell sharply on weak economic data and a relaxation of Mideast tensions.  [ D13. ]  The dollar advanced in hectic domestic trading after finishing mixed overseas.  [ D13. ] Today's Columns
Japan is turning away from the United States and toward Southeast Asia and Europe.
Leonard Silk: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Investors are continuing to pour money into bond mutual funds as they search for higher yields.
Fund managers say stock funds are also doing well.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D6. ]
More than 30 advertising executives who call themselves the Chinese Gourmet Society honored a founding member, the late Martin X. Solow.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising  [ D16. ]


5 Weeks After Violence, Hasidic Jews March in Crown Heights


Mets Shuffle Expected
The Mets announced yesterday that a "press briefing" had been scheduled for today at Shea Stadium, a development that led to speculation that there would be reorganization in the club's front office.
A Mets spokesman said the announcement did not involve "uniformed personnel," a statement that ruled out any dramatic trade or the much-expected replacement of Manager Bud Harrelson.


BRIEFS
*
Capital Acquisitions Inc., Miami, entered an agreement with Burger King Corp., Miami, to develop Burger King restaurants in Poland. *
Computer Associates International Inc., Garden City, L.I., a developer of software, completed a $15.75-a-share tender offer for shares of On-Line Software International Inc., Fort Lee, N.J., receiving more than 90 percent of On-Line's shares.


Sounds Around Town
Chuck Brown a Go-Go
Chuck Brown and the Soul Searchers with the P-Funk Horns, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
In Washington, dancers have an alternative to disk jockeys: go-go bands, who string together funk, rap, percussion breaks and the occasional ballad into nonstop dance music.
Chuck Brown is widely credited as the father of go-go, as his band, the Soul Searchers, exploded cover tunes into full-length jams.
This weekend, they will be bolstered by the horn section from Parliament-Funkadelic, musicians who also know how to keep pumping up a party.
Tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; admission is $12.50.


Cadigan, on Rebound, Says Jets Are, Too
Dave Cadigan, the Jets guard, remembers last season's fifth game very well.
It was against the Miami Dolphins at Joe Robbie Stadium.
"Yeah, that was the game I hurt my knee, but I try not to think about it," said Cadigan, the Jets' No. 1 draft choice out of the University of Southern California in 1988.
"It pops in my head every now and then, but I fade it out real quick."


Officials in Israel Ease Stand On Access to Ancient Scrolls
The Israeli authorities who oversee tightly restricted research on the Dead Sea Scrolls are backing away from earlier threats of legal action to prevent a California library from opening photographs of the rare documents to all scholars.
Instead, they have now invited participants in the bitter controversy to a meeting in Jerusalem on Dec. 4 to attempt to negotiate a compromise on procedures governing access to the ancient Jewish writings found more than 40 years ago in caves near the Dead Sea.


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
CHICAGO BULLS -- Signed Mark Randall, forward, to a 1-year contract.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Signed Wes Unseld, coach, to a 3-year contract.
FOOTBALL National Football League
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Placed Erik Howard, nose tackle, on injured reserve.
Signed Greg Meisner, nose tackle.
Released Jerry Bouldin, wide reciever, from the practice squad.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Placed Ron Lewis, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Re-signed Jim Burt, nose tackle.


Our Towns
If, as Socrates said, the study of philosophy is the preparation for death, then several dozen New Jersey residents are a lot better prepared now than just a few weeks ago.
This has nothing to do with last Monday's Jets game.
It is all attributable to Lynn Schiavi.
Ms.
Schiavi is a graduate student in philosophy at Drew University.
Early last summer she realized that, beyond the hot house confines of college campuses where so much learning is wasted on the young, American society and culture are not exactly overflowing with intellectual stimulation for average adults simply trying to cope with daily life (and perhaps pay the tuition at a distant hot house).


Mayor Delivers a Pep Talk To Motivate His Managers
Eight weeks after pledging a grab-bag of improvements in New York City's government, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday called together a few of his troops for a progress report and pep talk in front of the press.
It was a rare public attempt to motivate his managers in person by a Mayor whose commissioners often complain he is harder to get an audience with than the Wizard of Oz.
He lectured the 34 mid-level officials with a gentle anecdote from his days in the Marine Corps, and then took their questions, at least one of which -- about residency rules for city workers -- had been quietly prearranged by mayoral aides.


Prices for Silver Contracts Retreat Again in New York
Silver futures prices fell sharply yesterday as weak economic data and a relaxation of tensions in the Middle East knocked out the market's main supports.
Gold futures also retreated, grains and soybeans fell, livestock and meat futures were mostly higher and energy futures were mixed.


Diner's Journal
New General at Lafayette
Lafayette, the four-star restaurant in the Drake Hotel at Park Avenue and 56th Street in Manhattan, reopened this month after a summer break for hotel renovations.
But the chef who moved Lafayette into the spotlight, Jean-Georges Vongerichten, is no longer in residence.
Mr.
Vongerichten now runs Jo Jo, on East 64th Street.


Worley Is Charged
He was doing only 64 miles an hour, according to the police in Coraopolis, Pa., but he was doing it in a 40-mile-an-hour zone, so they pulled over the car and out popped TIM WORLEY, the Pittsburgh Steeler running back, very angry, the police said, and just drunk enough to flunk a subsequent blood test Wednesday night.
As a result, Worley, the Steelers' No. 1 1989 draft choice, who has been out with an injured knee, was charged with drunken driving, public intoxication and failure to obey a police officer. (AP)


U.S. Rebuffs Japan Concern On Complaint About Trade
The Commerce Department moved today to limit the ability of foreign companies to file anti-dumping actions in the United States, dismissing a Japanese company's complaint that its Tennessee plant had been hurt by imports.
The department ruled that Brother Industries (USA) Inc. did not qualify as an American producer because its plant in Bartlett, Tenn., performed only the final assembly of portable electric typewriters.
The typewriters are designed in Japan and most of the components are made there.


For Children
Japanese Supermarket  Yaohan Plaza 595 River Road Edgewater, N.J. (201) 941-9113
Recommended ages: 5 and up
This three-year-old establishment is about the size of a typical American supermarket; it stocks Coca-Cola and bananas, and even pipes in soft-rock music.
Yet this very light, very clean store also sells foods that you're not likely to find at the A&amp;P, such as hijiki (a seaweed), pink garlic pickles and boiled octopus.
For adventurous children, the world of Yaohan (pronounced YOW-han), is a quick trip to Asia.


Peeters Is Released
Flyer PETE PEETERS, a four-time All-Star goaltender who won the National Hockey League player of the month award as recently as last November, was released yesterday, apparently ending his 12-year career.


BUSH'S PLAN CUTS BATTLEFIELD ARMS
President Bush's arms control proposal issued today would sharply curtail nuclear weapons designed for use in battlefield operations.
Tactical nuclear weapons were first developed in the 1950's to counter the overwhelming numerical superiority of Soviet forces in Europe.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Connors vs. McEnroe


Bond Rates Drop as Fed Move Is Seen
Long-term interest rates fell to their lowest level since March 1987 yesterday on speculation that the Federal Reserve Board and the Bush Administration were formulating a plan to jump-start a very sluggish economy.
Based on the day's developments, credit market analysts and traders seem to see a plan that includes lower interest rates, a cut in military spending and a cut in taxes.


Met's Cashen Bowing Out
Frank Cashen, who has run the mets since 1980, said he would hand over the general manager's job to Al Harazin.
SportsSaturday, page 29.


Inflatable Ball Glove Is Taking the Field
The air pump technology that first appeared in basketball shoes two years ago has found a niche in baseball this season.
Two major sporting goods manufacturers, Spalding Sports Worldwide and Mizuno Sports, are producing baseball and softball gloves that inflate.
They say that air bags inside the leather gloves offer players a better fit.


Angeles Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Soviets Voice Doubt Mideast Talks Will Get Under Way on Schedule
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that there were "some doubts" that a proposed peace conference between Israel and its Arab neighbors would be convened before the end of October, the goal set by American and Soviet officials when they announced plans for the talks in July.
Mr.
Gorbachev, who spoke at a news conference following talks here today with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, did not say what had raised the doubts.
But he said he remained hopeful that the peace talks would start next month as planned.


Morning Run Puts U.S. Ahead in Ryder Cup
A resolute but still vulnerable United States team jumped out to a quick morning lead and, contradicting recent history, held it this afternoon to take a 4 1/2-points-to-3 1/2 edge over Europe after the first day of the 29th Ryder Cup.
In team match play, the United States was led by the team of Raymond Floyd and Fred Couples, who won both of their matches.
In their second, they handed Europe's star team of Nick Faldo and Ian Woosnam its second defeat of the day.


Observer; Curses, Foiled Again!
If I'm reading the papers right, Robert Gates qualifies to become head of the C.I.A. because he knew little or nothing about scandalous doings in progress there when he was Number Two on the organization chart.
By this test I'm just as qualified to run the C.I.A. as Gates because I didn't know the first thing about that scandal either.


CONFLICT IS DENIED IN NORIEGA'S CASE
The lawyer who originally headed Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's defense team denied today that he had either disclosed any information about the case to Federal prosecutors or deliberately sought to wrongly advise his client while simultaneously serving as a secret Government informer in an unrelated investigation.
Testifying at a hearing into a possible conflict of interest that could lead to the dismissal of the charges against General Noriega, the lawyer, Raymond Takiff, acknowledged that he had not informed his client or other members of the defense team of his undercover role.
But he said prosecutors had not sought, and he had not offered, any information that would have compromised General Noriega's defense.


What's Fair Is a Fare
The horrors of our bridges and roads are known to all New Yorkers.
Safety questions aside, our dilapidated transportation network is crippling New York's competitiveness by driving businesses out.
City capital spending on bridge and road maintenance has not budged in five years from the $230 million annual level, and projected increases to the $350 million level are not nearly enough.
City Hall knows this, but can't move.
More capital spending requires more long-term bonds to finance it, but investors are skittish.


Dollar Off as Traders Focus On Bush-Greenspan Talks
The dollar fell yesterday, as traders showed continued pessimism about the direction of interest rates.
Gold prices also closed lower.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the extent of Iraq's nuclear program misstated the educational background of Ahmed Hashim, a consultant in Washington.
He holds a doctorate in political science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; he is not a physicist.


Review/Dance; Belgians Go Beyond Minimalism
Five women dressed for success in business suits and high heels throw themselves into spiraling falls to the floor and rebound instantly, their bodies at a tilt, their heads thrown back.
Is this the way to make partner in the firm?
In her newest dance work, "Achterland" ("Hinterland"), the leader of the Belgian dance avant-garde, Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker, works wonders with such dynamic images, light years beyond the rigorous if somewhat grim minimalism that made her reputation in the last decade.


Marriott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 6


Review/Film Festival; Love-Struck Pair, Singing Amid a Shipyard Strike
To complement the presentation of "Jacquot of Nantes," Agnes Varda's memoir about her husband, Jacques Demy, the New York Film Festival is showing "A Room in Town" ("Une Chambre en Ville") today at 12:30 P.M.
Almost any other Demy film would have been a better choice than this sad 1982 attempt to reprise the successes of his two earlier all-singing films, "The Umbrellas of Cherbourg" (1963) and "The Young Girls of Rochefort" (1966).


Robbers Use 'U.P.S.' Box as Trojan Horse
A Brooklyn check-cashing store was robbed of $150,000 yesterday by a gunman who hid inside a box delivered by a fake United Parcel Service driver, the police said.
After the box was left inside a locked section of the store, the robber leaped out with a gun in his hand and ski mask over his head, said a police spokesman, Sergeant Peter Berry.


McMillan Makes Tackles Count for Special Teams
The Jets' Erik McMillan made such a nice hit on the Bears' Johnny Bailey after the opening kickoff Monday night in Chicago, that ABC's Dan Dierdorf commented about it toa national television audience.
"Yeah, I appreciate Uncle Dan talking about that, but Uncle Dan is not the coach over here at the New York Jets," said McMillan, who has known Dierdorf since he was 3 years old because Dierdorf was a teammate of his father, Ernie McMillan, with the St.
Louis Cardinals.


Lawyers and Visa Services Charged in False Ads
Three lawyers and four visa services were charged by the New York City Consumer Affairs Department yesterday with using misleading advertising to obtain coveted green cards for illegal aliens in an unusual lottery next month.
In some cases the advertisements guaranteed "full success" or a "proven strategy."
The lottery, to be conducted by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service, will grant green cards -- signifying permanent legal residency -- to 40,000 people on a purely first-come, first-serve basis.


To Our Readers
Starting on Monday, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on weekdays will be increased to 50 cents in New York City, within 75 miles of the city, and on all of Long Island.
The change is prompted by increasing costs.
The Sunday price will not change, nor will the weekday price outside the 75-mile area.


Roadway Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 7


Classical Music in Review
Music Today Merkin Concert Hall


Cuomo Denounces Judge's Lawsuit on Budget
Cuomo opened a second front today in his budget battle with Chief Judge Sol Wachtler, making it clear that one consequence of Judge Wachtler's lawsuit would be a barrage of public vitriol.
On Thursday, Judge Wachtler filed a lawsuit against Mr.
Cuomo and the Legislature, charging that the budget cuts they imposed this year placed an unconstitutional burden on the state's court system.
The judiciary's budget request of $966 million was cut by $77 million, forcing the closing of dozens of courtrooms.


Why U.S. Was Worried
Concern over the security of the Soviet stockpile of short-range nuclear weapons was a principal motivation behind President Bush's new arms control initiative, Bush Administration officials said today.
During the failed coup attempt in Moscow, Administration officials played down their concerns that the thousands of tactical nuclear weapons spread throughout the Soviet Union could fall into the wrong hands.


Shorter Tells of Abuse
Former Olympic marathon champion FRANK SHORTER, who will run in a race in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., today to benefit victims of child abuse, says he is still affected by beatings his father gave him.
"The cause is near and dear to me," the 43-year-old Shorter said.
"I've never talked about it much before. Sometimes, those topics are more self-serving than productive. I thought this was appropriate, given the charity."


Fuller (H.B.) Co. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Patents; A Way to Spray Deer To Fight Lyme Disease
In an attempt to fight Lyme disease, an illness carried by ticks that attack a person's nervous system and internal organs, a physician in Armonk, N.Y., won a patent this week for a "deer gazebo" that sprays deer, the most important carriers of adult ticks, with insecticide.
Lyme disease is especially severe in Westchester and Suffolk Counties, but it occurs over much of the Eastern Seaboard as well.
One company, Eco Health Inc. of Boston, is already marketing a product intended to treat mice, which carry ticks while they are in their larval and nymph stages.


Albert W. Grokoest, 74, a Doctor And a Discerning Collector of Art
Dr.
Albert W. Grokoest, a retired doctor and a discerning art lover -- he once bought a painting for $5,000, hung it in his office and sold it years later for $2.4 million -- died on Sunday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of prostate cancer, said a friend, Dr. Dorothy Estes.


Hawks Scout Daniels, But That's Probably All
The Atlanta Hawks are unlikely to invite LLOYD DANIELS, the former New York City high school star, to their training camp, the team's general manager, PETE BABCOCK, said yesterday.
But a final decision will be made next week, the executive added.
The 24-year-old Daniels is trying to come back from drug problems and a near-fatal shooting.
This week, he worked out in Houston for ED BADGER, one of the Hawks' scouts.
But while Daniels looked better than he did this summer playing in the United States Basketball League, Babcock said, the National Basketball Association team is not sure Daniels looked good enough to make the Hawks.


Review/Film Festival; Reams on the Renaissance Fill 'Prospero's Books'
"Knowing I lov'd my books, he furnish'd me from mine own library with volumes that I prize above my dukedom."
Thus speaks Prospero when, early in "The Tempest," he tells his daughter Miranda how they came to be living on this isolated isle.
Though Prospero's dukedom was usurped by his brother, and though he and the 3 1/2-year-old Miranda were sent into exile, all was not perfidy.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Excerpts From Remarks by Members of Senate Judiciary Panel on Thomas
Following are excerpts from statements today by members of the Senate Judiciary Committee on the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court: Senator Edward M. Kennedy Democrat of Massachusetts
If we play Russian roulette with the Supreme Court, if we confirm a nominee who has not demonstrated a commitment to core constitutional values, we jeopardize our rights as individuals and our future as a nation.
We cannot undo such a mistake at the next election or even in the next generation. . . .


BRIEFS
*
American Cyanamid Co., Wayne, N.J., a maker of medical products and specialty chemicals, sold its malathion insecticide business and assets to Cheminova, Lemvig, Denmark.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Amev Holdings Inc., the United States holding company of N.V.
Amev &amp; Groupe, said Judge Paul Levy of New Jersey Superior Court had approved its purchase of the Group Life, Accident and Health division of Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Co. for $500 million in cash and contingent notes.


Directors of First American Are Admonished on B.C.C.I.
Hostile lawmakers told the directors and executives of the First American Bank of Washington today that internal documents from the bank clearly showed that they should have known of its ownership by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
But the directors, led by Charles McC.
Mathias, the former Maryland Senator, told the House Banking Committee that they were unaware until earlier this year that the institution was owned by B.C.C.I.


Datapoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Coffee Prices Pushed Down; Copper Continues to Climb
Coffee prices plunged yesterday on forecasts for more rain in the previously dry growing regions of Brazil and the failure of coffee-growing nations to create a formula for reducing the supply glut.
In the copper market, traders focused on the unrest in Zaire that has shut down mines and led copper companies to declare force majeure on contracts.
Force majeure clauses exempt parties from their contract obligations.


P.L.O. Backs Talks but Splits on Role
The Palestine National Council, the highest legislative body of the Palestine Liberation Organization, voted today to support a Middle East peace conference,but delegates failed to reach a consensus on whether they would sanction participation by Palestinians.
The council, in a general policy statement, did not concede to Israeli demands but authorized the Palestinian leadership under Yasir Arafat to make the final decision on the organization's stance.
The statement was approved early today by a vote of 314 in favor and 18 against.
Five delegates abstained, and several were missing from the hall.


A Low-Key Armageddon For Michigan, Florida St.
Avoiding the urge to trumpet a meeting of college football teams as a Game of the Century, and without the grim late-season ritual of trading trash talk with a despised rival, Florida State and Michigan seem to be heading into their game Saturday afternoon with an unusual approach for the hyped-up, hard-sell 90's.
They will compete to see who is better. Imagine that.


Romanian Miners Hold Out For President's Resignation
Several thousand people gathered in University Square as night fell here, with city residents joining miners who have spent three days violently protesting the Government and economic hardship.
The crowd demanded that President Ion Iliescu step down, shouting, "Resignation! Resignation!" Romanian radio reported that two trainloads of miners had left Bucharest to return to the Jiu Valley, but hundreds of them were visible in the square tonight.


Howard Undergoes Surgery
Erik Howard, the Giants' Pro Bowl nose tackle, underwent surgery today to remove part of a herniated disk from his lower back.
Coach Ray Handley said that the doctors considered the surgery successful, and that he expected to have Howard ready to play in December.
Howard underwent the operation this morning at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York and was up and around before noon.
Handley said Howard would probably leave the hospital this weekend and start rehabilitation next week.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
5.40
8.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.14
5.14
7.13
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.14
5.17
7.16
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.28
7.34
8.68
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.81
7.87
8.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.94
8.99
9.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.90
6.91
7.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellweather bonds, notes and bills


Jewish Leader Assails Remarks by D'Amato
The executive director of the American Jewish Congress, Henry Siegman, yesterday criticized Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, saying the Senator had played on divisions between blacks and Jews in the wake of the racial violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
On Sept. 15, Mr.
D'Amato attacked Mayor David N. Dinkins for how he handled the violence that erupted after a Hasidic driver accidentally hit and killed a black child there.


Time for New Yorkers To Adopt a Library
To the Editor:
"City Libraries, Still at Risk" (editorial, Sept. 2) demonstrates the need for all New Yorkers to reach into their pockets and help the three public library systems -- New York, Brooklyn and Queens Borough -- and their branches survive the blow of the budget ax, which has already fallen.
Donations from the philanthropic and business communities, as well as nickels and dimes from children and other library patrons, will help these invaluable educational, cultural and informational institutions endure.


Oracle Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Guidepost; Lower Mortgage Rates
To stimulate the real estate market, mortgage lenders have been lowering rates to levels not seen since 1978.
For homeowners with mortgages negotiated in recent years, this offers an opportunity to refinance.
Getting the most out of refinancing depends not only on the lower rate but also on how long an owner plans to stay in a house.
For those planning on staying three years or less, the rule of thumb is that a new mortgage rate should be at least 2 percentage points below the old rate in order to realize a benefit from the new closing costs.
Homeowners expecting to stay at least six years need a rate at least one percentage point lower than their current rate to recover closing costs.
Here are the national average rates this week for the most popular mortgages compared to rates a year ago.
The rate given for a one-year adjustable rate mortgage, known as ARM, is the average introductory rate for an ARM with a 30-year term.
Mortgage
1991
1990
30-year fixed
8.77%
10.06%
15-year fixed
8.43
9.76
1-year ARM
6.60
8.25
(Source: Bank Rate Monitor, North Palm Beach, Fla.)


Review/Pop; Comparing New and Old Little Feat
Three albums into its second career, Little Feat seems content to rest on its virtuosity and its past.
The original band, which made some of the best rock of the 1970's, dissolved after the death of its singer, guitarist and main songwriter, Lowell George, in 1979.
In 1988, Little Feat reappeared with a new singer, Craig Fuller, and guitarist, Fred Tackett.
The band performed on Tuesday night at the Beacon Theater to mark the release of a new album, "Shake Me Up" (Morgan Creek).
Sam Clayton, the band's conga player, was ill and did not appear.
But even without the extra layer of cross-rhythm, the songs swaggered and crackled.
In the 1970's, the band blended New Orleans rhythm-and-blues, country, hard-rock and touches of funk and jazz.
That amalgam still makes Little Feat one of the most skillful bands in rock.


A Warning By Rohaytn: Little Time For Aid Plan
The chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, Felix G. Rohatyn, warned the Dinkins administration yesterday that it was running out of time to devise a broad plan to cut costs and hold down taxes that could persuade him to finance a $1 billion aid package for New York City.
In one sense, Mr.
Rohatyn merely repeated what he has said for months: That the M.A.C., which was set up to borrow money for the city in the fiscal crisis of the 1970's, cannot help again unless Mayor David N. Dinkins satisfies him that any aid will not be a bandage but a bridge to help bring the city's spending in line with its projected revenues over the next few years.


McMillan Makes Tackles Count for Special Teams
The Jets' Erik McMillan made such a nice hit on the Bears' Johnny Bailey after the opening kickoff Monday night in Chicago, that ABC's Dan Dierdorf commented about it toa national television audience.
"Yeah, I appreciate Uncle Dan talking about that, but Uncle Dan is not the coach over here at the New York Jets," said McMillan, who has known Dierdorf since he was 3 years old because Dierdorf was a teammate of his father, Ernie McMillan, with the St.
Louis Cardinals.


Elaine Horwitch, 58, Art Gallery Owner
Elaine Horwitch, who established the Elaine Horwitch Galleries for contemporary art in Scottsdale, Ariz., and Santa Fe, N.M., died on Saturday at her home in Santa Fe.
She was 58 years old, and also had a home in Scottsdale.
She died of a heart attack, said Abby Braun, director of the Santa Fe gallery.


Neiman Marcus Has a Loss
The Neiman Marcus Group has reported a loss of $8.1 million in its fourth fiscal quarter, ended Aug. 31, compared with a $6.2 million loss in the comparable period last year.
Sales increased 2.5 percent in the quarter, to $387 million from $377.7 million, the company said on Thursday.


Corrections
The caption with a picture from Agence France-Presse yesterday about the team of United Nations nuclear inspectors detained in Iraq misstated the conditions under which they were being held.
None of them had been allowed to return to their hotel.


Soviet Republic Awaiting Coup de Grace for Party
By the midnight moon, hundreds of Islamic men rolled out their prayer rugs in the city square before Leninism's empty pedestal and beseeched Allah to complete the death throes of the tired but still dangerously resistant Tadzhikistan Communist Party.
By dawn, the Communists making their last authoritarian stand and waving "state of emergency" demands from the grand parliament building could look out their windows and see scores upon scores of striped shepherds' tents pitched silently all about the square.


Public &amp; Private; The One Who Had Fun
Rote memorization, particularly of poetry, was still the fashion when I was in school.
So it happens that I retain most of "The Children's Hour" and "Daffodils," a fair amount of Edna St.
Vincent Millay and Emily Dickinson, a smattering of Gerard Manley Hopkins, and the beginning verses of three poems: "The Highwayman," "Richard Cory" and "The Hound of Heaven."
It is a sad fact of everyday life that I do not get to use them much, except when playing trivia games or occasionally in comparing childhood education notes with friends.


Letter: On Hong Kong; When Britain Abdicates in 1997
To the Editor:
"Who Will Speak for Hong Kong?" (editorial, Sept. 9) recognizes why it was important for the British Prime Minister, John Major, to visit Beijing.
It also raises questions about the transition to Chinese sovereignty over Hong Kong, as did your Sept. 18 editorial ("Hong Kong Speaks").


Dow Declines 11.18 After Early Gains
After making headway early in yesterday's session, stocks faded in moderate afternoon trading, with the Dow Jones industrial average falling 11.18 points, to close at 3,006.04.
For the week the Dow was down 13.19 points.
Both the gains and, later, the losses were attributed to buy and sell programs set off by futures-related trading.
Birinyi Associates, which tracks these movements, reported eight programs in yesterday's market.
The largest came late in the afternoon, when the Dow fell 16.32 points.


McMillan Makes Tackles Count for Special Teams
The Jets' Erik McMillan made such a nice hit on the Bears' Johnny Bailey after the opening kickoff Monday night in Chicago, that ABC's Dan Dierdorf commented about it toa national television audience.
"Yeah, I appreciate Uncle Dan talking about that, but Uncle Dan is not the coach over here at the New York Jets," said McMillan, who has known Dierdorf since he was 3 years old because Dierdorf was a teammate of his father, Ernie McMillan, with the St.
Louis Cardinals.


Congress Kills Penalties In AIDS Disclosure Plan
House and Senate negotiators today killed a measure that would have forced health-care workers performing invasive procedures to inform patients if they had the AIDS virus or face prison terms and fines.
The measure, which passed the Senate in July and set off alarm throughout the medical world, called for prison terms of at least 10 years and fines of up to $10,000 for health-care workers who violated the law.


Perez Sizzles On a Cold Night In Cleveland
Pascual Perez ended more than four months of misery by pitching eight scoreless innings tonight and powering the Yankees to a 3-0 victory over the Indians at an empty and chilly Cleveland Stadium.
Pitching in frigid weather, which he despises, Perez broke a string of 11 starts without a victory and won for the first time since May 14.
Displaying his act before only 4,256 fans, the lively Perez limited the Indians to five hits in his longest stint ever as a Yankee.


Woman Wins a Bias Suit Against Texaco
A woman who charged that she was twice rejected for management postions that were later given to men has been awarded more than $6 million in damages in a sex discrimination suit against Texaco Inc.
The employee, Janella Sue Martin, 48 years old, sued Texaco in 1986, asserting that she was twice rejected for management positions because of her sex.
She said she suffered emotionally after men were given the higher-paying jobs.


Contenders Can't Gain Any Ground On Leaders
In what might have been a preview of the American League Championship Series, the Blue Jays beat the Minnesota Twins, 7-2, in Toronto last night, strengthening the Blue Jays' slender lead in the American League East while barely denting the Twins' commanding lead in the American League West.
The Atlanta Braves ended a dismal slide by beating the Astros, 4-2, in Houston and pulling to within one and a half games of the Los Angeles Dodgers in the National League West, but not for long.


USAir Expects Heavy Losses
Seth E. Schofield, the president and chief executive of USAir Group Inc., said yesterday that the airline could have a pretax loss of more than $500 million this year and that the outlook for next year might not be much better.
He also announced that the airline would begin more reductions aimed at saving several hundred million dollars next year.
The measures were approved yesterday by the company's board.


ANAC Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 24


Benjamin Smith, 75, U.S. Senator in 1960's
Benjamin A. Smith 2d, who filled John F. Kennedy's seat in the United States Senate for two years after Mr.
Kennedy became President, died Thursday at Addison Gilbert Hospital in Gloucester, Mass.
He was 75 years old.
Mr.
Smith died after a long illness.
The cause of death was not given.
Mr.
Smith, who had been Mr.
Kennedy's roommate at Harvard and an usher at his wedding, was appointed by Gov.
Foster Furcolo of Massachusetts at Mr.
Kennedy's suggestion.
He agreed when he took the post that he would not run for the seat in 1962, the year of the next regular election.
By then the President's youngest brother, Edward M. Kennedy, would be eligible to run.
Senators must be at least 30 years old.


And Now, Small Talk From Various Giants
What the Giants are saying as they prepare for Sunday's game against the Dallas Cowboys:
EVERSON WALLS, the defensive back, on why the Giants lead the National Football League in pass defense: "Lawrence Taylor and Leonard Marshall are rushing the passer so well from the right side of the field that quarterbacks can't even get passes off to that side. I've never seen Lawrence play better."


Weak Economy Takes Toll on Its Experts
The recession, which they failed to predict and now declare over, is weighing heavily on the nation's economists.
The weak economy, combined with a wave of mergers in the banking industry and a mixed forecasting record, has dimmed employment prospects for the people who earn their living analyzing it.
And, except for the academic branch, economists are sharing the worries of other Americans, from the assembly line to the executive suite, about whether they will be victims of downsizing.
They recall the corporate casualties of the mid-1980's, when in some cases entire departments were eliminated.


Dean Foods Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25


Safety-Kleen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 7


Medjugorje Journal; In Shrine to Virgin, Threat of War Darkens Streets
Scared off by the war in Croatia, all but a few perseverant Roman Catholic pilgrims have disappeared from this mountain town, where four youths have reported seeing apparitions of the Virgin Mary each evening for the last decade.
The millions of Catholics drawn here from all over the world by devotion to the Virgin, curiosity and reports of miraculous healings transformed this once down-at-the-heels hamlet into a tourist haven.
But this afternoon it resembled a wind-blown off-season beach town.


New Chief of Operations For Imperial Chemical
Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C., the British chemicals giant, has appointed Ronnie Hampel to the new post of chief operating officer, effective Oct. 1.
Mr.
Hampel, 61, is an executive director of I.C.I. responsible for the explosives, paints and specialties businesses, and for acquisitions and divestments.
He joined the I.C.I. board in 1985, and until April he had responsibility for operations in North and South America.


F.D.A. APPROVES AIDS TREATMENT
The Food and Drug Administration today approved another drug for treatment of a condition in AIDS patients that can cause blindness.
The drug, Foscavir, is not a treatment for the AIDS virus itself but works on a condition called cytomegalovirus retinitis that occurs in patients with severely damaged immune systems; it is a viral infection that often causes blindness.


Basic Shift On Bailout Is Proposed
Bowing to political reality, the Bush Administration proposed today to make fundamental changes in the way the savings and loan bailout is organized in an effort to persuade Congress to approve more money for the highly unpopular effort.
In a measure sent to Congress today, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady proposed to give the Administration greater control over the Resolution Trust Corporation, the quasi-independent agency that was set up by Congress two years ago to manage the rescue.
The trust corporation has had two masters, the independently run Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Oversight Board, a Cabinet-level committee that sets overall policy for the bailout.
Would Cut Out the F.D.I.C.
Mr.
Brady's measure would formally separate the F.D.I.C. from managing the trust corporation.
And it would give the Oversight Board new authority to appoint the leadership of the trust corporation to replace the F.D.I.C.


Review/Television; An Ancient Working Civilization
"Nature," the popular PBS series, begins its new season at 8 P.M.
Sunday on Channel 13 with a program that untypically is not about wildlife.
"From the Heart of the World: The Elder Brothers' Warning" is an account of a visit by the producer, Alan Ereira, to the remote reaches of the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta in Colombia to look at what he calls "the last functioning civilization of pre-Columbian America." It's an interesting visit, up to a point.
The Kogi have no wheels, plows or written language, but they are certain -- and Mr.
Eriera seems to agree -- that they are in tune with the harmony of nature, which the modern world has violated.
They see themselves as the elder brothers of mankind, the rest of the globe's population being made up of younger brothers who have gone astray.
The elder brothers wear white cotton garments but no shoes; they carry little sticks that they constantly rub against gourds and then lick; they chew dried coca leaves; they farm.
The elder sisters tend to stay out of camera range.


Lilly Industrial Coatings reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Ted and Joe, 1941: Sept. 28


British Boxer Improves
Doctors reported signs of improvement yesterday in the condition of British boxer MICHAEL WATSON, who remained on a life-support machine with a brain injury suffered in a title bout last Saturday.
Watson, who was knocked out by CHRIS EUBANK in a World Boxing Organization supermiddleweight title fight in London, was still listed in critical condition at St.
Bartholomew's Hospital. (AP)


Federal Paper Board reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 7


Patents; A Robot Ant Can Be Tool Or Tiny Spy
A professor of electrical engineering at Boston University has patented the elements for a robotic ant, a six-legged machine small enough to handle individual cells under a microscope or, possibly, to serve as a miniature spy that can sneak into secret government installations.
"Imagine what you could do with an ant if you could control it," said Johannes G. Smits, the inventor.
"You could make it walk into a petri dish filled with cells, or you could make it walk into C.I.A. headquarters."


More Employers Seen Using Dismissals to Fight Unions
Companies eager to keep organized labor out of their work sites are increasingly cutting short organizing drives by the blunt and often effective tactic of dismissing leaders of the campaigns, many labor experts say.
It is strategy that, in recent years, has been invoked even in a relative bastion of labor like the New York region.
Sometimes, the leaders are discharged as part of a mass dismissal, like the one at The Sae Gae Times, a Korean-language daily newspaper on West 27th Street in Manhattan, where three-quarters of the editorial staff was dismissed in May, just days after the start of a union organizing campaign.


Tribute to Composer
A concert honoring the 80th anniversary of the birth of the Finnish composer Erik Bergman is to take place at Weill Recital Hall tomorrow evening at 8:30.
The program by the Washington Music Ensemble includes the New York premieres of "Mana" for clarinet, violin, cello and piano, and "Quo Vadis" for cello and piano.
Other scheduled works are "Triumph of Being Here," "Karansi" and "Lament and Incantations." Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Police Officials Contest Ruling On Discipline
New York City has gone to court to overturn a labor ruling it says could destroy the police commissioner's traditional power to discipline officers.
In the ruling, a city-appointed labor-relations commission said that the city must negotiate with the police officers' union over its demand that the commissioner's disciplinary actions be subject to review -- and possible reversal -- by an arbitrator.
The commissioner is now the ultimate departmental judge; the city had argued that this power was written into the City Charter and is not subject to bargaining.


BUSH SEEKS SOVIET CUTS AND FURTHER TALKS


Digicon Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Texscan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


National Medals Awarded
Saying that their work has "transformed the world," President Bush has awarded medals to 38 of the nation's top scientists, engineers and industrialists.
At a ceremony last week at the White House, Mr.
Bush praised past technical accomplishments and announced a new, 5-year, $500,000 program to support young faculty members who want to do research and teach.
The Presidential Faculty Fellows Program, which starts next year, will provide awards to as many as 30 promising young faculty members annually.


Baseball Failing in Minority Hiring, Officials Say
Top officials of major league baseball expressed frustration and alarm yesterday at the failure of many teams to hire and promote members of minority groups for management positions on the field and in the front office.
The officials, Commissioner Fay Vincent and the National League president, Bill White, voiced their concerns on a day when two teams, the New York Mets and the Detroit Tigers, appointed new general managers, both of them white, and two days after Vincent and White attended the first organizational meeting of the Colorado Rockies, one of two new franchises set to join the National League in 1993.


Gov. Hunt Seeks to Stop Alabama Inquiry
Gov.
Guy Hunt has asked a Federal court to stop an Alabama ethics investigation of his use of state-paid transportation to church meetings where he accepted cash offerings.
In a lawsuit filed Thursday in Federal District Court here, the Governor, a Republican serving his second term, contended that he was exempt from the 17-year-old state ethics law.
Mr.
Hunt noted that the Legislature amended the law in 1975 to exclude members of the judiciary, but the lawsuit did not elaborate on why the Governor would also be exempt.


Rash Remedy on Illegal Aliens
The landmark 1986 immigration law set out to discourage illegal aliens by turning off the economic magnet and penalizing employers who hire them.
Now opponents of employer sanctions argue that the law has provoked insupportable discrimination against legal residents who look foreign.
They are pressing for a bill to repeal sanctions sponsored by Senators Orrin Hatch, Utah Republican, and Edward Kennedy, Massachusetts Democrat.
That represents a rash remedy for an uncertain ailment.
The evidence is mixed and, in any case, proponents of repeal have yet to show why less drastic alternatives won't work.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Mortgage Unit Cuts At Citicorp
Citicorp Mortgage, one of the nation's largest home-mortgage lenders, is being reorganized to cut costs and tie its operations more closely to the branch networks of Citibank.
The reorganization will give managers of Citicorp's consumer banking branch networks closer control over the mortgage lending operations.
In the past, the 575 Citibank branches in New York, Illinois, California, Arizona, Florida and the District of Columbia have accounted for about two-thirds of the mortgages originated by Citicorp Mortgage.


NEWS DIGEST
The Economy
President Bush asked banking regulators to make sure they were not inhibiting banks from lending.
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and William Taylor, who has been nominated to head the F.D.I.C., met with the President and his economic advisers, who are clearly concerned about the economy's slow pace barely a year before the Presidential election.  [ Page 1. ]


Weddings a Millionaire Would Love
In a scene evocative of the grand parties given by Newport millionaires around the turn of the century, the gilded ballrooms of several beautifully restored mansions here were ablaze with light on a recent Saturday night.
Under the flicker of candelight, couples in formal attire swirled around the dance floors.
Along Bellevue Avenue, Newport's mansion row, the scene is repeated on many weekends, as more couples choose such fairytale settings for their weddings.


Rock Climbing: The Experience Is the Thing
I was about 20 feet up on the rock face with a sudden resolve to go no further, up or down.
The strength seemed to be ebbing from arms and legs.
What to do next?
Fortunately there was good company.
Jim Munson, the guide, said, "Take a deep breath and relax."


Lisa A. Blauhut Has a Wedding
Lisa Amy Blauhut, a production associate for the Palmetto division of Roydonware, a New York children's clothing manufacturer, and William Edward Demarest, a staff writer for The Rockland Journal-News in West Nyack, N.Y., were married yesterday at Tarrytown (N.Y.) House.
Judge William K. Nelson of the Rockland County Court officiated.
Mrs.
Demarest, 30 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Blauhut of Piermont, N.Y.
Mr.
Demarest, 30, graduated from Iona College.
He a son of Carole Demarest of Woodside, Queens, and the late Gerard Demarest.


CHRONICLE
It was a poignant reunion the other evening, when WILLIAM RANDOLPH HEARST JR. greeted newspaper people he had not seen in 25 years, since his days as publisher of The New York Journal American.
The occasion was a party at the Overseas Press Club to celebrate the publication of his new book, "The Hearsts: Father and Son" (Roberts Rinehart Publishers) and his 63 years in the news business.
"I didn't burst out crying," Mr.
Hearst said yesterday, "but it was very emotional to see people who had been police reporters and court reporters and had covered Broadway."


History Doesn't Know 'Ethnic Macedonians'
To the Editor:
A Sept. 10 news article on Yugoslavia refers to "ethnic Macedonians." Such an idea is inaccurate.
Macedonia has always been a geographic notion and not an ethnic one.


Martin T. Shields, 55, Executive at Hospital
Martin T. Shields, a senior vice president at Staten Island University Hospital and a specialist in labor relations in the health care field, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital on Staten Island.
He was 55 years old and lived on Staten Island.
He died of injuries suffered in an automobile accident, a University Hospital spokesman said.


Review/Opera; In the Met's 'Zauberflote,' Wonder Joins Whimsy
At once the most whimsical and deeply serious of Mozart's operas, "Die Zauberflote" provides a puzzle for modern producers.
American directors raised on sit-coms and Saturday morning television have made of it a sort of Rococo "Bambi" with added infusions of Tom and Jerry.
In the Metropolitan Opera's longstanding production, Marc Chagall's visual sense of mystery kept watch against the disrepectful.
David Hockney's vision of "Die Zauberflote" came to the Met a year ago.
To whimsy and seriousness it adds a child's wonderment, three qualities that the Met tried to reproduce at Thursday night's revival.
Mr.
Hockney's opera settings, with their bright, deep colors, cut-out components and aggressive two-dimensionality, confront the operagoer with a kind of illustrated storybook; each new scene is like the turning of a page.
Hockneyan Mozart is much in the spirit of his "Tristan und Isolde" at the Los Angeles Opera a few seasons back, a production that its director, Jonathan Miller, described (with little apparent charity) as a children's pop-up book.


Classical Music in Review
Korean Program  Carnegie Hall


Trap for Suspect in Drug Killings Was Set Months Ago
The arrest in Queens of a young Colombian who the authorities say is a top cocaine cartel assassin resulted from an international electronic trap that had been set months earlier, the authorities said yesterday.
The suspect, Dandeny Munoz Mosquera, "was here on a mission," said Andrew J. Maloney, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District.
"But we don't know who the target was."


44 U.N. Inspectors Freed by Iraq With Secret Nuclear Documents
A team of 44 United Nations inspectors detained by Iraq were freed early today and allowed to remove documents that they believe will yield information on the country's secret nuclear weapons program.
The inspectors, who had spent four nights in a bus and several cars after they were surrounded by Iraqi guards in a parking lot, returned to their hotel shortly before 6 A.M.
Baghdad time.


Jim Hjelm's Private Collection Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Kenya Offers a Model of Peace and Stability
To the Editor:
"Out of Kenya" by Jamaica Kincaid and Ellen Pall (Op-Ed, Sept. 16) conforms to your familiar, hostile pattern of subjecting Kenya to negative and one-sided coverage in editorials and Op-Ed articles.


Traffic Alert
Broadway Mall Association Street Fair: The west side of Broadway between 66th and 71st Streets will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
North West Central Park Block Association Street Fair: The west side of Central Park West between 100th and 106th Streets will be closed today from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Neiman-Marcus Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Once a Crack Haven, Now a Farm


Explaining Hussein: A Losing Gambler Won't Stop Playing
On the surface, President Saddam Hussein's willingness to violate the Persian Gulf war cease-fire resolutions brazenly and repeatedly seems almost inexplicable -- as though the Iraqi President was just daring the United States to smash him again.
But experts who have followed Mr.
Hussein's career are not in the least bit surprised by his behavior.
They say Mr.
Hussein's character is that of the compulsive gambler who learns nothing from his previous losses and remains ever committed to the notion that the next time around he will beat the house.


At U. of Virginia, Quieter Good Times
"From Rugby Road to Vinegar Hill, we're gonna get drunk tonight . . . The faculty's afraid of us; they know we're in the right . . ."
So go the opening lines of an old party song, sung with boozy vigor by generations of good-timing students at the University of Virginia.


Classical Music Thrives in Pittsburgh Subway
To the Editor:
You report that the Transit Authority is planning music in New York City's subway system (Sept. 10).
You may be interested to know that classical music has been played in subway stations in downtown Pittsburgh since 1986.
The Port Authority of Allegheny County was the first public transit agency in the United States to play recorded music in a subway.


Racer's Edge in Truck Engines
Donald Schneider was impressed by Roger Penske's hustle after Mr.
Penske bought what had been a stodgy division of the General Motors Corporation.
And the new truck engines produced by Mr.
Penske's company, he noticed, were first rate, achieving reduced emissions without sacrificing efficiency.
So earlier this year, the president of Schneider National Inc. began switching his fleet of 6,700 trucks from Cummins engines to those made by Mr.
Penske's Detroit Diesel Corporation.
The action by the head of the nation's largest long-haul trucking company goes a long way to explain why Detroit Diesel has increased its share of the engine market for heavy trucks from an anemic 3.5 percent in 1988 to 23 percent now.


Corrections
A television review in Weekend on Sept. 20 about "Brooklyn Bridge" misidentified the director of the first episode of the series.
The director was Sam Weisman, not Gary David Goldberg, who is the show's creator and executive producer.


INSIDE
A Close Call at 5,600 Feet
A jetliner and a small plane came within 50 feet of colliding near Chicago.
The incident underscored a lasting aviation problem.
Page 7.
Punitive AIDS Bill Beaten
Congress killed a measure that sought prison for doctors doing invasive procedures who had the AIDS virus and did not tell patients.
Page 7.
Oona O'Neill Chaplin Dies
Oona O'Neill Chaplin, daughter of Eugene O'Neill and wife of Charlie Chaplin, is dead at 66.
Page 27.


About New York
Her head bent over a ledger, Olga Loeb was in control.
She gripped a wad of cash in one hand, a pen in the other.
"Just let me get this out of the way," she said, barely looking up.
"I don't like to carry it over the weekend."


Remarks by President Bush on Reducing U.S. and Soviet Nuclear Weapons
Following is the text of remarks by the President in an address to the nation tonight, as recorded by The New York Times:
Good evening.
Tonight I'd like to speak with you about our future, and the future of the generations to come.


For the Frequent Flier, Shuttle War Is a Boon
The air shuttle war has intensified, and travelers between New York and Washington, or New York and Boston, are the beneficiaries.
The fare hasn't changed on the two high-traffic, no-reservation shuttles, which use La Guardia Airport.
But the number of frequent-flier miles per trip has doubled.
And additional mileage credit is being granted for same-day round trips.
Now those who fly these routes, particularly those who fly back and forth in a day, can earn free or upgraded travel much faster.


Burlington Coat Factory reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


A Peculiar Peril for the Poor
A little-known but wonderfully effective inducement for low-income housing is about to expire.
Why?
Because the leaders of Congressional tax-writing committees can't figure out how to save a superb tax subsidy without simultaneously giving unjustified salvation to a dozen others, many wasteful.
Some quick, belated legislative ingenuity is now in order.
The low-income housing tax credit is a lifeline for poor families.
It produces about 120,000 units of low-cost housing per year, an astounding 94 percent of all low-income housing units.
And unlike many programs designed to help the poor, this one is beautifully targeted, with more than 95 percent of units going to families earning less than 60 percent of an area's median income.


Cashen Calls It a Decade; Harazin to Run Mets
Frank Cashen, who had directed the Mets since 1980 and reshaped the moribund organization into world champions in 1986, said yesterday that he would hand over the baseball operation and title of general manager to Al Harazin, effective at the end of this season.
Harazin, who has worked alongside Cashen for nearly 20 years and who had handled contract negotiations for the Mets as the organization's executive vice president, quickly appeared to set his own tone for the future and in the process distance himself from Cashen.


Another End to Europhoria
Success is threatening to undermine the European Community.
Even before the establishment of a single market, the community has proved an irresistible magnet, playing an important role in the breakdown of the Soviet Eastern European empire.
It provided the contrast showing how badly Communism failed.
But now, old suspicions simmer between France and Germany.
An interlude of "Europhoria," which replaced the fear of "Eurosclerosis" of the mid-1980's, has given way to another bout of rival jousting.


Italy Urges Sweeping Structural Changes at U.N.
Citing the end of the East-West rivalry and a host of other reasons, Italy today proposed sweeping changes to the United Nations structure, including increasing the number of permanent and nonpermanent members of the Security Council.
"We realize how difficult it is simply to contemplate the changes," the Italian Foreign Minister, Gianni de Michelis, said in a speech before the General Assembly.
"I know it means retreating from established positions, giving up some prerogatives, and undertaking a redistribution of international power to reflect the changes that have taken place in the world in recent years."


Dodgers Creep Closer to Title By Downing the Giants, 6-2
Their game is pitching, not power, but the Los Angeles Dodgers used their muscle to record a vital victory tonight over their rivals, the San Francisco Giants, and move a little closer to a divison title.
Nevertheless, the Dodgers had to overcome some spotty defense to come up with the victory.


Amid Latin Growth, Brazil Falters
Despite a strong electoral mandate 18 months ago, two economic shock programs and promises to put one Government-owned company into public or private hands each month, President Fernando Collor de Mello's grand plans to revamp Brazil's economy have seriously faltered.
Brazil is still running large budget deficits and printing money to cover the shortfall.
Inflation is moving back up toward 20 percent a month.
And a deep two-year recession persists at a time when almost all other countries in South America are beginning to grow again.


Columbia Pictures Proud of Its Summer Crop
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 11 report on the fall movie season misrepresents the situation at Columbia Pictures.


A Revamping At Control Data
The Control Data Corporation said yesterday that it would create "separate legal entities" for its three primary businesses: information services, government systems and computer products.
The announcement lifted Control Data stock, which closed on the New York Stock Exchange at $9.875, up $1.25.
About 1.6 million shares were traded.


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Two Airplanes Nearly Collide Above Chicago
At rush hour on Thursday evening in the sky near Chicago, a commercial jetliner came within 50 feet of colliding with a small plane, aviation officials said today.
The close call occurred in some of the world's busiest airspace, an area that has been identified by the National Transportation Safety Board as having "a high collision potential" because of the way big jets and smaller planes mingle on the outskirts of the Chicago air traffic control zone.


Joanne Sundby and Karl Van Horn Are Married
Joanne Sundby and Karl Van Horn, both of London, were married yesterday in a civil ceremony at Villecroze, France.
Mrs.
Van Horn is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dag Sundby of Whitney, Oxfordshire, England.
Her father is a physician.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 7


Patents; A Nicotine Lollipop To Help Smokers Quit
For smokers who find that chewing nicotine-laced gum is not enough to kick their habits, a husband and wife have patented Nic-on-a-Stick, a lollipop that they say can better mimic the oral gratification of a long stick of tobacco.
"There's a kind of oral fixation or compulsive kind of behavior that smokers all have in common -- the need to put something in and out of their mouths and to repeat this in a very ritualistic way," said Gloria Mascarelli, a former smoker who patented the lollipop with her husband Robert.
The couple, antique dealers who live in Holbrook, L.I., said they came up with the idea after Mr.
Mascarelli suffered a heart attack and could not overcome his addiction to cigarettes.


Shirley Garry Quill, Tenant Organizer, 76
Shirley Garry Quill, a tenant organizer and the widow of the labor leader Michael J. Quill, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She was suffering from an undetermined virus, a close friend said.


Classical Music in Review
Andrew Appel, Harpsichordist Merkin Concert Hall 129 West 67th Street


Cuomo, Heading to Tokyo, Says It's Strictly Business
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who often boasts that if New York State were a country it would have the world's ninth-largest economy, leaves for Tokyo on Saturday on a trade mission that comes against the backdrop of a precipitous decline in new Japanese investment in New York in recent years.
While much of the decline is tied to internal economic problems in Japan and is common to other states, several American and Japanese executives said the slowing of investments was magnified in the New York City area, with many Japanese investors increasingly nervous about the city's prospects in the wake of its fiscal turmoil and tremendous social problems.


Judiciary Panel Deadlocks, 7-7, On Thomas Nomination to Court
The Senate Judiciary Committee deadlocked 7 to 7 today on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, thus refusing to endorse President Bush's choice to succeed Thurgood Marshall.
But moments after the vote, the committee then voted overwhelmingly to send Judge Thomas's nomination without a recommendation to the full Senate, where even those committee members who opposed him said he remained a strong favorite to be confirmed as the nation's 106th Supreme Court Justice.


Review/Music; A Narrative 'Peer Gynt' From the Philharmonic
As far as I know, the word "sweet" has never been used to describe the sound of the New York Philharmonic in Avery Fisher Hall.
And with good reason.
On Thursday night, however, under Kurt Masur's direction, the orchestra produced a sound that was unmistakably sweet.
So burnished was the ensemble's timbre, in fact, that I thought I was having a critical hallucination from too much ponderous thinking about Mr.
Masur's new role as music director.
But there it was, throughout the incidental music to Grieg's Peer Gynt (Op. 23): a warm, throaty sound, with no biting attacks, no disproportionate shouting in the upper register, just the sound of instruments taking pleasure in their own singing.


CHRONICLE
Senator LLOYD BENTSEN, the Texas Democrat, and his wife, BERYL ANN, known as B.A., like to make what they think are grand exits from parties and then watch the reaction.
As a longtime aide explained yesterday: "He likes to pick her up, throw her over his shoulder and walk out. They enjoy the looks on the faces of other guests. They even did it at the run-through for the vice-presidential debate with Quayle in Omaha in 1988."
But now they will be more subdued.
Earlier this month, they were visiting the Wyoming ranch of CHARLES DUNCAN, a former Secretary of Energy in the Carter Administration.
After a hard day of fly fishing, the 70-year-old Senator announced that he was tired and wanted to go to bed, according to the aide, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Kenya Offers a Model of Peace and Stability; Free Speech, Keep Out
To the Editor:
Jamaica Kincaid and Ellen Pall ("Out of Kenya," Op-Ed, Sept. 16), who went to form a Kenyan chapter of PEN and found Kenya "a grim and brutal place," could have learned that before they set out.
They might have consulted such Kenyan exiles in the United States as Maina wa Kinyatti (a historian imprisoned for six and a half years apparently for researching the wrong topic) and Ngugi wa Thiong'o (the pre-eminent Kenyan writer, imprisoned for a year as co-author of a satirical play in the vernacular).
Both were Amnesty International prisoners of conscience.


Hy Rensin, 87, Teacher of Music in the Bronx
Hy Rensin, a music teacher at the Bronx High School of Science for more than 30 years, died on Wednesday at the Berkshire Medical Center in Pittsfield, Mass.
He was 87 years old and lived in Lenox, Mass., and Miami Beach.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


The Gift Is Opened. Now, What About Those Plastic Packing Peanuts?
What to do with those insidious plastic packing peanuts that spill out of gift boxes and invade the house during celebrations and holidays?
They can trip adults and are a hazard to children and pets, who might swallow them.
The answer: recycle or reuse them.
After you have gathered them up, checking under sofas, chairs and beds for strays, you can send them to a growing number of recycling centers that now accept the foam pieces, along with other plastics made of polystyrene.
Some shipping companies will also reuse or recycle the plastic peanuts.


Sports of The Times; The Double Standard In Sports
When Sam McDowell was a pitcher with the Yankees in 1974, he badly hurt his ankle when he stumbled on an escalator in a Minneapolis department store.
Or so he said then.
Now he readily relates what really happened.
"I got drunk out of my mind at a disco, and I fell off a curb," he recalled.


Amy S. Lafferty Wed in Florida
Amy Steel Lafferty and William Clarence Hsieh, graduates of Dartmouth College, were married yesterday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The Rev.
Daniel J. Yeary and the Rev.
Oris S. Hawkins officiated at the First Baptist Church.
Mrs.
Hsieh, 25 years old, is an account coordinator at the advertising agency of McCann-Erickson in San Francisco, and her husband is an investment banker there at Robertson, Stephens &amp; Company.


BUSH WANTS A RISE IN BANKS' LENDING
At his second meeting in three days with his economic advisers, President Bush today asked banking regulators to review their procedures to make sure they were not inhibiting banks from making loans, White House officials said.
The President and his advisers are clearly concerned about the slow pace of the economy almost a year before the Presidential election.
But because of the large budget deficit, expected to be well over $300 billion in the next fiscal year, they do not have the leeway to cut taxes or increase spending, the usual steps for an Administration facing a sour economy in an election year.
Pressing a Point
That is one reason they are focusing on bank regulations, and today they called two of the nation's top bank regulators to an otherwise routine meeting of the President's Economic Policy Council.
The regulators were Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and William Taylor, who has been nominated to be chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


The Garden State Grows on Stevens
Even though the Devils are on the West Coast, for the first time this season there were people with television cameras and microphones in the dressing room of the team's training complex this morning.
The focus of attention was Scott Stevens, the defenseman awarded to New Jersey as compensation for the signing of Brendan Shanahan by the St.
Louis Blues and who then threatened not to join the Devils.


Hope Diminishes for Missing Family in Rhode Island


News Summary
International 2-6
Unilateral cuts in nuclear weapons were announced by President Bush, who is hoping to use the crumbling of Soviet military power as a chance to reshape the pillars of American nuclear doctrine.
Page 1


Community Psychiatric Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Franco-American Soiree Welcomes Galeries Lafayette
Tout New York and un peu de Paris showed up Thursday night for the first glimpse inside Galeries Lafayette's new store on 57th Street, off Fifth Avenue.
The occasion was a cross-cultural party that gave 420 leaders of the social, fashion, retail and diplomatic worlds a chance to tour the store, which opens its doors to the public today.
There were six floors to explore and most of the guests never got any higher than the main floor.
But that's par for the course.
What matters is being at an important event with a lot of other important people.


A Fast Belmont Farewell For Housebuster Today
Housebuster, who is to horse racing what Carl Lewis is to Olympic sprinting, will flash his speed in New York for the last time today when he heads a field of seven sprinters in the $200,000 Vosburgh Stakes at Belmont Park.
After that, they will ring down the curtain on his career after the Breeders' Cup Sprint on Nov. 2 at Churchill Downs, and then it's off to Kentucky for a new career as a stallion with memories of all those dashes.
The 4-year-old colt, who is exceptionally serene in nature, especially for a sprinter, has been saying farewell at tracks around the country all summer.
In his most recent swan song, at Saratoga last month, he left his public with a dramatic memory: He spotted Senor Speedy 14 pounds in the weights and then outran him by a nose in the Forego Handicap.
Now, he has $1.1 million in his bank account and he has a record of 14 victories in 20 starts, and 18 times has finished in the money.


Fees Decline at Salomon
Salomon Brothers underwriting fees declined 33.7 percent in September as the firm struggled to emerge from the Treasury auction scandal.
The firm's fees from underwriting debt and equity securities totaled $10.4 million in September, compared with $15.7 million in August, according to statistics from IDD Information Services.


Beliefs
For religious bodies no less than political ones, study committees often seem like aspirin.
They relieve headaches but only temporarily.
That skeptical view is widespread and understandable, but in at least two recent cases it is unjustified.


Quotron Is Suing Automatic Data
Quotron Systems Inc., the computerized stock quotation company, filed a copyright infringement suit contending that Automatic Data Processing Inc. copied some of its computer programs and manuals.
The suit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, seeks unspecified damages and an order stopping Automatic Data Processing, based in Roseland, N.J., from using Quotron's trade secrets.
Quotron, based in New York, is a subsidiary of Citicorp.
The suit contends that Automatic Data Processing obtained trade secrets about Quotron's Software Development Library, which allows subscribers to create their own applications of Quotron programs to design charts and analyses.
Quotron also contends that Automatic Data Processing copied its manuals.
Automatic Data Processing officials could not be reached for comment.


ARX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Oona O'Neill Chaplin Dies at 66; She Lived in the Shadow of Fame
Oona Chaplin, the daughter of one of the great tragic playwrights of the century, Eugene O'Neill, and wife of one of the screen's greatest comic geniuses, Charles Chaplin, died yesterday at the age of 66 in Corsier-sur-Vevey, Switzerland.
She died of cancer of the pancreas, said her lawyer, Herbert Jacoby of New York City.


Harrelson Thinks He May Stay
Bud Harrelson said last night that, based on a scale of 1 to 10, he thinks his chances of returning next season to manage the Mets "are right now an 8."
To avoid any confusion, that's a scale in which the lower number would represent his smallest chance.


Barry Is Sentenced Again to Six-Month Term on Cocaine Conviction
Former Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. was resentenced today to six months in prison by a Federal district judge who accused him of lending an "aura of respectability" to the capital's violent drug culture.
The sentence, for conviction on one misdemeanor count of cocaine possession, was issued by Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson and was identical to the one that Judge Jackson imposed on Mr.
Barry last year but that was thrown out two months ago by a Federal appeals court.


Bridge
There are certain to be some new winners in the world team championships which begin Monday in Yokohama, Japan.
In the open series for the Bermuda Bowl, it is true, Brazil will have the same six players who won two years ago in Perth, Australia, and will be favored by many to beat back all challengers. (If they are toppled, the new champions are likely to be one of four European teams or one of two United States teams.)
But in the Venice Trophy contest for women's teams, none of the Americans who won in Perth qualified for Yokohama.
One of them, however, was recruited to fill a gap in a United States team.
Lynn Deas, of Schenectady, who won in 1987 as well as 1989, will now have chance to win three straight Venice Trophies.
One of her team-mates, making her international debut, will be Nell Cahn, of Shreveport, La., who sat South on the diagramed deal from a Swiss Team event last year.


Genetic Pioneers Win Lasker Awards
The Albert Lasker Medical Research Awards, considered second in prestige only to the Nobel Prizes, were given yesterday to two pioneers in the field of fruit fly genetics and to a scientist who first applied DNA analysis to the detection of inborn diseases like sickle-cell anemia.
By presenting research awards to Dr.
Edward B. Lewis of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, and to Dr.
Christiane Nusslein-Volhard of the Max-Planck Institute for Developmental Biology in Tubingen, Germany, for their work in mapping out the crucial events in the embryonic development of the fruit fly, the Albert and Mary Lasker Foundation took a more farsighted view than usual of the link between basic research and any potential clinical spinoffs.


Quotation of the Day
"America must lead again as it always has, as only it can. We can now take steps in response to these dramatic developments, steps that can help the Soviet peoples in their quest for peace and prosperity. More importantly, we can now take steps to make the world a less dangerous place than ever before in the nuclear age." -- President Bush.  [ 1:6. ]


Just Call Highway Tolls a Hidden Gas Tax
To the Editor:
"Tolls Up, Trucks Take Back Roads" (Business Day, Sept. 17) points out many of the problems caused by exorbitantly high tolls on roads in the Northeast.


Your Money; A Longer Life, And Saving for It
Americans are on a collision course with economic reality, living longer, retiring earlier and saving less than they did a generation ago.
At the same time corporations are shifting their focus away from traditional employer-paid plans that provide defined benefits to defined contribution plans, like 401(k) plans, that require employees to defer a portion of their compensation for retirement and often to decide how to invest that money.
"The days of paternalism are over," said Joel S. Isaacson, director of financial planning at Clarfeld &amp; Company in New York.
"The burden of meeting any retirement objective falls on the employee."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
NEW YORK METS -- Announced Frank Cashen, general manager, will step down at the end of this season and will remain as chief operating officer for 1992 and consultant for 1993.
Promoted Al Harazin from executive vice president to general manager and Gerry Hunsicker from director of operations to assistant vice president for operations.
Activated Vince Coleman, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Basketball


Peru's President: A Good Bet
Despite concerns about human rights, Congressional committees are about to release economic and military aid to help Peru's President Alberto Fujimori fight the cocaine trade.
The concerns are valid, but Mr.
Fujimori still deserves the show of confidence.
The Bush Administration's plans for $34.9 million in military aid, including 50 military advisers, stirred fears of United States involvement in a Vietnam-like quagmire.
The Peruvian military's human rights record, as sorry as any in the Americas, makes the idea seem even more dismaying.


Ewing in Talks on Altering Pact
Knicks President Dave Checketts has been negotiating with Patrick Ewing's attorney about the possibility of restructuring Ewing's contract, further evidence that the team has no plans to trade their 7-foot center.
The goal of the negotiations is not to improve Ewing's salary immediately, but to give the team more flexibility to make personnel moves now and in the future under the league's $12.5 million salary cap.
The Knicks, who are $88,000 over the cap, are negotiating with their first-round draft choice, Greg Anthony.


Editors' Note
An article yesterday about the death of a Hasidic scholar last month in Brooklyn discussed the professional background of the doctor who was attending him when he died.
The scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum, died in the emergency room of Kings County Hospital after being stabbed in a racial disturbance in Crown Heights.
The article quoted hospital officials as saying that the physician, Dr.
Pamela Damian, had been dropped from surgical training programs at two other hospitals before going to Kings County.
In fact, The Times learned yesterday that she was dropped from one program, but left the other one, at the State University at Stony Brook, voluntarily after being denied advancement.
Yesterday's article, prepared before the facts became known, included a statement from Dr.
Damian to that effect.
But her denial was given much less prominence than the officials' allegation, and the headline accepted the allegation as fact.
The headline should have reflected the fact that contradictory accounts of her background existed, and the article should have given them equal prominence.


Store Detective Held in Blaze At Suffolk Mall
A 22-year-old store detective has confessed to setting the fire that killed two people and injured 28 in a McCrory variety store in May, the police said.
He started the fire, he told the police, so he could help put it out.
"He wanted to appear as being on the spot and effective in his job," said Lieut.
John Gierasch, commanding officer of the Suffolk County Police Department's homicide squad, adding, "He did not intend for these people to die."


Bush's New Strategy: Seizing the Initiative and Avoiding Deeper Arms Cuts
For the first time in his Presidency, President Bush reached out boldly tonight and sought to put his stamp on the future.
By proposing a sweeping new series of cutbacks in American nuclear defenses, Mr.
Bush acted before the Western Europeans, before the Soviets, before Congress and before many in the arms-control fraternity had fully developed their own ideas for scaling back military forces in the wake of this summer's turbulent changes in the Soviet Union.
Often derided in the past as a man without vision, able but timid, a reacter who succeeded mainly because fate marched with him, the President this time gave the lie to such portrayals.


Corrections
The Economic Scene column yesterday referred incompletely to action by the Toshiba Corporation in response to a United States tariff on imports of advanced computer display screens.
Toshiba plans to move production of only one Toshiba computer model out of the United States; it is not moving all of its manufacturing operations.


Here in the Suburbs, Malls (Like Hope) Spring Eternal
Here in suburbia, where malls are Broadway, Main Street and the town common all rolled into one, the opening of a 1.3-million-square-foot shop-'till-you-drop paradise today was a major municipal event.
Never mind that the Menlo Park Mall is the third mega-mall within a few square miles or that there is a recession going on.
The 30-minute ceremony this morning had all the pomp and circumstance once reserved for mayoral portrait unveilings and city hall cornerstone layings and other community events that people tell their grandchildren about.
There were perky singers up on a stage, front row seats filled with V.I.P.'s in pin-stripe suits and speeches by elected officials, including Gov.
Jim Florio.


State Legislatures Shouldn't Redistrict
To the Editor:
"Strange Foes in California Redistricting" (news article, Sept. 19) reports on the bizarre alliances being forged by state legislators, with the conservative Gov.
Pete Wilson at odds with conservative lawmakers, in attempts to set boundaries for the state's 52 Congressional and 120 state legislative districts.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Express Bank Ltd., New York, an American Express Co. unit, named Eric W. P. Hasselman managing director and chief credit officer. *
Liz Claiborne Inc., New York, named Richard Shaw president of Liz Claiborne (Canada) Ltd., its Canadian division.


Top Franchise Owner Heads Precision Tune
Although Joseph A. Grimaud's muffler shop in Alexandria, La., was a financial success itself, he became captivated by the auto tune-up shop across the street.
Eventually, Mr.
Grimaud became the largest franchise owner in the tune-up company's system, and this week he was named chief executive of the company, Precision Tune Inc.
Based in Sterling, Va., the company operates more than 500 automobile tune-up shops nationwide through a system it calls subfranchising.
Instead of buying the rights to a single store, a franchise operator purchases the rights to an entire area, including the first store in that area.


The Ballot Counting Plods Along For Brooklyn Council Candidates
Brooklyn candidates haggled before a judge over the validity of dozens of absentee ballots yesterday, as the official canvass of four too-close-to-call Democratic primary races for City Council seats inched along, Board of Election officials said.
Election officials still had no official tallies by the end of the day.
But one incumbent and two newcomers to politics claimed victory after the majority of absentee and emergency ballots were counted.


Arms Plan Hailed in Congress But Some Call for More Cuts
Senators and arms control experts mostly praised President Bush's proposals this evening for eliminating short-range nuclear weapons, calling bombers off alert and asking for new talks with the Soviet Union on long-range weapons.
But leading Democrats faulted the President for not placing enough emphasis on the nation's economic troubles, while disarmament advocates said the plan did not go far enough.


Class Struggle
ON A LEAFY SIDE STREET IN THE Los Angeles suburb of Glendale, parents and children are playing out the American ritual of going back to school.
The youngsters, still adjusting to the unfamiliar surroundings of classes at the Columbus Elementary School, clutch glossy new textbooks.
About 30 of them file into John Robertson's fifth-grade classroom, where the walls are decorated with Presidential portraits, diagrams of the 50 states and Navajo sand drawings.
From all appearances, a traditional setting.
But appearances are deceiving.
That becomes evident when Robertson addresses his charges, with names like Aram, Razmik, Sarkis, Su Chin, Pierre and Angela.
The classroom, a typical one in the new California, is filled with immigrant children from Soviet Armenia, Mexico, El Salvador, Korea and Hong Kong, plus a few Americans.
At the rear, a Filipino-American teacher's aide, Nanette Morales, prepares to help Armenian and Korean children learn English.


Tour Group Sets Antarctic Rules
Because of the rise in travel to Antarctica and ensuing international concerns about its environment, seven of the largest North American operators of cruises to the region have formed a new lobbying organization, the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators.
The organization banded together in part because of an international agreement signed earlier this year that strengthens the environment protection mandate of the Antarctic Treaty of 1969, signed by 39 nations.
The association said part of its mission is to lobby international legislative bodies, and clear up what it called "grave misconceptions in regard to the way tourism is conducted in Antarctica."


CAMPUS LIFE: Michigan; Reconstructing English as Spoken in Days of Yore
The S's were tough and the W's promise to be difficult, but if all goes as planned, editors of the Middle English Dictionary will be defnining words that begin with the letter Z before the turn of the century.
Their endeavor to define 70,000 Middle English words began at the University of Michigan in 1930.
It is now nearing completion with the help of a recent grant of $745,443 from the National Endowment for the Humanities.


Billboards: Yesterday's Pollutants, Today's Nostalgia
Like Sebastian Flyte in "Brideshead Revisited," who clutched his teddy bear well into adulthood, America seems to be in love with its own childhood.
These days it is possible to feel nostalgic for almost anything.
It is comforting to think how quickly the national symbol of cultural vacuum -- the billboard -- has been transformed into a morsel of Americana.
It was 26 years ago that Lady Bird Johnson crusaded for the Highway Beautification Act of 1965, which banned billboards within 1,000 feet of interstate highways.


New Yorkers, etc.
Put a pile of mail in front of 20 people and the only certainty is that it will be attacked in any number of different ways, that is if it is attacked at all.
It's true that most men and women tackle their at-home mail immediately or simply wait for a few quiet minutes.
But there are others, more than one might think, who don't put it off for just a few minutes or hours but for days and, in a few extreme cases, weeks, ignoring the the constantly growing stack as though it didn't exist.
Immediate or postponed, once the decision is made to at least open the stuff, uniformity continues to fall by the wayside.
There are mail openers who stand and mail openers who sit, and each generally has a specific preferred place for carrying out their mission -- kitchen, living room, library, counter, desk, sofa, bed.


Fit in London
To the Editor: In response to "Fit as a (Surprise) Brit" (Aug. 11) about running in central London, I might offer a couple of suggestions.
I found that two other parks are worth visiting: Holland Park, just beyond Kensington Gardens, and Kew Gardens, which is further out, but well worth an underground trip.
My favorite has been the banks of the Thames.
One can run from Battersea Bridge on the west all the way to Tower Bridge.
There may be a few obstacles, but part of urban running is learning to live with the city and its environment.
There are some great areas to see.
Certainly a favorite is the Rodin statue Burghers of Calais, where one can touch the feet and go on about your merry way.
The Thames is always changing and has some delightful bridges to cross.
I offer this to any ambitious runner or jogger visiting London.
I have found this to be very satisfying.
WILLIAM L. HEDRICK Minneapolis


Ferragamos Mark Family's Ties to Saks
The Ferragamos plunged into the fashion scene in Manhattan last week, with five of six siblings associated with the Florentine design house rushing about to breakfasts, lunches and dinners.
"Having five of us together for this has been not only very good for business, but also great fun," said Massimo Ferragamo, 34 years old, the youngest family member.
He is based in Manhattan as president of Ferragamo U.S.A., overseeing the company's largest market: United States sales are 55 percent of the company's total.


Two Noted Pianists to Visit County
TWO great American masters of the keyboard are performing in Westchester next Saturday: Leonard Pennario, with the Westchester Symphony at the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase, and Abbey Simon, in a solo recital at the Rye Country Day School.
Mr.
Pennario, whose renown dates from his collaboration with Jascha Heifetz and Gregor Piatigorsky in the 1950's, has performed with nearly every major orchestra in the United States.
He will play the Grieg A minor Concerto.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a fireplace on the first floor and another below it in the basement.
When we build a fire in the first-floor fireplace, the smell of smoke is strong in the basement.
The ash pit has been removed, and the chimney flue connected to the basement fireplace has been capped.
It has been suggested that a stainless-steel liner be installed in the first-floor chimney.
Would that solve the problem?
A.
If the two chimney flues are in the same brick chimney structure, if either one or both of the flue liners is cracked or leaking and if there are no flue liners, it could be that smoke will leak from one flue to the other.
That should not occur if the flue being used draws properly, but it could happen if there are down drafts or other defects in that chimney.
Capping the unused flue was probably a mistake.
It will trap smoke that leaks into it, instead of allowing the smoke to escape through the opening at the top of the chimney.
I would suggest removing the cap.
If that does not solve the problem, have an expert check the structure.
It is very likely that lining the flue will be the answer.


Making a Difference; Retailing's Modest Napoleon
To command its first foray into the competitive and economically battered New York City retail scene, Galeries Lafayette chose a self-effacing general.
"I'm a suburban mom," said Eugenia Ulasewicz, president of the United States subsidiary of the French department store chain, which opened its first American store yesterday in Trump Tower.


New York City Reviews Contract After Learning of Altered Report
New York City is reconsidering a $1.2 million contract it awarded to a major construction company after learning the company had submitted an altered copy of a report concerning its possible ties to organized-crime figures.
The contract was awarded in July to the company, the Leon D. DeMatteis Construction Corporation of Elmont, L.I., to oversee the design and construction of a $67 million jail but city officials say the deal is being reconsidered.


Chicago Traffic Eases, for Now
With many thoroughfares in and around Chicago torn up for construction, the Windy City at rush hour has begun to resemble Los Angeles.
But construction on one of the most important roadways, Lake Shore Drive, has finally been completed.
As a result, the traffic jams into the city from Midway Airport and from the suburbs along Chicago's North Shore have at last been eased.
The rebuilding of Lake Shore Drive lasted from the middle of April to the second week of September.
At times, so many construction crews were working on the highway that traffic was restricted to two lanes in each direction.


POSTINGS: 19 East 54th St.; An 1890 Granite-Front Phoenix
Minnie E. Young built the lavish granite-front house at 19 East 54th Street in 1889 and 1890, nearly five years after her husband, Albert, died.
This small detail was the only historical distinction that attached to the handsome five-story building until other rich women, including one named Jaqueline Kennedy, began visiting the building to have their hair washed, colored, permed and poufed at the Kenneth Beauty Salon, the hairstylist, in the 1960's.
Now, after a fire that gutted the interior on May 16, 1990, the big, 17,000-square-foot house is reaching for a new chapter.
The fire effectively broke the Kenneth salon lease, which was first signed in 1962, and now Donald Gordon, the owner, is spending at least $1.2 million to restore the interior and is negotiating a long-term net lease -- meaning the tenant pays all expenses -- with a new commercial renter.


Corrections
A report in Campus Life last Sunday about a videotape made by Columbia University medical students misidentified its producer.
She was Joan LaRovere.


Seen Everything? Wrong! There's More, a Lot More.
NEW YORK is a city with so many spectacular museums that there's even a mile-long stretch of Fith Avenue nicknamed for them.
And now that the art season is here, museumgoers can see everything from Jacob Lawrences series of Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman paitings at the Studio Museum in Harlem to "Pleasures and Terrors of Domestic Life" at the Museum of Modern Art.
On Museum Mile itself are "Seurat" at the Metropolitan, "The Cooper-Hewitt Collections" at the Cooper-Hewitt and "The Art of Babar" at the National Academy of Design.
But Manhattan has another breed of museum, humbler places that have lower budgets but offer their own rewards.
They're small - usually one or two gallery rooms - and personal.
If the curator-proprietor-director-janitor isn't there to collect your donation at the door, there's always someone on hand who knows every inch of the place by heart and would be thrilled to rhapsodize for hours.


Cadets Survive Ivy Scare
Two touchdowns in the fourth quarter saved Army today from a upset at the hands of Harvard, a 30-point underdog.
The Cadets prevailed, 21-20, after losing their starting quarterback, Willie McMillian, because of a knee injury early in the third period.
Myreon Williams, the starting split end, took over at quarterback and performed well in directing the wishbone offense had so often been stymied by the Crimson.


Winter-Storage Tips For Fuel-Powered Tools
GASOLINE-POWERED tools like lawn mowers, garden shredders, tillers and string trimmers need servicing before being stored for the winter.
That is not difficult, and it assures quick starting in the spring and long life.
The best place to store most gasoline-powered tools is in a dry unheated garage or shed.
If you must store items outside, wrap them with plastic sheeting to keep out moisture and tie the sheeting with rope or elastic cord to prevent wind from undoing the wrap.
If equipment is to be stored in a heated garage, basement or utility room, follow the directions given later for servicing the fuel system.


The Season Sets a Brisk Pace
For fall and winter visitors to Europe, the bright lights of theater marquees and concert stages and the excitement of the latest museum opening are ample compensation for any vagaries in the weather.
This year opera fans can hear Wagner's "Parsifal" with Placido Domingo in December at La Scala and Verdi's "Rigoletto" with Alfredo Kraus next month in Seville, the city that will play host to Expo '92 later next year; music lovers can choose from no fewer than four performances of Mozart's Requiem on Dec. 5, the 200th anniversary of the composer's death -- in Vienna, Rome, Madrid and Barcelona.


Offshore Banking Gets New Scrutiny With B.C.C.I. Scandal
For years, while other Caribbean islands concentrated on building resort hotels and duty-free shopping centers, a handful of tiny British possessions have quietly taken it upon themselves to become centers of international finance.
In less than two decades, the most spectacularly successful of the bunch, the Cayman Islands, have gone from being a well-kept secret of divers and deep sea fishermen to a tax-free and secret-keeping haven for most of the world's leading banks.
The banks are attracted by the scarcity of requirements about financial reserves and waiting periods, as well as the absence of taxes.


The Executive Computer; Connectivity Comes to Life in a Technology Supermarket
Many computer companies talk about compatibility and connectivity, asserting that it is easy to hook their computers to other systems a customer may already have installed.
Executives may soon have the chance to see, in advance and without pain, how "multivendor connectivity" works in real life.
Last week, at the Infomart technology center in Dallas, the foundation of such a public showcase was officially put in place.
The Infomart Martnet is an ambitious attempt to get most of the major computer and information technology companies to roll up their sleeves and work together on a real project.


Persephone Zill Has a Wedding
Persephone Alexandra Zill, a finance associate at the City Parks Foundation, which raises money for New York's parks, was married yesterday to Michael Kushner, a doctoral candidate in experimental psychology at Brooklyn College.
Judge Claudius S. Matthews of Criminal Court officiated at the Junior League in New York.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Barnard College.
She is a daughter of Nicholas Zill 2d of Washington, where he is the director of Child Trends, a social-science research group, and Anne Broderick Zill of Freeport, Me., where she is a documentary film producer and a foundation executive for the Stewart Mott Charitable Trust.


Streetscapes: The Weyhe Book Store and Gallery; From Books to Baked Goods
IT'S like an illuminated manuscript, small, brilliantly colored, the work of several hands.
But it now appears that the venerable Weyhe Book Store and Gallery at 794 Lexington Avenue, between 61st and 62d Streets, is threatened with destruction, with at least the acquiesence of the family that built it in 1923.
Erhard Weyhe emigrated from England on the eve of World War I and soon specialized in the sale of art books.
Business was good and in 1923 he bought a four-story, 1870's brownstone at 794 Lexington.


Forcing Salomon Into Buffett's Conservative Mold
Warren E. Buffett, the vaunted Omaha investor, did not get what he bargained for when his Berkshire Hathaway company bought a $700 million stake in Salomon Brothers four years ago.
Now, as Mr.
Buffett scrambles to save the company, it is becoming clear that Salomon did not get what it expected either.
The new Salomon that Mr.
Buffett is creating is likely to be a very different one from the old one -- smaller, less haughty and less inclined to take risks.
That aversion to risk reflects Mr.
Buffett's style, and may also reflect the nature of his investment, which will remain a safe one unless things get far worse than they are now.


Pop Music as Spice: Just Be Certain To Use With Care
In the past it may have been commonplace to walk out of films humming their theme songs, but these days an audience is more likely to be humming on the way
in
.
Films have learned to rely on pop music for its catchiness while the credits roll, its help in glossing over continuity gaps and its effectiveness as a kind of shorthand.
Music can establish mood or character in the space of only a few bars.
For a film with problems, tacking on a hit record can be the aural equivalent of a Band-Aid, and an easy way out.
In almost any set of movie trailers, there's bound to be one in which a hit song is played so prominently that it becomes the tail wagging the dog.
When the hit is noticeably bigger than the movie -- Prince's "Delirious" or Roy Orbison's "Only the Lonely" -- this tactic seems especially ill-advised.
And when the hit is too familiar ("Born to Be Wild" and "Bad to the Bone" should be off limits for motorcycle movies forever after), it can create an instant sense of deja vu.
But this gambit is becoming more and more popular because it can be so powerful.
In the right directorial hands, pop music becomes as central to a film as any flesh-and-blood character.


Beth Wagshul and Stephen Besen Are to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Ely Wagshul of Meriden, Conn., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Beth A. Wagshul and Stephen M. Besen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Besen of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Miss Wagshul, 30 years old, is the assistant copy chief of advertising for Saks Fifth Avenue.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Mr.
Besen, 33, is a partner in the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges.
He graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received a law degree from Columbia University.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Allendale 244,500
77 Ivers Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old split level; h/w floors, deck, patio, family room; taxes $4,520.
Edison 209,000
60 Livingston Avenue
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old split level; wooded lot, h/w floors, skylight; taxes $4,130.
Hopatcong 68,000
222 Dupont Avenue
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; enclosed porch, new water heater, large lot; taxes $1,284.
Howell 150,000
2 Silversmith Court
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old split level; 2-car garage, patio, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,601.
Iselin 125,000
71 Kennedy Street
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; fenced yard, deck, patio, ceiling fans, full basement; taxes $2,595.
Ramsey 343,000
7 Candlelight Road
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; fireplace, patio, work room; taxes $7,444.
OTHER AREAS Bethpage, L.I. 132,000
1 Perry Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Rye, N.Y. 310,000
60 Fulton Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 21-year-old split-level; eat-in kitchen, deck, family room; taxes $5,606.
Simsbury, Conn. 204,000
1 Lawton Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, large deck, 1 acre; taxes $3,200.


INSIDE
Why U.N. Hit Iraqi Archives
A suspicious lack of records at Iraqi nuclear sites led U.N. inspectors to raid two document storage centers, involved officials say.
Page 18.
Bush's Use of the Veto
Twenty-two sucessful vetoes, and Congress's current efforts to break that streak, underscore a White House strategy of saying no first and negotiating, if at all, later.
Page 14.


Tipping the Scales Toward Success
Craig (Ironhead) Heyward has discarded others' obsession with his losing weight, along with his use of water pills and other unorthodox methods to achieve that goal.
He has decided to ignore the notion that a man of his robust size -- 5 feet 11 inches and somewhere near 285 pounds -- cannot be a productive star running back in the National Football League.
Instead, Heyward is concentrating on a fresh opportunity with the New Orleans Saints to become a featured back.


TOURS
Here is a sampling of tours by bus, van, helicopter and foot that are scheduled this fall in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Walking tours in New York City parks are listed on pages 36 and 37.
Today
LOWER EAST SIDE, Manhattan.
A look at the many varieties of markets on a walking tour of the Lower East Side led by Sherrill Wilson, an archeologist; sponsored by the Museum of the City of New York.
For ages 9 and up. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15 Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)534-1672, extension 206.
PEDDLER'S PACK WALKING TOUR, Lower East Side, Manhattan.
Explores the neighborhood's Jewish heritage; sponsored by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
Noon.
Also Oct. 13 and 27 and Nov. 24, same time.
Fee: $12 ($11 for students and the elderly).
Reservations are encouraged.
Information: (212)431-0233.
FREENWICH VILLAGE, Manhattan.
The neighborhood's architecture, streets and cemeteries will be covered in a walking tour led by Joyce Gold, a professor of Manhattan history at New York University.
Noon.
Fee: $10.
No reservations necessary.
Information: (212)242-5762.
CHINATOWN, Manhattan.
A walking tour with stops at the neighborhood's oldest general stores, led by Peter Kwong, a historian; sponsored by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street. 1 P.M.
Fee: $12 ($11 for students and the elderly).
Reservations are encouraged.
Information: (212)431-0233.
GRAMERCY PARK, Manhattan.
"Writers and Reformers: Literary Civil Servants," a walking tour of the area that housed many noted writers who were also civil servants, including Herman Melville and Washington Irving.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 to 4 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
LADIES' MILE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of New York's Gilded Age shopping district, which thrived during the time between the Civil War and World War I. Covers the area from 15th to 23d Street between Avenue of the Americas and Broadway; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
FIFTH AVENUE, Manhattan.
A walking tour from 42d to 59th Street; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. on Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.
Fee: $12.
No reservations necessary.
Information: (212)989-2456.
JAMAICA BAY BIRDING, Gateway National Recreation Area, Flatlands, Brooklyn.
A walking tour of the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge with Steve Garber, a biologist, who will also present an ecology lecture; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
ROOSEVELT ISLAND WALKING TOUR.
Sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the Tramway, Second Avenue and 59th Street, Manhattan.
Suggested donation: $3; tram fare ($2.80 round-trip), is additional Information: (212)663-2167.
Oct. 5
PARK AVENUE, Manhattan.
A walking tour from 46th to 66th Street, sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
BROWNSTONE BROOKLYN.
A tour by minivan of brownstone neighborhoods, including Brooklyn Heights, Cobble Hill, Carroll Gardens, Park Slope, Clinton Hill and Fort Greene, led by Louis Singer, who has taught Brooklyn history at local colleges, including Brooklyn College. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Also Nov. 23.
Fee: $25.
Reservations required.
Information: (718)875-9084.
BROOKLYN WATERFRONT WALKING TOUR, Sunset Park, Brooklyn.
Includes stops at Owl's Head Park, the 65th Street Railyard and the Brooklyn Army Terminal.
Sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Second Avenue and 65th Street, Brooklyn.
Suggested donation: $3.
Information: (212)663-2167.
Oct. 6
LITTLE ITALY, An Italian-American heritage walking tour in lower Manhattan, sponsored by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street. 1 P.M.
Also on Oct. 13, 20 and 27, same time.
Fee: $12 ($11 for students and the elderly).
Reservations are encouraged.
Information: (212)431-0233.
LOWER EAST SIDE, Manhattan.
"The Streets Where We Lived," a multi-ethnic walking tour in lower Manhattan led by Prof.
James P. Shenton of Columbia University; sponsored by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
Noon.
Also Oct. 20 and Nov. 3, 10 and 17, same time.
Fee: $12 ($11 for students and the elderly).
Reservations are encouraged.
Information: (212)431-0233.
GREENWICH, VILLAGE, Manhattan.
A walking tour that focuses on the history and architecture of historic churches, including St.
Luke's in the Fields, St.
John's Lutheran Church, Our Lady of Pompeii Roman Catholic Church, Judson Memorial Church and Washington Square Unied Methodist Church.
Sponsored by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation and led by Scott Marshall, executive director of the society.
Meets at 12:45 P.M. at St.
Luke's in the Fields, 487 Hudson Street.
Fee: $12.
Reservations required: (212)924-3895.
FIFTH AVENUE AND GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL, Manhattan.
An architectural tour of an area that blended European Neo-Classicism and American practicality to create centers of commerce, culture and transportation that shaped the midtown district of the 1900's; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
TIBECA, Manhattan.
A tour of the surviving architecture of the late 19th century as well as buildings converted into modern residences and artists' lofts, led by Andrew Scott Dolkart, a professor of architectural history at Columbia University; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100 or (212)415-5420.
MURRAY HILL, Manhattan.
Walking tour of the area that includes the residences of J.P.
Morgan and Franklin D. Roosevelt; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meetig place: (212)265-2663.
PELHAMBAY TO FORT SCHUYLER, northeast Bronx.
A walking tour along the Bronx shore tot eh Throgs Neck area.
Sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 11 A.M. at Pelham Bay IRT subway station in the Bronx.
Suggested donation: $3.
Information: (212)663-2167.
SEPHARDIC FLATBUSH, Brooklyn.
A visit to one of the largest Syrian-Jewish communities in the United States; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 10 A.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
Oct. 12
GREENWICH VILLAGE, Manhattan.
A two-hour walking tour of Greenwich Village and the Washington Square Park area, including the Salmagundi mansion, town houses, jazz clubs and the block of Macdougal-Sullivan Gardens; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and Eighth Street.
Also Nov. 9, same time and place.
Fee: $12.
Reservations required.
Information: (212)989-2456.
FLATBUSH, Brooklyn.
A tour by mini-van includes a visit to the Wyckoff House, one of the oldest farmhouses in America, a 17th-century Dutch Reformed Church, Victorian mansions, the Vitagraph film studio and the former homes of Mary Pickford, Gilda Grey and the Barrymores, led by Louis Singer. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Also Nov. 20, same time.
Fee: $25.
Reservations required.
Information (718)875-9084.
Oct. 13
LOWER EAST SIDE WALKING TOUR, Manhattan.
Led by Joyce Gold, professor of Manhattan history at New York University.
Meets at noon at Straus Square (the intersection of Canal, Essex and Rutgers Streets and East Broadway).
Also Nov. 10, same time and place.
Fee: $10.
Information (212)242-5762.
HISTORIC NEW YORK: CITY HALL TO THE BATTERY, Manhattan.
A two-hour of lower Manhattan, passing historic sites including City Hall, St.
Paul's Chapel, Trinity Church, Federal Hall and the Merchant's Exchange; sponsored by Citywalks. 1 P.M.
Also Dec. 1, same place and time.
Fee: $12.
Reservations required.
Information: (212)9892456.
DOWNTOWN NEW YORK: BEAUX-ARTS TO POST-MODERN, Manhattan.
An architectural walking tour of the four generations of skyscrapers in Lower Manhattan: Beaux-Arts, Art Deco, modern and post-modern; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Led by Barry Lewis, an architectural historian. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
RADICAL WALKING TOUR, Manhattan.
Tour of Greenwich Village and lower Manhattan from a Marxist, anarchist perspective.
Sites include Tompkins Square Park, Cooper Union and Colonnade Row, "where the richest of the rich lived ina arow of houses built by prison labor," according to Bruce Kayton, an amateur tour guide who will lead the walk.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Astor Place at the large black cube sculpture.
Fee: $6.
Information: (212)941-0332.
QUEENS BEACH WALK, along the beach from Jacob Riis Park to Breezy Point; sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 10 A.M. by the token booth at the Flatbush Avenue station on the IRT No.2 or No. 5 line in Brooklyn.
Donations: $3.
Information: (212)663-2167.
GOVERNORS ISLAND.
A ferry trip to and walking tour ont he landmark island, formerly a military base and now headquarters of the United States Coast Guard.
Led by Justin Ferate, an architectural historian; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 10:45 P.M.
Fee: $25.
Reservations required.
Information: (212)996-1100.
JAMAICA WILDLIFE REFUGE, Cross Bay Boulevard, Rockaway, Queens.
A walk around West Pond and East Pond; sponsored by the New York-North Jersey cahpter of the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Take a lunch, a bird book and binoculars.
Meets at 11:45 A.M. at the Refuge Administration Building.
Fee: $15, including admission to all chapter activities this fall.
Information: (212)986-1430.
JAMAICA BAY NATURE WALK, Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge, Cross Bay Boulevard, Rockaway, Queens.
A tour through pine and holly groves, around a freshwater pond and along the shoreline of Jamaica Bay, with an emphasis on the history and management of the 9,155-acre wildlife oasis; sponsored by the National Park Service, Gateway National Recreation Area. 1 P.M.
Also Nov. 9, same time.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718)338-3829.
Oct. 16
GRACIE MANSION AND ENVIRONS, Manhattan.
A walking tour of Gracie Mansion, home to Mayor David N. Dinkins and his predecessors, led by Justin Ferate, an architectural historian; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 9:45 A.M.
Also Nov. 6, same time.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
Oct. 19
WEST VILLAGE, Manhattan.
A tour of the streets along the Hudson River; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the corner of Seventh Avenue South and Christopher Street at the General Nurtition Center, 116 Seventh Avenue South.
Also Nov. 16, same place and time.
Fee: $12.
Information (212)989-2456.
QUEENS BIRD MIGRATION WALK, Breezy Point, Fort Tilden, Rockaway Beach, Queens.
A tour of the maritime forest and ocean beach habitats of a variety of migratory birds, led by National Park Service rangers. 9:30 A.M.
Take binoculars.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718)474-4600.
NEW YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN TOUR, Southern Boulevard and 200th Street, Moshaolu, the Bronx.
A walk through the Rock Gardens, the Conservatory and the wooded areas overlooking a Bronx River waterfall; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club. 11 A.M.
Fee: $15, including admissio to all events of New York-North Jersey Chapter this fall.
Information: (212)986-1430.
WATERFRONT BROOKLYN.
Tour by minivan of Sunset Park, Bay Ridge, Sea Gate, Coney Island, Brighton Beach and sheepshead Bay, led by Louis Singer. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Also Dec. 7, same time.
Admission: $25.
Information (718)875-9084.
Oct. 20
PARK ROW EXTRA, A walking through the lower Manhattan streets once traveled by Ben Franklin, Currier and Ives, Horace Greeley, Willian Randolph Hearst and the Pulitzers, led by Marvin Gelfand, a historian; sponosred by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
LOWER EAST SIDE, Manhattan.
Walking tour of the Culridge Street Synogogue, Orchard Street, and the Henry Street Settlement; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Chatham Square, east Broadway and Oliver Street, in front of the Asia Bank.
Also Nov. 17, same time and place.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212)989-2456.
CHELSEA WALKING TOUR, Manhattan.
A tour of the area, including stops at the General Theological Seminary, the site of the former Grand Opera House, the buildings that housed 19th-century department stores that still stand, the Chelsea Hotel and the current national headquarters of the Communist Party.
Led by Joyce Gold, professor of Manhattan history at New York University.
Meets at noon at General Theological Seminary, Ninth Avenue and 21st Street.
Fee: $10.
Information (212)242-5762.
TURTLE BAY, Manhattan.
A Walking tour of the East Side neighborhood where Katharine Hepburn and Stephen Sondheim reside; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
QUEENS HAWK WALK, Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge, Cross Bay Boulevard, Rockaway, Queens.
A tour in the salt marshes led by National Park Service Rangers, in search of 10 species of hawk commonly seen during their fall migration; sponsored by the Gateway National Recreation Area. 10 A.M.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718)338-3829.
ROOSEVELT ISLAND.
A walking tour of the community of 7,000 residents living a stone's throw from Manhattan; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5, plus tram fare ($2.80 round-trip).
Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
ROOSEVELT ISLAND: PLANNING IN THE 20TH CENTURY.
An architectural tour of Roosevelt Island, with discussion of its planning concepts; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15 plus tram fare ($2.80 round-trip).
Reservations required.
Information meeting place: (212)996-1100.
Oct. 26
GREENWICH VILLAGE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the neighborhood where Thomas Wolfe and John Barrymore once lived; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring.
Meets at 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
CHELSEA, Manhattan.
A walking tour of Chelsea Square, the General Theological Seminary, town houses and the Chelsea Hotel; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Seventh Avenue and 23d Street.
Fee: $12.
Information (212)989-2456.
ETHNIC BROOKLYN, a tour by mini-van through neighborhoods with Polish, Russian German, black, Scandinavian and Italian populations, led by Louis Singer. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Also Dec. 14, same times.
Fee: $25.
Information: (718)875-9084.
RIVERDALE FOLIAGE WALK, Wave Hill, Riverdale, the Bronx.
A tour to learn how to identify dogwoods, sugar maples, oaks and black birches by their foliage.
Meets at 1 P.M. at West 249th Street and Independence Avenue.
Free with weekend admission to the grounds of $4 ($2 for students and the elderly; children under 6, free).
Information: (212)549-3200.
QUEENS FOLIAGE WALK, Breezy Point, Fort Tilden, Rockaway Beach, Queens.
A tour led by National Park Service rangers of the foliage and fruits found along the trails of Fort Tilden's maritime forest. 2 P.M.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718)474-4600.
Oct. 27
DOWNTOWN HAUNTS, Manhattan.
A walking tour of graveyards and two recent archeological excavations - the city's first burial grounds for blacks and the notorious Five Points neighborhood; sponsored by the Museum of the city of New York. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)534-1672.
CITY HALL TO BATTERY PARK, Manhattan.
A walking tour from City Hall south to Battery Park, east to South Street Seaport and ending in Chinatown; sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at noon at City Hall.
Donation: $3.
Information: (212)663-2167.
HOUSTON STREET, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the street that borders SoHo, Greenwich Village and the Lower East Side and is home to Picasso sculptures, the Junk Art Garden, the Yonah Schimmel Knishery and the Puck Building.
Led by Joyce Mendelsohn, an urban historian; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 11 A.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
WEST OF DOWNTOWN: TRIBECA TO BATTERY PARK CITY, Manhattan.
A two-hour walking tour of TriBeCa and downtown, with stops at the World Trade Center and Battery Park City; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Broadway and Chambers Street.
Fee: $12.
Information (212)996-1100.
MIDTOWN NEW YORK AND ROCKEFELLER CENTER.
An architectural walking tour of Rockefeller Center and the Seagram Building, Citicorp Center and the Waldorf-Astoria; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
DINER DISTRICT, Manhattan.
A Walking tour of the oldest, largest, trendiest and most authentic diners on Manhattan's West Side, from 21st to 58th Street, led by Claude Solnick, a freelance journalist; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 10 A.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
GREEN-WOOD CEMETERY WALKING TOUR, Brooklyn.
A guided tour of Brooklyn's famous 19th-century cemetery, known for its ornate furnerary monuments and the notable people who are buried there, including the architects Stanford White and Richard Upjohn; Louis Comfort Tiffany, Horace Greeley, Peter Cooper and Leonard Bernstein.
Organized by the continuing education program at Cooper Union.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the main gate of Green-Wood Cemetery, 25th Street and Fifth Avenue.
Price: $15.
Information: (212)353-4195.
FLUSHING FOLIAGE, Queens.
A walking tour of the area, one of the country's commercial gardening centers, and site of one of the widest varieties of trees in North America; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the corner of Main Street and roosevelt Avenue, Flushing.
Take a lunch.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall activities sponsored by the new York-North Jersey chapter of the club.
Information: (212)986-1430.
Nov. 1
FASHION INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY DESIGN LABORATORY, Manhattan.
A tour of the private collections of costumes, accessories and textiles, dating from the 17th century; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Nov. 1 at 2 P.M.
Fee: $20.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
Nov. 2
EAST VILLAGE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the ethnically diverse area, which includes a large Ukrainian population; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
JEWISH BROOKLYN, a tour by mini-van of historic synagogues, the Old Lower East Side, the Hasidic communities and a variety of religious and cultural sights, led by Louis Singer. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $25.
Also Dec 21, same time.
Information: (718)875-9084.
Nov. 3
LOWER EAST SIDE, Manhattan.
An architectural walking tour; Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street. 1 P.M.
Also Nov. 10, same time.
Reservations required.
Admission: $12 ($11 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212)431-0233.
EDITH WHARTON'S NEW YORK, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the Gramercy Park and Madison Square areas of Manhattan, where the writer was born; includes the church where she was married and the stores, streets and squares that were part of her life.
Led by Joyce Mendelsohn, an urban historian; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 11 A.M.
Admission: $16.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
GRAMERCY PARK, Manhattan.
A walking tour of this historic neighborhood, including the 19th-century homes of Peter Cooper, Edwin Booth and Stanford White, the Players' Club, the Gramercy Park Hotel, Lexington Avenue and Gramercy Park North.
Led by Joyce Gold, professor of Manhattan history at New York University.
Noon.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212)242-5762.
LADIES' MILE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of lower Manhattan streets where the great dipartment stores of a century ago were located; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club. 10:3 A.M.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall activities of the New York-North Jersey chapter of the club.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
GREAT HOUSES OF ASTORIA, QUEENS.
A walking tour of the little-known great houses in Astoria, led by Charles Nicholas, an amateur tour guide; sponsored by Friends of Central Park.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the 59th Street and Lexington Avenue subway station in Manhattan, ont he upper level near the No. 6 uptown local train, by the first car.
Contribution: $1, to benefit the Camprdown Fund for tree care in historic parks.
Information: (212) 473-6283.
JAMAICA BAY NATURE WALK, Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge, Cross Bay Boulevard, Rockaway, Queens.
A hike along the refuge trails, with speciala ttention to the area's preparation for winter; sponsored by the National Park Service, Gateway National Recreation Area. 1 P.M.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718)338-3829.
Nov. 9
RADICAL WALKING TOUR, Manhattan.
Tour of Washington Square Park area from a Marxist, anarchist perspective, led by Bruce Kayton.
Sites include Emma Goldman's former residence, the site of the triangle Shirtwaist Company fire of 1911, the house where John Reed wrote "Ten Days That Shook the World," and the Women's House of Detention.
Meets at 1 P.M. under the Washington Square arch.
Fee: $6.
Information: (212)941-0332.
TIFFANY'S BROOKLYN.
A tour by mini-van of Brooklyn sites that contain Tiffany pieces, including the Lafayette Presbyterian Church, home of the world's largest Louis Comfort Tiffany stained-glass window collection.
Led by Louis Singer. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Fee: $25.
Information. (718)875-9084.
Nov. 10
DEAD HORSE BAY, Floyd Bennett Field, Exit 11, south of the Belt Parkway, Flatbush Avenue, Flatlands, Brooklyn.
A walking tour led by National Park Service rangers will explore the natural and historic elements of this area on the western edge of Floyd Bennett Field. 10 A.M.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information (718)338-7441.
EAST VILLAGE WALKING TOUR, Manhattan.
A tour of St.
Mark's-in-the-Bowery, an 18th-century church; the Yiddish Theater and Tompkins Square Park, led by Joyce Gold, professor of Manhattan history at New York Unversity.
Meets at noon at the church, 10th Street and Second Avenue.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212)242-5762.
LOWER EAST SIDE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the historic neighborhood, sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
Nov. 16
ASTORIA, QUEENS.
A walking tour of the world's largest Greek city outside Athens; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 1 P.M.
Fee: $5 plus subway fare.
Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
NOSHING IN LOWER MANHATTAN.
A food-tasting and shopping tour by mini-van of a wide variety of ethnic cuisines on the Lower East Side, led by Louis Singer. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Fee: $25.
Information: (718)875-9084.
TOUR THE TIP OF QUEENS, Fort Tilden, Rockaway Beach, Queens.
A walking tour of the westernmost point of the Rockaway Peninsula, which provides a critical habitat for a variety of wildlife, with a view of the Atlantic Ocean, Jamaica Bay and acres of rolling dunes; sponsored by the National Park Service. 10 A.M.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718)474-4600.
Nov. 17
CITY WALK ON THE WEST SIDE, Manhattan.
A walk that focuses on the history of the West Side; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Columbus Circle in front of the Paramount Building.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall activities of the New York-North Jersey chapter.
Information: (212)986-1430.
ELLIS ISLAND, walking tour led by Joyce Gold, a professor of Manhattan history at New York University.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. at the flagpole in Peter Minuit Plaza, opposite the Staten Island ferry terminal, Manhattan.
Fee: $18, including entry to Ellis Island.
Participants should mail prepayment to Joyce Gold, 141 West 17th Street, New York, N.Y., 10011.
Information: (212)242-5762.
JEWISH WILLIAMSBURG, Brooklyn.
A visit to the synagogues and other institutions of the Satmars, a Hasidic sect, led by David Edelstein, an urban affairs specialist; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 11 A.M.
Fee: $25.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
WRITERS' UPPER WEST SIDE, Manhattan.
Works by Edgar Allan Poe, Saul Bellow, Anais Nin, Dorothy Parker, Elizabeth Hardwick, Herman Wouk and others will be read as the tour passes the streets where they lived.
Led by Marvin Gelfand; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100 or (212)415-5420.
CITY ISLAND AND ORCHARD BEACH, the Bronx.
A seven-mile walk, sponsored by shorewalkers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the Pelham Bay Park IRT subway terminal on the IRT subway line in the Bronx.
Donation: $3.
Information: (212)663-2167.
Nov. 23
CHINATOWN AND LITTLE ITALY, Manhattan.
Sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Mott Street and the Bowery.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212)989-2456.
Nov. 24
GRAMERCY PARK, Manhattan.
A walking tour of one of New York's most noted residential communities; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
PARK AVENUE, Manhattan.
A walking tour from 42d to 57th Street, with a stop at Grand Central Terminal; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Park Avenue and 42d Street, southeast corner.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212)989-2456.
Nov. 30
GREENWICH VILLAGE, Manhattan.
Walking tour of Washington Square Park, the Salmagundi mansion, St.
Luke's Church, New York University and town houses; sponsored by Citywalks.
Meets at 1 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and Eighth Street.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212)989-2456.
WALK OFF THE TURKEY.
A 13-mile tour along the Hudson River from South Ferry to the Little Red Lighthouse under the George Washington Bridge; sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. in front of the Staten Island Ferry terminal.
Donation: $5.
Information: (212)663-2167.
Dec. 7
BROOKLYN CIRCULAR WALK, Brooklyn.
A Strenuous 14-mile walk from Prospect Park to Coney Island and back; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 9 A.M. under the arch at Grand Army Plaza, Prospect Park, Park Slope.
Take alunch.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall activities of the New York-North Jersey chapter of the club.
Information: (212)986-1430.
MIDTOWN WEST SIDE, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the revitalized area formerly known as Hell's Kitchen; sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring. 3 P.M.
Fee: $5 Reservations and meeting place: (212)265-2663.
Dec. 15
THE CHELSEA HOTEL, Manhattan.
A tour of a Victorian Neo-Gothic hotel that has been a sanctuary for the likes of Mark Twain, Willem de Kooning, Virgil Thomson, Arthur Miller and Thomas Wolfe, with a visit to some artists' studios.
Led by Jerry Weinstein, assistant manager of the hotel; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $30.
Information and meeting place: (212)996-1100.
All Season
GRAY LINE BUS TOURS, 900 Eighth Avenue, at 53d Street, Manhattan.
Bus tours of New York City, from Harlem to Battery Park, including such sights as Lincoln Center, Central Park, Striver's Row, the Apollo Theater and the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Other tours go to the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island.
Trips last two to eight hours.
Tickets: $14.75 to $56.75.
Information: (212)397-2600.
HISTORIC GOSPEL TOUR, Manhattan.
A three-hour bus tour, featuring a gospel church service, stops at the Apollo Theater, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, and Sugar Hill; sponsored by Harlem Renaisance Tours.
Proper dress for church service recommended.
Bus leaves the Gray Line Terminal at 54th Street and Eighth Avenue, Manhattan every Sunday at 10 A.M.
Fee: $31.
No reservations necessary.
Information: (212)772-9634.
HARLEN ON SUNDAY, Manhattan.
Sponsored by Harlem Spirituals, the tour includes a church service with music, a stop at a historic house and a walk through the Sugar Hill area. 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. every Sunday.
Fee: $27.
Proper dress for church service required.
Reservations required.
Information: (212)757-0425.
ISLAND HELICOPTER, at the heliport at 34th Street and the East River, Manhattan Seven-to 35-mile helicopter tours of Manhattan leave continuously from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M. everyday.
Tickets range from $41 to $94, depending on the flight, and are sold at hotels and sightseeing bureaus; tickets purchased at the heliport cost $5 extra.
No reservations necessary.
Information: (212)683-4575.
LIBERTY HELICOPTER TOURS, West 30th Street and 12th Avenue, Manhattan.
Tours above Manhattan's skyscrapers, other sights in and around Manhattan, or the Statue of Liberty run daily from 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. except Christmas.
Flights depart whenever at least three passengers are ready to go.
Reservations are not necessary but are recommended with groups of 10 or more.
Rides range from $55 to $99 a person.
Information: (212)629-5370.
GOSPEL ON WEEKDAY, Harlem, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the Sugar Hill area, past the houses of noted musicians, with stops at the Apollo Theater, the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, and a church for a midweek service with gospel music; sponsored by Harlem Spirituals. 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. every Wednesday.
Admission: $30.
Reservations required.
Information: (212)757-0425.
HISTORIC HARLEM, Manhattan.
A four-hour bus tour with stops at the Apollo Theater, Striver's Row, City College and Sugar Hill; sponsored by Harlem Renaissance Tours.
Bus departs from the Gray Line Terminal at 54th Street and Eighth Avenue. meets at noon every Wednesday and Friday.
Fee: $31, including lunch.
No reservations necessary.
Information: (212)772-9634.
SOUL FOOD AND JAZZ, Harlem, Manhattan.
An evening tour contrasting Harlem's "valley"and "hill," with dinner and music at a cabaret; sponsored by Harlem Spirituals. 7 P.M. to midnight every Thursday through Saturday.
Admission: $65.
Reservations required.
Information: (212)757-0425.
GRAND CENTRAL AREA, Manhattan.
A 90-minute walking tour covering the architecture and history of the Grand Central Terminal area, led by Justin Ferate, a historian; sponsored by the Grand Central Partnership.
Meets at 12:30 P.M. in front of the Philip Morris Building, Park Avenue and 42d Street, every Friday, weather permitting.
Free.
Information: (212)986-9217.


'Standing Up to Ezra Pound'
To the Editor:
I found Richard Gillman's essay yet another sad recounting of trivia, and irrelevant to the basic issue -- that is, Pound's greatness.


The Season Sets a Brisk Pace: France; Paris stages major exhibitions of Munch, Ernst and others
Paris, which considers itself the world's culture capital, is playing host to four major art exhibitions this fall.
At the Musee d'Orsay (1 Rue de Bellechasse; 40.49.48.14), "Edvard Munch and France," organized with the Munch Museum in Oslo, shows how the Norwegian painter was influenced by Impressionism, Post-Impressionism and Symbolism.
The show, which runs from Sept. 26 to Jan. 5, also includes works by Van Gogh, Gauguin, Monet and Toulouse-Lautrec.


And Us Without Our Spoons
THE HUMAN BLUEPRINT
The Race to Unlock the Secrets of Our Genetic Script.
By Robert Shapiro.
Illustrated. 412 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


Traffic Alert
Gracie Square Art Show: East End Avenue between 84th and 88th Streets will be closed today from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Park Avenue South Street Fair: Park Avenue South between 17th and 23d Streets will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Dr. Karen S. Place Marries Andrew C. Carlson
Dr.
Karen S. Place, a research fellow at the Yale University Child Study Center in New Haven, Conn., was married in Hartford yesterday to Andrew C. Carlson, a doctoral student in clinical psychology at Antioch University in Keene, N.H.
The Rev.
Hope Adams officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from the University of South Florida.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Wilfred E. Krell of Southbury, Conn., and Ransom Y. Place of Port Chester, N.Y.
Mr.
Carlson, 29, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received a master's degree from the Yale Divinity School.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles P. Carlson Jr. of Shrewsbury, Mass.


At Mineola's Crossings, It's Stop, Look and Wait
THERE is no disagreement over the need to remove the dangerous railroad crossings from the Island's busiest traffic corridor, in Mineola.
But how to accomplish the goal is setting off a dispute.
A plan by the State Transportation Department to build road bridges up to 20 feet over streets to bypass the railroad crossings outrages residents and merchants, who successfully opposed a similar plan years ago.
The critics favor depressing the tracks below street level.


Cleveland Fans Can Take A Loss
There were rows and rows of empty seats today at Cleveland Stadium when the Yankees and Indians played.
Just as there were Friday night.
If you needed tickets for 60,000 or so intimate friends, no problem.
There was room.
Bad baseball does not sell well in any city.
Lose 100 games three times in seven seasons as the Indians have and people will find something else to do on Friday night.
Anyone for a movie?
How about cheering on the local boys in a high school football game?


Himalayas
To the Editor: In addition to private treks booked in Katmandu such as the one Marcia Lieberman took ("A Trek of One's Own," July 28), there is another option that is also cheaper than booking from the United States.
Group treks are available from some of the same Nepali trekking agencies that American adventure-travel companies use.
These also also provide custom trekking facilities.
The trip leader will be the native Nepali sirdar and you should lose nothing and gain significant savings.
They are unlikely to have a Western physician in the group, but then you take your chances with an adventure travel company trek having one either.


A Banner Year for Blue Crabs From the Hudson River
WHEN the blue crabs run in the Hudson, crabbers stalk this delectable crustacean from boats, piers and docks.
Casting out their crab pots, they hope to pull in a bounty, and this season they did just that.
"This has been a banner year for crabs. I don't think I've ever seen so many big ones or so many little ones," said Christopher Letts, a former commercial fisherman and educator who runs crab festivals up and down the estuary as part of the educational program for the Hudson River Foundation.


Taiwan's Chances Rising for World Trade Status
After years of looking the other way, fearful of doing something that might anger mainland China, the United States and other countries may finally be moving to squeeze Taiwan into the international trading regimen.
Although Taiwan is the 13th-largest trading nation in the world, it is not a member of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the organization that governs trade among more than 100 countries.
China says Taiwan should be allowed to enter GATT only after it does.
Until now, industrial countries have not been willing to risk antagonizing Beijing, but President Bush said in July that he would work for Taiwan's admission.


BUSH'S ARMS PLAN GETS EXPERTS' NOD
President Bush's proposals to cut America's nuclear arsenal to reflect a new world order drew generally favorable reviews from experts on nuclear arms control yesterday, but some said the reductions did not go far enough and others called them something of a gamble in a still-unfolding global picture.
Some experts noted that the United States has been under pressure to get its nuclear weapons out of Europe and to cut military spending, and they contended that the President was merely bowing to the inevitable in unilaterally removing short-range nuclear weapons from American bases and vessels around the world.


Himalayas
To the Editor:
I have made six treks in Nepal.
After the first, with a U.S.-based company.
I discovered Asian Trekking in Katmandu.
Although their catalogue highlights groups treks, the owners, Ang Tshering Sherpa and his Belgian wife, Jo, arrange programs for every interest from international climbing expeditions to a high trek for me alone, a 63-year-old housewife.
I find their prices lower than those of U.S. companies.
Their address is: Asian Trekking, Post Office Box 3022.
Keshar Mahal, Thamel, Katmandu, Nepal.
VIRGINIA C. ALLEN Island Park, L.I.


Taiwan's Art Treasures Leave Fortress and Venture Abroad
When he was a young apprentice 60 years ago at the Forbidden City in Beijing, Na Chih-liang expected to polish and maintain the artistic treasures.
Instead, he found himself packing them up.
For the next 18 years, Mr.
Na took part in a twisted journey that brought the Imperial collection from China's Forbidden City, where emperors, their wives and concubines once drank from the prized jade cups and porcelain bowls, to the island of Taiwan.
The operation ultimately enabled the fleeing Nationalist Government to establish what is virtually the Louvre of Asia, with some of the most brilliant works of Chinese art, in Taipei.


Sports of The Times; For Ryder Cup Teams, It's Golf on the Edge
ON the final hole of the final match in the 1969 Ryder Cup, Jack Nicklaus holed a putt that assured the United States of a 14-14 tie, enough to retain the trophy.
But if Tony Jacklin were to miss a putt of less than three feet, the Americans would win outright, 14 1/2 points to 13 1/2.
With a smile, Nicklaus picked up Jacklin's marker.
"I don't think you would have missed that," the Golden Bear said, shaking hands, "but I would never give you the opportunity."


For a Touch of Flair, With a Nip in the Air
OBVIOUSLY, you're going to need more than fishnets and black leather to get through this fall season.
No problem.
Fashion collections from both sides of the Atlantic are especially strong and realistic for fall, with both a heightened femininity and a harder edge that mirror the contemporary woman.
Traditional skirted suits are brassier, more aggressive, as in the designs of Gemma Kahng, Isani and others.
The tailored blazer, as much a staple of women's wardrobes as of men's, has evolved to the point where some are designed to go over leggings.
The futuristic jackets of Claude Montana, cut asymeterically with zippers everywhere, bring the "Star Trek" look to La Cirque.
To be completely fashionable is out of the question. (The style are too eclectic, the demands on the pocketbook too intense.) But one or two fabulous things to update one's wardrobe seems only reasonable, especially when is such a dazzling field from which to chose.


Jill Van Riper, Dietitian, Weds
Jill Margaret Van Riper, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Van Riper of Saddle River, N.J., was married yesterday to Scott Pearson Brown, a son of Mrs.
Robert Cummings of Little Compton, R.I., and the late James Potter Brown Jr.
The Rev.
Beverly Edwards performed the ceremony at the United Congregational Church in Little Compton.
Mrs.
Brown, 30 years old, is a dietitian and an owner of Healthy Habits, a nutrition consulting concern in Ipswich, Mass.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master of science degree from Boston University.
Her father owns a farm in Suffern, N.Y.


River Phoenix Is Not Just The Boy Next Door
In "My Own Private Idaho," River Phoenix plays the boy next door, except that next door is a ghetto where street youths sleep on the sidewalk.
As Mike Waters, a narcoleptic teen-age hustler, Mr.
Phoenix's closest approximation to home is a ransacked, burned-out hotel; his surrogate family is a rickety support system of street friends.
His knowledge of his real home consists of dim memories of his mother, a house whose color he can't remember, and a brother who lives somewhere in Idaho.
In the film, which was shown at the New York Film Festival and opens today in New York and nationally Oct. 18, Mr.
Phoenix wears no makeup, and there's a even pimple or two on his cheek.
His clothes are seedy, and his dirty-brown hair continually disheveled.
In other words, he strips Mike of none of his grime in a performance that earned him the best-actor prize at this month's Venice Film Festival.


Gail McGovern Marries Dr. Frank Cammisa Jr.
Gail Ann McGovern, a model for the Ford Modeling Agency, and Dr.
Frank P. Cammisa Jr., an assistant professor of surgery at the Cornell University Medical College, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Salvatore Matarazzo officiated at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Cammisa, a graduate of New Hampshire College and Salem State College, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald A. McGovern of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
Dr.
Cammisa graduated summa cum laude from Tufts University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. from Columbia University.
He is the son of Mrs.
Frank P. Cammisa of Waterbury, Conn., and the late Dr.
Cammisa.


Alison Ball Is Wed
Alison Pettengill Ball, a daughter of Mrs.
J.
Thomas Cannon of Darien, Conn., and the late Ronald F. Ball, was married yesterday to Leslie S. Hollo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie Hollo of the Bronx.
The Rev.
Joseph Juracek officiated at St.
Stephen of Hungary Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Hollo, 28 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Mr.
Hollo, 28, is a cum laude graduate of Columbia University, where he also received a law degree.
He is an associate in New York for the Washington law firm of Dow, Lohnes &amp; Albertson.


Dr. Kitty Brown Wed in Jersey
Dr.
Katherine Olivia Brown, a resident in internal medicine at the Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeffrey Scott Duchin, an assistant professor of medicine at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
The wedding took place at the home of the bride's parents in Princeton, N.J.
Judge Lawrence Stamelman of New Jersey Superior Court officiated.
Dr.
Brown, 34 years old, is known as Kitty and is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Cornell University and of the University of Pennsylvania Medical School.
She is the daughter of Clarence Brown, a professor of comparative literature at Princeton University, and Jacqueline Brown, the director of information services at Princeton.


Tyson Can Wait
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson's column tries to compare Muhammad Ali's dispute with the draft board to Tyson's indictment on a rape charge.
Comparing Ali's circumstances to Tyson's situation is inappropriate and insensitive.
Tyson is accused of a violent, harmful crime that damages the victim for life, whereas Ali's crime, if any, involved making a political statement that injured no one.
To equate the two shows a blatant misunderstanding about the serious nature of a rape charge.


Trust Without Verifying
With his new arms control initiative, President Bush has done more than bring the United States nuclear arsenal more in line with the new world realities.
He has thrown out the book on arms control.
Without any negotiation with the Soviet Union, under Mr.
Bush's plan, 1,300 ground-based American artillery shells and 850 short-range ballistic missile warheads will be withdrawn and destroyed.
About 500 nuclear weapons will be removed from ships and submarines at sea.


Ellen C. Oler Weds Jeremy Epstein
Ellen Curtis Oler, the daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Clarke K. Oler of Pasadena, Calif., was married yesterday to Jeremy Ethan Epstein, a son of Mrs.
Michael Lee of New York and Mike Epstein of Brooklyn.
The father of the bride and the Rev.
John Moody, both Episcopal priests, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel in New York.
Mrs.
Epstein, who is 39 years old and is keeping her name professionally, is a psychotherapist in Brooklyn and Manhattan.
She graduated from the University of Colorado, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in social work from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father, who retired last year as the senior pastoral minister at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Pasadena, is now in private psychotherapy practice there.
Her mother, Wendy Salmond Oler, was formerly head of the middle school at the Spence School in New York.


Tamara Gorgas, Marketer, Weds
Tamara Margaret Gorgas, a daughter of Carol Gorgas Strandberg of Wilton, Conn., and E. William Gorgas of Hudson, Ohio, was married yesterday to Olivier Pacton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Pacton of Angouleme, France.
The Rev.
Brenda Husson performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Ms.
Gorgas Pacton, 31 years old, is to be the marketing director for Carr Futures, a division of the Banque Indosuez, in London.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree from the London School of Economics and Political Science.
Her father is a sales manager for the Kimberly-Clark Corporation in Hudson and her mother is a psychotherapist in Norwalk, Conn.


Bosworth Is Suing the Seahawks
The way BRIAN BOSWORTH is telling it, what persuaded him to sign a 10-year contract with the Seattle Seahawks in 1987 wasn't just the $11 million the contract would pay him, but the team's assurances that it would also maintain large policies to insure him in the event of injury.
Sure enough, the linebacker was injured, and after missing parts of three seasons, failed his training-camp physical last year.


POSTINGS: Volunteer Effort; Day Care at Kennedy
For the last few years many of the companies that do business at John F. Kennedy International Airport in Queens have been passing the hat to raise funds for a day-care center there.
With some $870,000 raised so far by a consortium of airport tenants, a January construction start of JFKids Port, as the center will be called, has been planned.
JFKids Port Inc., the nonprofit corporation building the center, expects the total cost to be about $2.7 million.


Everyone Has Advice for Murphy, Especially Real-Life TV Journalists
At the start of the fall season, "Murphy Brown" catapulted to the top of the ratings when the lead character, played by Candice Bergen, faced an unexpected pregnancy.
But the series is noteworthy for more than its 35 share (the percentage of sets tuned to the program): Lucy Ricardo, after all, grabbed a 70share nearly 40 years ago when she announced her pregnancy in the same CBS time slot, Mondays at 9 P.M.
Murphy is the star anchor of the fictional investigative news program "F.Y.I.," 42 and unmarried.
Her predicament, coming after several pregnancies among high-profile real-life network newswomen, is only one of the latest examples of the ways in which the series blurs the lines between real and fictional characters.
Indeed, when one of Murphy's colleagues, Jim Dial, played by Charles Kimbrough, learns of Murphy's plan to have her baby and continue working during her pregnancy, he exclaims: "Oh, good Lord! This could be the worst decision anyone's made in television since Rhoda's wedding."


From Ballybeg to Broadway
LATE ON A Summer's evening in London in 1987, Brian Friel walked along the Thames Embankment with Tom Kilroy.
The two playwrights had just left Britain's National Theater, where they had seen Friel's dramatization of Turgenev's "Fathers and Sons." As they passed homeless men and women curled up in doorways and trash-filled alleys, the writers speculated about the lives of these unfortunate people.
Friel said he had two maiden aunts who ended up like that -- destitute and abandoned in London.
Just before World War II, they had suddenly left the family home in the tiny village of Glenties in Ireland, and never returned.
Caught up by the story, Kilroy suggested Friel write a play about it.
Back in Ireland, Friel took his friend's advice.
It was in fact an idea that had been lodged deep in his memory bank -- his remembrances of childhood summers spent with his mother and her sisters at his grandparents' house.
For several years he had been trying to overcome a severe case of writer's block, but as he began to write, the play flowed freely.
As "Dancing at Lughnasa" (pronounced LOO-na-sa, as in lunacy) evolved, it became the story of five sisters, all of them unmarried and living together, each stranded with an unrealized dream.
The play is dedicated "in memory of those five brave Glenties women," and "out of piety" for his mother and her sisters, each of the characters bears the first name of the real-life model on which she is based.


SIGNIFICANT OTHER
The honest emotion in Rick Weiss's About Men article "Significant Other" (Sept. 1) stirred me.
Weiss gently disclosed the secret most of us share: That we can, indeed, care for someone deeply and, at the same time, experience the pain of those "taboo" feelings of jealousy, envy, anger, etc.
If more of us would accept this universal truth as normal, we might have better and more lasting relationships.
Instead, we go through guilt and denial or torment ourselves with the premise of "perfection" -- the idea that we cannot really love someone if we also have negative feelings about her or him.
MYRNA I. MUNOZ
Dover, Del.


Juliana Chen Weds
Juliana Chen, an assistant actuary for William M. Mercer, benefit and compensation consultants, and Robert Bass, the music director of the Collegiate Chorale, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Lotos Club in New York.
Roger Schmidt, president of the Olga Forrai Foundation in New York, officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Chen of Wilmington, Del.
Mr.
Bass, 38, is a graduate of the Mannes College of Music.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Bass of New York.


The Calculator Crutch
This year, for the first time, calculators are required for at least part of the 11th-grade mathematics Regents exam in New York State.
Also, there is now a mathematics achievement test for college in which calculators are mandatory by design: that's the point of the exam.
All this is happening just when we thought it was safe to go back into the classroom and actually teach math.
The calculator was meant to make computation more convenient for people who already knew about numbers.
Now, it threatens to crash the intellectual order, assuming the role of an end, when it is only a means.


PARTY PLAYERS
Here and on the following two pages, seven women who are experts in styling party clothes prance for the camera in their own designs.
The looks may vary from cutesy to sexy to sophisticated, but the prices are all fairly reasonable given the marketplace today.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
GUPPIES AND GOLDFISH
Fish hobbyists will have plenty to look at and buy at a show of the Exotic Fish Society of Fairfield on Saturday and Sunday from 1 to 6 P.M. in the Westport Nature Center, 10 Woodside Lane.
In addition to fish and a wide variety of related items on display, there will be auctions of fish, food, magazine subscriptions and equipment.
Winners of a fish photography contest will receive plaques.


Spooning Out The Ocean
To the Editor:
One point of disagreement with Walter Goodman's article about ridicule  [ "Prime Time vs. the Art of Ridicule," Sept. 1 ] : There is an ethnic group that can be slurred in American media, including PBS, with virtual impunity: Arabs, and by extension, Arab-Americans and Muslims.
Though a small Arab-American group does try to write letters to the media objecting to this onslaught of insults, it is like emptying the ocean with a teaspoon.
JOSEPH D. POLICANO  East Hampton, N.Y.


Killings in Druse Area Shake Lebanon's Fragile Peace Arrangement
A shooting incident in which eight people were killed in the Shuf foothills southeast of here has shaken Lebanon's fragile peace, raising tension to a level not seen here since a national reconciliation agreement nine months ago formally ended 16 years of civil strife.
The incident involved a gunman who went on a shooting spree Monday in the mountaintop village of Maaser al Shuf 20 miles from Beirut, killing four civilians and four soldiers with an AK-47 automatic rifle before he was captured.


Lisa Columbo, Lawyer, Weds
Lisa Doreen Columbo, a vice president and associate general counsel at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York, was married yesterday to Edward Cerasia 2d, a lawyer who is to join Sullivan &amp; Cromwell in New York as an associate in October.
The Rev.
James Cesta, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Saint Ephram's Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Cerasia, 28 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Hunter College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Phyllis Columbo of Brooklyn, the treasurer at Star Corrugated Box Company in Maspeth, L.I.


Correction


Foreign Affairs: Mr. Bush's Conversion
President Bush's Friday night initiatives on nuclear arms were designed to make the world a safer place, which they will, and to head off Congress from slashing military spending.
But in a curious way, the weapons programs he now says he will cancel, even unilaterally, and the reasons he gave for taking these actions could legitimize the far deeper cuts in spending he desperately wants to avoid.
Remember what happened in the immediate wake of the failed Soviet coup.
Moderate and liberal legislators argued that this meant the end of the Soviet Union and of the Soviet threat, and that it established a clear basis to lower U.S. military efforts.
Bush Administration officials hit back hard, saying the old regime was gone but 30,000 Soviet nuclear weapons remained, and it would be crazy for the U.S. to eliminate even one of its nuclear programs.


Bush Rewrites the Nuclear Rules
SENSING that the nation and the world had arrived at a moment when history must be seized by the throat, President Bush abandoned his cautious and incremental approach on Friday night and in a single speech proclaimed the transformation of the security apparatus that has shielded Americans for 40 years.
In what historians surely will rank as one of the most momentous steps even in these revolutionary times, Mr.
Bush simply granted much of what the Soviet Union had long sought, including elimination of tactical nuclear weapons from American forces abroad -- among them troop units stationed in Europe and Asia and Navy ships at sea.


Barbara Marks Weds
Barbara Marks, an architect, and James Garvey, a custom metal designer, both in New York, were married in New York yesterday at the Two Eleven Restaurant.
Frank J. Blangiardo, a retired Civil Court judge, officiated.
The bride, 37 years old, graduated from Rennsselaer Polytechnic Institute.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Marks of Fair Lawn, N.J.
Mr.
Garvey, 40, graduated from Colorado State University.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.
He is a son of Lieut.
Col.
Ray Garvey Jr. of the Army, retired, of Graham, N.C., and the late Nettie Earl Thompson Garvey.


The Company They Keep
HARLOT'S GHOST
By Norman Mailer. 1328 pp. New York: Random House. $30.


And for the B-52's, the Alert Is Finally Over
The American armada of B-52 Stratofortresses that for four decades has stood the role of nuclear centurion, ready at a moment's notice to fly into the nightmare of global war, is going to get a rest under the arms control package announced by President Bush on Friday.
The fleet of eight-engined planes, which has come to symbolize the threat of nuclear war as much as the mushroom cloud over Hiroshima demonstrated its impact, has been rebuilt, re-winged and re-engined a dozen times since it was first shaped at the Boeing Company in the Korean War.
The prototype first flew in April 1952.


Corrections
The weather listing on Sept. 1, 8, 15 and 22 in the Travel Watch column misstated the average afternoon humidity in September in Boston.
It is 62 percent, not 81 percent.


Ms. Sommers to Wed
Elizabeth Sommers, a senior vice president of the Greater New York Hospital Association, is to marry Dr.
Tracy E. Strevey Jr., the chief executive and executive director of the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I., in November.


Christina Black Wed in Princeton
Christina Ellen Black and Francis Carling were married yesterday in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Frederick S. Baldwin performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Nassau Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Brown University with an M.B.A. from New York University, she is a senior associate at Financiere Indosuez in New York.
She is the daughter of Corinne Manning Black of Princeton and the late Cyril E. Black.
Her father was the James S. McDonnell Distinguished University Professor of History and International Affairs at Princeton University.
Her mother is the director of Philanthropic Associates, charity consultants in Princeton.


When the Movable Feast Goes From Outdoors to In
STREET fairs, block parties and church suppers are pageants that mark the bends and turns of the season in New York City, times when the small towns inside the city bloom.
Some festivals are hand-lettered signs and home-baked brownies; others are big business.
In recent years, the city has averaged 1,200 street celebrations a year, each a blend of church and community and old-fashioned profiteering that turns residential blocks into carnivals.
But by October, street fairs dwindle to block parties, and the concept moves indoors to church basements and benevolent associations.


Is It Wise to Let 'Healthy' Mean 'Wealthy'?
To the Editor:
"Rewarding Employees for 'Wellness,' " (Sept. 15) makes me wonder whether my view -- that companies should evaluate employees simply on work performed instead of trying to regulate their personal health habits -- is as hopelessly reactionary as my wish that people would stop using odious neologisms like 'wellness.' " FELICIA ACKERMAN  Providence, R.I., Sept. 15


Headliners; Case Closed
Warren McCleskey, a black man who was convicted of killing a white Atlanta policeman in 1978, twice fought for his life before the Supreme Court and twice came away with rulings that made it easier for states to kill those they condemned.
In a 1987 case he brought, the Court ruled that the death penalty was not unconstitutional just because far fewer people were executed for killing blacks than for killing whites.
Then last year, when Mr.
McCleskey argued that the prosecution had withheld evidence from the jury, the Court rebuffed him with a ruling that sharply curtailed the ability of state prisoners to file multiple Federal appeals.
Mr.
McCleskey's supporters said he thus faced execution "in violation of the Constitution." He lost his last Supreme Court battle at a little after 3 A.M.
Wednesday, when, after he had already been in and out of the electric chair once, the Justices voted 6-to-3 by telephone not to stay his death.
Minutes later, he was electrocuted.


Working


Exxon Adopts Preventive Measures In $10 Million Project to Avoid Spills
After three oil spills in early 1990 in the waters that separate Staten Island from New Jersey, Exxon shut its marine operations for three months to find out what it was doing wrong.
Now the company says that it has incorporated dozens of changes, not least of which is a new attitude, and that it has spent more than $10 million on hardware and procedures.
The next challenge is to show the world that the company's operation is safer.


Mary M. Reid Has Wedding
Mary Margaret Reid, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Joseph Reid of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Todd Andrew McElwee, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Bell McElwee of Darien.
The Rev.
Frank Hoffman performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Darien, assisted by the Rev.
David Minnick, a minister of the United Church of Christ.
Mrs.
McElwee, 25, is the production coordinator for Air Age Inc., a magazine publisher in Wilton, Conn.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is president of Shelbyco Ltd., a sportswear manufacturer in New York.


A Highly Personal Collection, From Shakespeare to Oz
A voracious reader since childhood, Richard Manney began to collect rare books and manuscripts a decade ago.
His library of 600 first editions and autograph copies -- children's classics, American and English novels, religious and political works, and plays by Shakespeare, Ibsen and O'Casey -- represents a highly personal assemblage of volumes.
He has read most of them, and all are to be auctioned Oct. 11 at Sotheby's in New York.
Mr.
Manney, a New York businessman who buys media time for advertisers, said the collection is the first of his art and antiques holdings to be sold.
He has formed most of the collections with his wife, Gloria.
"We are going to move to smaller quarters," Mr.
Manney said.
"The rare books need climate control and proper housing, which we will not have in our next home." Sotheby's estimates that the rare books and manuscripts will bring $4 million to $5 million.


V. H. Greenburg, 91, Co-Founder Of Hoff-Barthelson Music School
Virginia Hoff Greenburg, a pianist, music teacher and co-founder of the prestigious Hoff-Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale, N.Y., died on Friday at the Hospice of the Central Coast in Carmel, Calif.
She was 91 years old.
She suffered a stroke at her home in Carmel on Sept. 14 and was in a coma until her death, family members said.


Miss Feketie to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Feketie of South Orange, N.J., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Kathryn A. Feketie and William T. Freeman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Freeman of Moorestown, N.J.
Miss Feketie, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Colgate University and is studying for an M.B.A. at the University of Pennsylvania.
Mr.
Freeman, 27, graduated from Denison University and Rutgers University Law School and is an associate with the Haddonfield, N.J., law firm of Freeman, Barton &amp; Huber.


Miss Washburn, Marketer, Weds
Pamela Melhado Washburn, an assistant marketing manager for Sports Illustrated, and Andrew Arnold Brooks, a vice president of Westpac Banking, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert A. Davenport officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in Upperville, Va.
Mrs.
Brooks, 30 years old, graduated from Bowdoin College.
She is a daughter of C. Langhorne Washburn of Middleburg, Va., and the late Paula Melhado Gilpatric of New York.
The bride's father, a government affairs consultant, is a former vice president of the Walt Disney Company.
Her late mother was a senior vice president of the Brown Harris Stevens real-estate company in New York.
Mrs.
Brooks is a granddaughter of the late Alan Melhado, a New York investment banker, and the late Mrs.
Melhado.


Give Hyacinths a Chance for Spring
IT is time to start thinking about planting bulbs.
Almost everyone includes some tulips in their garden, but how many gardeners can boast of clusters of fragrant hyacinths?
This elegant, but too often neglected, spring flower, needs to have more consideration.
It is fragrant, quite showy and available in a wide range of colors, from the traditional blues, whites and pinks to the more dramatic reds and even a yellow.
A beautiful orange hyacinth is available now.


For Americans and Filipinos, Basics of Life Are at Stake in Fate of Navy Base
Their memories of the base are starkly different, but the American sailors who lived or took liberty at the Subic Bay Naval Station and the thousands of Filipinos who repaired the American warships and swept the Americans' floors agree that a way of life is in jeopardy.
"Subic is paradise," said Robert Buttrey, a ruddy-faced 49-year-old retired Navy Seabee from Framingham, Mass., who married a Filipino he met while on duty at Subic, settled his family near the large American naval base and now owns an off-base saloon that bears his nickname, Bubba.


The Season Sets a Brisk Pace: Spain; Opera and dance and, soon, a world's fair and the Olympics
Spain is offering a rich cultural program this winter as it gears up for a year of a remarkable combination of attractions.Madrid has been chosen as Europe's cultural capital in 1992 to mark the fifth centenary of the discovery of the Americas.
Barcelona is accompanying next July's Summer Olympics with what it has nicknamed the Cultural Olympics.
And Seville has insured that the arts will be featured prominently alongside Expo '92, the world fair that runs from April to October next year.
Thanks to the current crop of top Spanish singers, opera is rapidly becoming as popular in Spain as it is in Italy.
At Seville's new opera house, the Teatro de la Maestranza, on the Paseo Colon (telephone 422-3344), Alfredo Kraus will appear in Verdi's "Rigoletto" on Oct. 21, 24 and 27, while Placido Domingo will sing in Puccini's "Tosca" on Nov. 3, 6 and 9.
In Barcelona, the Gran Teatro del Liceu at 13 Rambla dels Caputxins (412-3532) also has a full program of operas.
It includes Mozart's "Marriage of Figaro" on Nov. 23, 25, 27 and 29 as well as Dec. 1, Puccini's "Boheme" on Dec. 16, 18, 19, 21, 23, 27, 29 and 30 and Tchaikovsky's "Queen of Spades" on Jan. 16, 19, 22, 25, 28 and 31.


Black Agents
To the Sports Editor:
I am a retired African-American business man who has lived in the Harlem community for approximately 70 years.
My concern for the young professional African-American athlete is growing.
My basic concern is the absence of African-American agents' involvement with the young athlete.


Miss Buckner Wed
Georgette Carkener Buckner, the president of Solanee Inc., an importer of French tableware, and Michael Wallace McConnell, a partner in the private banking firm of Brown Brothers Harriman, both in New York, were married yesterday at the bridegroom's home on Shelter Island, L.I.
The Rev.
William T. Grimbol, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
McConnell is a daughter of Laura Toll Carkener of Shawnee Mission, Kan., and the late G. Guyton Carkener.
Mr.
McConnell is a son of Mary Wallace McConnell of Stuart, Fla., and the late E. John McConnell.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.


An Exciting Place
To the Editor:
As a member of the mission to Israel that Gene Saks wrote about, I would like to add to his comments.


In London, a Mood of Change Despite Serious Money Needs
Change is in the British theatrical air.
Some of the signs and symptoms are open and obvious.
The Royal Shakespeare Company has recently reopened what is and isn't the same tiny playhouse where Ian McKellen launched his Macbeth and Iago, and where Jane Lapotaire created the part that was to win her a Tony Award, the growling chanteuse of Pam Gems's "Piaf." The Other Place, as it's still called, has not moved from its old Stratford site, but it has been completely reconstructed, at a cost of $3 million.


Brooke Alison Byers, a Law Clerk, Wed to Eugene Goldman, a Lawyer
Brooke Alison Byers, a law clerk in Washington, was married in New York yesterday to Eugene Ira Goldman, a partner in the Washington law firm of McDermott, Will &amp; Emery.
The Rev.
James English performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Roman Catholic Church, with Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman attending.
Ms.
Byers, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a clerk for Judge Geoffrey M. Alprin, the presiding judge of the family division of the District of Columbia Superior Court.
She graduated magna cum laude from New York University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree cum laude from Georgetown University.


Giant-Cowboy Matchup: 2 Jekyll-and-Hyde Types
The Giants will play the Dallas Cowboys on Sunday, and the first question is not who will win, but who will show up.
Will these be the Giants with their tightly wound offense of this season or will Jeff Hostetler finally be allowed to open up the passing game?


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a fireplace on the first floor and another below it in the basement.
When we build a fire in the first-floor fireplace, the smell of smoke is strong in the basement.
The ash pit has been removed, and the chimney flue connected to the basement fireplace has been capped.
It has been suggested that a stainless-steel liner be installed in the first-floor chimney.
Would that solve the problem?
A.
If the two chimney flues are in the same brick chimney structure, if either one or both of the flue liners is cracked or leaking and if there are no flue liners, it could be that smoke will leak from one flue to the other.
That should not occur if the flue being used draws properly, but it could happen if there are down drafts or other defects in that chimney.
Capping the unused flue was probably a mistake.
It will trap smoke that leaks into it, instead of allowing the smoke to escape through the opening at the top of the chimney.
I would suggest removing the cap.
If that does not solve the problem, have an expert check the structure.
It is very likely that lining the flue will be the answer.


Cardinal Glemp's Visit Points Up the Polish-Jewish Rift
It was symptomatic that when Jozef Cardinal Glemp, Roman Catholic archbishop of Warsaw and Primate of Poland, arrived in the United States to visit Polish American communities, his first official event was a meeting with a dozen Jewish religious leaders.
"A thousand years of history were in that room," said Rabbi A. James Rudin of the American Jewish Committee, after hearing the Cardinal condemn anti-Semitism and express regrets that a homily he delivered in August 1989 might have fostered stereotypes of Jews and Judaism.
The homily had followed a protest by Jewish demonstrators who entered the grounds of a convent adjacent to the site of the Auschwitz death camp.


Homeowners Said to Face Rise in Costs To Clean Up Environment
HOMEOWNERS across New Jersey can expect the cost of sewer, water and garbage-disposal services to nearly triple on the average by 1994 because of regulations aimed at cleaning up the environment, a newly released state study says.
As a result, the study concludes, municipalities may be forced to raise taxes or cut services.
Business groups hail the study, saying it lends support to their argument that business has borne a larger share of the cost of protecting the environment than have municipalities and property owners.
Municipal organizations and consumer groups are less sanguine.
The study, they say, is further evidence of the mounting tax burden on state residents.


A PRICE FOR SECURITY
Absorption of immigrants has never been a quick and easy process.
My father, a physician, immigrated to Israel from Eastern Europe 30 years ago.
He, too, found a country with few jobs and few resources.
Nevertheless, my father found his place in Israeli society, as did the majority of the educated men and women who immigrated to Israel in the last 40 years.
As an Israeli dermatologist, I can say that, at my home hospital in Haifa (as well as in many others), physicians coming from Russia are given a full year of training both in Hebrew and in their medical subspecialties.
Some have had to change to more sought-after subspecialties or to medical research instead of clinical work, but none of them will be hungry, homeless or jobless.
YORAM HARTH, M.D.
Haifa, Israel


'A Wild Desire to Be Absolutely Fascinating'
ME
Stories of My Life.
By Katharine Hepburn.
Illustrated. 420 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


A Classic Housebuster Wins His Belmont Finale
Housebuster gave his New York public something to remember yesterday when he sprinted through the homestretch in his final appearance at Belmont Park and outran five rivals to win the Vosburgh Handicap by five and a half lengths.
It was a classic performance for the champion sprinter, who was sleek and dark with four bright orange bandages flashing from his ankles as he stalked the leaders from third place after stumbling at the start.
When they turned for home, Craig Perret asked for action and got it.


Headliners; Fatal Care
Weak in body and voice, Kimberly Bergalis, the first person believed to have caught AIDS from a medical worker, last week asked Congress to grant her "dying wish" -- to make AIDS testing for health-care personnel mandatory.
Miss Bergalis was a Florida college student four years ago when she became the first of five people believed to have been infected with the HIV virus during dental treatment by Dr.
David Acer, who died last year.
They did not know they were at risk -- state law required no disclosure -- until publication of Dr.
Acer's posthumous letter advising them to be tested.
Some experts say mandatory testing of health workers would not help check the disease, and Dr.
Acer is the only dentist suspected of infecting patients, according to the Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
That was of no consolation to Miss Bergalis.
"My life is being taken away," she said.
"Please enact legislation so no other patient will have to go through the hell that I have."


THE BREAKFAST CLUB
Surely, Abbott Combes's Food column "The Breakfast Club" (Sept. 1) was written in jest -- sausage, bacon, chicken livers, eggs, butter, cheese -- more than 8,000 calories of saturated fats!
Everything "tastes better in the wild," he writes.
And the subliminal message is that everything tastes better soaked in fat, animal fat.
Reserve some bacon fat for the hearth-browned potatoes, adding it to the miserly half-stick of butter.
More butter and bacon fat for the 16 large eggs, scrambled and tasty, with crumbled sausage.
Best of all, mixed grill: two pounds of bacon and a pound each of sausage and chicken livers.
The cook warns, "Beware flying fat."


CAMPUS LIFE: Bowdoin; Fraternity Members Give Female Members Equal Standing
Faced with the college's mandate that fraternity women receive full membership privileges, Bowdoin College's Alpha Delta Phi chapter this month became the last of four fraternities on campus to sacrifice national affiliation rather than lose college recognition.
The university administration's policy of integrating women more fully into campus life, including the Greek system, presented a tough choice for fraternities like Alpha Delta Phi, whose national organizations do not recognize women as members.
The fraternities had to decide by the first of this month.


OUTINGS
Here is a sampling of outings in the New York metropolitan region.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
EARLY AMERICAN TOUR OF LONG ISLAND, via the Long Island Rail Road.
A visit to the Vanderbilt Museum and Mansion and the Old Bethpage Village Restoration, including lunch.
Departing from Penn Station at 9:30 A.M.
Admission: $36 ($28 for ages 5 to 11.) Tickets are available one week prior to the trip to 30 minutes before departure.
Also Nov. 3, same time.
Information: (718) 990-7498 or (718) 217-5477.
NORTH SHORE HIKE, through Muttontown, L.I.
A four-to-five hour tour beginning in Syosset and traveling through woods, fields and horse trails, passing the former home of King Zog of Albania and his collection of pine trees; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club. 12:45 P.M.
Fee: $15, which includes admission to fall activities sponsored by the New York-North Jersey chapter of the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Information: (718) 478-0383.
PATRIOT'S WEEKEND, Putnam Memorial State Park, Redding, Conn.
Revolutionary War battle re-enactments with artillery demonstrations and infantry camp life activities at the park, the site of the largest encampment of the Continental Army in New England during the American Revolution.
Colonial crafts will also be on display. 11 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (203) 783-6034.
PLEASURES OF PRINCETON, guided tours of Princeton University and the Art Museum; sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $38, which includes train fare and entrance fees.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
HARVEST HAYRIDE AND HOEDOWN, Palmer Vineyards, 108 Sound Avenue, Aquebogue, L.I.
Country and blue-grass music, hayrides through the vineyards, and free tours.
Today, Oct. 5 to 6, Oct. 12 to 13 and Oct. 19 to 20, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free admission.
Hayrides, $1.
Information: (516) 722-9364.
APPLEWOOD ORCHARDS, Four Corners Road, Warwick, N.Y.
Apple-picking, face-painting, wagon rides, puppet shows, live music and live animals, including free bunnies.
Today and every Saturday and Sunday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Through October.
Free.
Information: (914) 986-1684.
Oct. 5
FALL JURIED CRAFT AND ART SHOW, Historic Allaire Village, Allaire, N.J.
Show features potters, weavers, glass-blowers and wood-carvers. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $1 (children under 12, free).
Also: Fall Antique Show and Sale, Oct. 12, 8 A.M. to 4 P.M., with items like spinning wheels, ladderback chairs and antique jewelry.
Admission: $1.
Information: (908) 938-2253.
FOLIAGE BICYCLE TOUR, through southern New Jersey, with stops at 19th-century churches.
Bicycle rides are casual and vary from 30 to 100 miles; sponsored by the Shore Cycle Club.
Departs at 9 A.M. from Atlantic County Park, Estell Manor, N.J.
Registration: $7 (includes lunch and refreshments.) Information: (609) 625-2445.
AUTUMN CRAFTS AND TASKS, Van Cortlandt Manor, South Riverside Avenue, off Route 9, Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
A demonstration of crafts from 18th-century America, including food preservation, cider-pressing, blacksmithing and candle-making.
Oct. 5 and 6, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $6 ($5 for the elderly, $3 for ages 3 to 17).
Information: (914) 631-8200 or (914) 271-8981.
BEAR MOUNTAIN CRAFTS FAIR, Bear Mountain State Park, Exit 19 of the Palisades Parkway.
Ceramics, herbal crafts, jewelry, pottery and wood ornaments.
Oct. 5 and 6, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Parking: $3.
Information: (914) 786-2701.
FALL FLOWER AND LANDSCAPE SHOW, Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
Landscaped gardens, plant sales, lectures, greenhouse display, scarecrow competition for children, hay rides, magic shows and petting zoo. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Also: Oct. 6 to 14, same times.
Admission: $5 weekdays, $6 weekends (free for those under age 12).
Information: (516) 922-9206.
FOLK ART OF THE CATSKILLS, Hunter Mountain, Route 23A West, Hunter, N.Y.
Artists, musicians and painters, and a Skyride for viewing the fall foliage.
Oct. 5 and 6, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (518) 263-4223.
PUMPKIN FESTIVAL, Greig Farm, Pitcher Lane, Red Hook, N.Y.
Hayrides, donkey rides, pumpkin-picking and music.
Fees for rides.
Oct. 5, 6, 12 and 13, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Information (914) 758-1234.
Oct. 6
FAMOUS HOMES AND GARDENS, via the Long Island Rail Road.
Visit Sagamore Hill, home of Theodore Roosevelt, and Old Westbury Gardens; lunch is included.
Departs at 9:30 A.M. from Penn Station and returns at 6 P.M.
Admission: $37 ($29 for ages 5 to 11).
Tickets are available from one week before the trip to 30 minutes before departure.
Information: (718) 990-7498 or (718) 217-5477.
FIRE ISLAND FOLIAGE HIKE, beach walk around the Smith Point section of Fire Island.
Meets at 9:30 A.M. at the Mastic-Shirley Railroad Station, L.I.; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Fee: $15, including admission to all activities of New York-North Jersey chapter of the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
Oct. 12
CHOWDERFEST, Mystic Seaport, 50 Greenmanville Avenue, Route 27, Mystic, Conn.
New England chowder, cooked over wood fires; also hot dogs, kielbasa and cookies.
Folk music.
Oct. 12 to 14, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Museum admission, $14 ($8.75 for ages 6 to 15; under 5, free); additional charges for meals.
Information: (203) 572-0711, extension 315.
FALL FESTIVAL, Shore Line Trolley Museum, 17 River Street, East Haven, Conn.
A celebration of Indian summer, with a trolley parade, a guided tour and a slide show on the development of the streetcar.
Wine and cider tasting.
Oct. 12 and 13, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5 ($4 for the elderly; $2 for ages 2 to 11).
On exhibit at the museum are almost 100 trolleys, including the world's first electric freight locomotive.
Information: (203) 467-6927.
FALL FESTIVAL, Museum Village, off Route 17, Monroe, N.Y.
A re-created 19th-century village with working blacksmiths and weavers.
Hayrides, cider-pressing, log-splitting and soap-making.
Oct. 12, 13, 19 and 20, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $7 ($5 for the elderly, $4 for ages 6 to 15).
Other special activities include a Halloween celebration, Oct. 27, 1 to 4 P.M., and a holiday decorations workshop, Nov. 29 and 30 and Dec. 1, noon to 5 P.M.
Information: (914) 782-8247.
HUDSON VALLEY CRAFTS, Dutchess County Fairgrounds, Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Jewelry, leather, glass and woodworking exhibits; and hayrides, pumpkin-painting, a petting zoo and bluegrass music.
Oct. 12 and 13, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $4. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (914) 876-4001.
LONG ISLAND FAIR TOUR, via the Long Island Railroad.
A trip to Old Bethpage Village Restoration, where there will be music, magic and puppet shows.
Departs Penn Station at 9:30 A.M. and returns at 4:30 P.M.
Price: $22 ($17 for ages 5 to 11).
Information: (718) 990-7498 or (718) 217-5477.
WEST POINT FOOTBALL, Michie Stadium, West Point, N.Y.
Army versus Citadel, 1 P.M.
Tickets: $17.
Information: (914) 446-4996.
SUGAR LOAF FALL FESTIVAL, Arts and Crafts Village, Exit 127 off Route 17, Sugar Loaf, N.Y.
More than 65 permanent arts-and-crafts shops, with pottery, glass, photography and other items.
Oct. 12 and 13, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Oct. 14, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 469-9181 or (914) 469-6494..
OUTDOOR ARTS FESTIVAL, Bruce Museum, 1 Museum Drive, Exit 3 off I-95, Greenwich, Conn.
More than 70 arts exhibits, with paintings, sculpture, drawings and photographs.
Live classical, bluegrass and folk music, and drawing contests for children.
Oct. 12 and 13, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
On view at the science and art museum are American Impressionist paintings from the Cos Cob art colony; American Indian and pre-Columbian art and artifacts, including pottery, sculpture and beaded garments, and fossils, dinosaur bones and live marine specimens that children may handle.
"Life, Death and the Afterlife in Ancient Mexico," an exhibition of Mayan sculpture and pottery, runs through Nov. 3.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Sunday, 2 to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $3 ($1.50 for the elderly and $1 for children).
Information: (203) 869-0376.
Oct. 13
AROUND LONG ISLAND, via Long Island Railroad.
A trip to the North and South Forks of Long Island, Pindar Vineyards, Sag Harbor and Shelter Island.
Departs from Penn Station at 7:58 A.M. and returns at 6:50 P.M.
Admission: $25 ($18 for ages 5 to 11).
Tickets are available from one week before the trip to 30 minutes before departure.
Information: (718) 990-7498 or (718) 217-5477.
FOLIAGE CANOE RIVER TOUR, aboard Kittatinny Canoes, Dingmans Ferry, Pa.
A three-to-four-hour ride down the Delaware River to view the fall foliage and wildlife. 9:30 A.M.
Cost: $24.30 in advance or $26.50 on the day; participants should take lunch.
Reservations necessary.
On other days, rafts and canoes are launched from six sites on the Delaware River in New York and Pennsylvania.
Cost: $23 to $25 a day on weekends, $20 to $22 on weekdays, including transportation upstream, paddles and vests; overnight camping, $7.50 to $9, plus $3 to $4 grounds fee; take your own supplies.
Open until late October.
Information: (800) 356-2852.
Oct. 19
APPLE FESTIVAL, Trotting Horse Museum, 240 Main Street, Goshen, N.Y. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Local culinary students will offer a sampling of apple dishes, from pie to fresh-pressed cider.
Also a brief talk at 1 P.M. by Art Soons, local orchard owner, on the varieties of apples and their uses.
Admission: $1.50 (50 cents for children).
Information: (914) 294-6330.
FALL FOLIAGE TOUR, from the Metro-North Station, Haarlem Avenue, North White Plains, N.Y.
Fall foliage to Brewster and back aboard trains leaving Metro-North repair shop as part of an exhibition of model trains, videos and a meeting with "Metro-Man," the railroad's electronic safety robot.
Free. 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.; trains leave every hour.
Information: (212) 532-4900.
AUTUMNFEST TOUR, via the Long Island Railroad.
With pumpkin-picking, a bicycle race and a stop at the Oyster Bay Oyster Festival.
Departs from Penn Station on Oct. 19 and 20 at 10 A.M. and returns at 5:30 P.M.
The Oyster Festival goes on from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Oct. 19 and 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Oct. 20.
Tickets: $11 ($8 for ages 5 to 11); price includes sampling of oysters on the half shell.
Information: (718) 990-7498 or (718) 217-5477.
FALL HARVEST FESTIVAL, Pindar Vineyards, Main Road, Peconic, L.I.
Folk and rock music, wine-tasting, lunch and tours of the vineyard.
Oct. 19 and 20, noon to 5 P.M.
Free admission; charges for food.
Vineyard tours daily, every half-hour, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (516) 734-6200.
FALL CLASSIC CYCLING TOUR, Hudson River Valley, N.Y.
A bicycle tour covering distances of 75 to 200 miles; sponsored by the Food and Hunger Hotline.
Money raised by pledges secured by riders will benefit the organization.
Bicyclists must register for the tour: $75 ($50 for students.) Information and time: (212) 366-5400.
OKTOBERFEST, Hunter Mountain, off Route 23A West, Hunter, N.Y.
German-style celebration with beer, food and entertainment at the base lodge. 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Also Oct. 20, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (518) 263-4223.
CLEARWATER PUMPKIN SAIL FESTIVAL, Maritime Museum, 1 Rondout Landing, Kingston, N.Y.
Boat sails to various Hudson River communities offering pumpkins for sale, folk-singing and other entertainment.
Traditional stone soup, a hodgepodge of ingredients, will be served, and each stop will include a discussion of environmental issues.
Noon to 5 P.M.
On Oct. 20, the sloop will be at the Old Ferry Dock in Beacon, N.Y.
Other stops include the Erie Lackawanna Plaza in Hoboken, N.J. (Oct. 26), and Pier 45, Hudson River at Christopher Street, Manhattan (Oct. 27).
Free.
Information: (914) 454-7673.
Oct. 20
OCTOBER AUTOFEST, Playland Park, off I-95, Exit 19, Rye, N.Y.
A series of car-related events, including an automobile rally, featuring a 55-mile drive through Westchester; a timed course in the parking lot, and a classic-car show. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Some events require registration; fee: $15 per event.
Admission is free for spectators.
Information: (914) 285-7275 or (914) 736-2254.
HARVEST WALK, Audubon Center, 613 Riversville Road, Greenwich, Conn.
A walk through the Audubon Center to observe the abundance of food in the wild. 2 P.M.
Admission: $2 ($1 for children and the elderly.) Information: (203) 869-5272.
Oct. 26
FALL FOLIAGE TOUR via Long Island Railroad.
A tour along the North Shore, with stops at the Museums at Stony Brook, and a walking tour through Port Jefferson's harbor village.
Departs Penn Station on Oct. 26 and Oct. 27 at 9:30 A.M. and returns at 6:35 P.M.
Tickets: $36 ($29 for ages 5 to 11).
Information: (718) 990-7498 or (718) 217-5477.
LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW WEEKEND, at Sunnyside, the home of Washington Irving, off Route 9, Tarrytown, N.Y., and at Philipsburg Manor in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Storytelling and a screening of two film versions of Irving's "Legend of Sleepy Hollow." Oct. 26 and 27, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission to each location: $6 ($5 for the elderly, $3 for ages 6 to 17).
Information: (914) 631-8200.
TREE WALK, Elizabeth Park, Prospect and Asylum Avenues, Hartford.
A tour of the many species of trees in the park, including Douglas fir, common hoptree, western red cedar and the blue weeping spruce.
The park also includes a rose garden and a horticultural library. 9 to 11 A.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: (203) 523-4276.
WEST POINT FOOTBALL, Michie Stadium, West Point, N.Y.
Army vs.
Boston College.
Oct. 26 at 1 P.M.
Tickets: $17.
Information: (914) 446-4996.
Oct. 27
AUTUMN COLOR WALK, Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
A tour of fall foliage and discussions of why leaves turn colors.
Oct. 27 at 10 A.M.
Admission: $6.
Information: (516) 922-9206.
ALL SEASON Museums and Rides
BARNUM MUSEUM, 820 Main Street, Bridgeport, Conn.
Dedicated to the life of the showman P. T. Barnum, once the mayor of Bridgeport, the museum features a video on Barnum's life; a re-creation of the library from his home; memorabilia about such personalities as Tom Thumb and Jenny Lind and a scale model of Barnum's three-ring circus.
Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sundays noon to 4:30 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $5 ($4 for the elderly, $3 for ages 4 to 18. Information: (203) 331-9881 or (203) 331-1104.
CRADLE OF AVIATION MUSEUM, Charles Lindbergh Boulevard, adjacent to Nassau Community College, Garden City, L.I.
The museum displays the airplane in which Lindbergh learned to fly, salvaged from a pig farm in Coggan, Iowa, and a sister-plane of the Spirit of St.
Louis.
Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 5 P.M., through Oct. 27.
Free.
Information: (516) 222-1190 or (516) 222-0976.
EDISON NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE, Main Street and Lakeside Avenue, West Orange, N.J.
The research laboratory where Edison invented the motion-picture camera and modified the light bulb and phonograph.
The tour includes Edison's office, library, laboratories, machine shops and a replica of the first motion-picture studio, in operation from 1893 to 1903.
Two films related to Edison can be seen continuously from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. in the visitor's center -- "The Invention Factory," an 18-minute film made in 1987 about Edison's work and "The Great Train Robbery," a 9-minute film produced in 1903 by Edison's film company.
Edison's house, Glenmont, is nearby and tours are given on Saturdays and Sundays.
Passes are available at the visitors' center on Main Street.
Daily, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2 for those over 16; free for those under 16 and over 62.
Information: (201) 736-5050 or (201) 736-0550.
FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT HOME, LIBRARY AND MUSEUM, 511 Albany Post Road, Hyde Park, N.Y.
F.D.R.'s birthplace and "Summer White House" contains his books, archives, and other memorabilia and exhibits on the Depression and the New Deal.
There is also a gallery devoted to Eleanor Roosevelt, whose own retreat, Val-Kill Cottage, is nearby.
Daily, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., except Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's Day.
Admission: $4 (free for those under 16 and over 62.) Information: (914) 229-9115.
JOHN JAY HOMESTEAD, Route 22, Katonah, N.Y.
The 60-room home of the nation's first Chief Justice.
The homestead contains rooms with 18th-century furniture, Jay's book collection, two formal gardens and a schoolhouse that Jay built for his grandchildren.
Wednesdays through Sundays, noon to 4 P.M., through Oct. 31.
Admission: $4 ($2 for children and the elderly).
Information: (914) 232-5651.
MYSTIC SEAPORT MUSEUM, 50 Greenmanville Avenue, Mystic, Conn.
Art and artifacts related to 19th-century maritime commerce on the Atlantic coast.
Maritime village and museum with ship models, paintings, scrimshaw, a planetarium and the Charles W. Morgan, one of America's last surviving wooden whaleships.
Half-hour and hour-long cruises on the Sabino, a coal-fired steamship built in 1908.
Open daily through Oct. 27, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Oct. 28 through New Year's Day, 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $14 ($8.75 for age 6 to 15).
Afternoon cruises aboard the Sabino, $3 ($2 for children); evening cruises, $7.50 ($6 for children).
Information: (203) 572-0711.
NEW HOPE AND IVYLAND RAIL ROAD, New Hope, Pa.
A coal-fired steam locomotive leaves the Bridge Street station hourly for a narrated 50-minute ride between New Hope and Lahaska.
Trains today, noon to 5 P.M. and tomorrow 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
In October trains run Mondays through Fridays, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., Saturday 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
In November: Mondays through Fridays, noon to 3 P.M.; Saturdays 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sundays noon to 3 P.M.
Special Halloween rides Oct. 26 to Oct. 31.; Christmas rides in December.
Tickets: $6.50 ($5 for the elderly; $3.25 for ages 3 to 11).
Information: (215)862-2332.
SUNNYSIDE, Route 9, Sunnyside Lane, Tarrytown, N.Y.
A small Dutch farmhouse that was the home of Washington Irving.
Irving's private study, library and many of his furnishings are on display.
Sunnyside is part of Historic Hudson Valley, a collection of historic houses that includes PHILIPSBURG MANOR, a Colonial preserve with early New York and European furniture and Dutch crafts, in North Tarrytown, N.Y.; VAN CORTLANDT MANOR, an early 19th-century mansion in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., and MONTGOMERY PLACE, a classical-revival mansion and riverfront acreage with 18th- and 19th-century memorabilia, in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
All are on Route 9 and are open daily except Tuesdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission to each: $6 ($5 for the elderly, $3 for ages 6 to 17).
Admission to all four sites is $20 ($11.25 for children).
Information: (914) 631-8200.
TROTTING HORSE MUSEUM, 240 Main Street, Goshen, N.Y.
A museum devoted to harness-racing.
Displays include a 95-year-old sleigh, trophies, wagons and a collection of 200 original Currier &amp; Ives prints.
Mondays to Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays and holidays, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $1.50 for adults (50 cents for children.) Also offered are group walking tours of historic sites in Goshen, among them the schoolhouse where Noah Webster taught and the site where Ulysses S. Grant watched harness racing.
Group tours are by reservation and cost $1.50 for adults, 50 cents for children.
Information: (914) 294-6330.
STEAM TRAIN AND RIVERBOAT RIDE, from Essex, Conn.
An old-fashioned locomotive travels from Essex Station to Deep River, connecting with a riverboat that travels the Connecticut River, providing a tour of old New England houses and fall foliage.
Through Oct. 27, the train departs Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays at 11:45 A.M., 1:15, 2:45 and 4:15 P.M.
Closed Oct. 28 to Nov. 29; reopens Nov. 30 to Dec. 22, with holiday trains Thursdays and Fridays, 5:45 and 7:15 P.M. and Saturdays and Sundays, 1:15, 2:45, 4:15, 5:45, 7:15.
Fare for the train ride alone: $7.95 ($3.95 for ages 2 to 11. Train and boat fare: $12.95 ($5.95 for children.) Information: (203) 767-0103. Balloon Rides
SKY PROMOTIONS, Box 54, R.D. 2, Sky Manor Airport, Pittstown, N.J.
Balloon flights daily at dawn and dusk over Hunterdon Country.
Price: $125 a person for early flights, $135 for evening flights, Information: (908) 996-6638.
SKY ENDEAVORS, 4 Brown Street, Bloomfield, Conn.
Balloon flights daily over the Farmington River Valley at dawn and dusk.
Price: $200 a person for an hourlong trip.
Information: (203) 242-0228.
BOLAND BALLOON RIDES, Pine Drive, Burlington, Conn.
Daily hourlong morning and evening flights.
Price: $200 a person.
Information: (203) 673-1307.
LIFT AND DRIFT BALLOON TOURS, 371 Route 6, Port Jervis, N.Y.
Daily hourlong flights over Orange County at sunrise and a few hours before sunset.
Price: $155 a person.
Information: (914) 856-8550.
NEW ENGLAND HOT AIR BALLOONS, Post Office Box 706, Southington, Conn.
Daily hourlong flights at dawn and dusk, east of Waterbury, Conn.
Price: $200 a person.
Information: (203) 250-8441.
MYSTIC RIVER BALLOON RIDE, 17 Carriage Drive, Stonington, Conn.
Daily early-morning flights over Mystic Seaport.
Price: $225 a person.
Information: (203) 535-0283.
YELLOWSTONE BALLOON ADVENTURES, High Street, Interstate 78, Old Southwick, N.J.
Daily flights at 6 P.M. through November.
Price: $135 a person.
Reservations necessary.
Information: (201) 439-3320.
Canoe Trips
JERRY'S THREE RIVERS CANOES, Route 97, Pond Eddy, N.Y.
Raft rentals on the Delaware.
Cost per day, $18 per person for canoes, $17 for rafts.
Daily through late October.
Information: (914) 557-6078.
MAIN STREAM CANOE CORPORATION, Route 44, New Hartford, Conn.
Paddling on the Farmington River through Avon and Simsbury.
Prices per weekend trip: $35 per canoe.
Weekends only through November.
Information: (203) 379-6657.
INDIAN HEAD CANOES, 7 Hampton Downs, Newton, N.J.
Raft rentals on the Delaware River from Matamoras, Pa., and Barryville, N.Y.
Weekends, 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Through Oct. 13.
Cost: $22 a person.
Reservations required.
Information: (800) 874-2628.
Wineries
BALDWIN VINEYARDS, Hardenburgh Road, Pine Bush, N.Y.
Daily, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Tours: $4 a person.
Information: (914) 744-2226.
BENMARL VINEYARDS, Highland Avenue, Marlboro, N.Y.
Daily, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Weekend tours, noon to 4 P.M.
Cost: $5 a person, including wine-tasting.
Information: (914) 236-4265.
FOUR SISTERS WINERY AT MATARAZZO FARMS, Route 519, R.D. 1, Belvidere, N.J.
Free tours and wine-tasting.
Saturdays and Sundays, every half hour 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (908) 475-3671.
MILBROOK VINEYARDS, Wing and Shunpike Roads, Milbrook, N.Y.
Daily, noon to 6 P.M.
Free tours beginning at noon.
Information: (800) 662-9463 or (914) 677-8383.
NORTH SALEM VINEYARD, Hardscrabble Road, North Salem, N.Y.
Daily, 1 to 5 P.M. through Oct. 31; weekends only in November and December, 1 to 5 P.M.
Free tours beginning at 1 P.M.
Information: (914) 669-5518.
TEWKSBURY WINE CELLARS, 164 Burrell Road, Lebanon, N.J.
Open Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.
Free tours.
Wine tasting, $2.
Information: (908) 832-2400.
HAIGHT VINEYARD AND WINERY, Chestnut Hill Road, off Route 118, Litchfield, Conn.
Sundays, noon to 5 P.M. and Mondays to Saturdays, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free tours and wine tasting every hour.
Information: (203) 567-4045.


Silhouettes In the City


What Would Sally and Geraldo Say?
I am not one to tune in the daytime talk shows on television, so it was pure happenstance that I recently caught Geraldo Rivera interviewing a man who had been lured into and escaped from the apartment of the self-confessed serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer.
The following morning, as the luck of the dial had it, I stumbled upon Sally Jessy Raphael commiserating with a mother who had accidentally run over her daughter with a lawn mower.
In both cases, I watched until these two understandably distraught souls burst into tears, which wasn't all that long. (Sobbing is as ubiquitous on daytime TV as the laugh track is on prime time.) What little I saw, however, made me queasy enough to switch off the set.


Review/Film Festival; Music and Metaphor In 'Life on a String'
In the imposingly beautiful but slow and cryptic Chinese film "Life on a String," a young boy is enveloped by his tutor in a magical spell.
The boy is instructed to devote his life to music and told that he will be blind until the 1,000th string on his banjo breaks, an event that does not occur until the boy is a very old man.
By this time -- as the film moves forward 60 years after a very brief prologue -- he has become known as the Saint (Liu Zhongyuan).
And he has a disciple of his own, a young man who is as blind as the teacher.
"Master! Why is empty space white?" the younger and more impatient man asks, having never fully achieved the mystical submissiveness that binds the Saint to his destiny.
Both men appear torn between their desire for higher wisdom and their eagerness to see.


Ginger: Rhizome With a Reason
FRESH ginger came into style in the mid-1970's.
In those days it was hard to find.
But as stir-fried food with garlic, scallions and ginger became more and more popular, ginger was soon available in even the most pedestrian supermarket.
Now, the rhizome (for ginger is a stem, not a root) shows up in the most unexpected places: as a dressing for fois gras, smoked salmon or even a chicken salad.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
WAGNER 28, CLINTON 20: Javonny Darling scored 3 touchdowns and Ron Spann intercepted 2 passes to lead the Falcons (2-1) past the Governors (1-1).
The turning point came with Wagner leading, 14-8, in the third quarter.
Pablo Foster of Clinton threw into the end zone but was picked off by Spann.
Darling, Wagner's star quarterback, (23 carries for 159 yards), then capped an 80-yard drive with a 5-yard run.
Darling put Clinton away in the fourth quarter with a 50-yard run on a fourth-and-2 play.
GARDEN CITY 29, LAWRENCE 7: Garden City, the defending Conference II champion (1-0) started the game with a 70-yard drive on 10 plays that was capped by Peter Murphy's 1-yard run.
Lawrence (1-1) then came back with its own long drive (80 yards on 18 plays) on a pass to Mario Marra from Frank Mistero.
The rest of the game was all Garden City.
LINDENHURST 31, CENTEREACH 7: Jamie Maltese scored two touchdowns and linebacker Billy DeWitt scored on a fumble that he forced to push the Bulldogs (2-0) past the Cougars (0-2).
Centereach scored in the first minute and half, when Danny Giove hit Jeff Morgan with a 17-yard touchdown pass.
But Lindenhurst then scored 31 consecutive points and held Centereach to 127 yards of total offense.
Greg Pryor led the defense with 7 tackles and 1 interception.
NEW CANAAN 17, RIDGEFIELD 0: New Canaan (3-0) held Ridgefield (0-3) to 123 yards while posting its second shutout of the season.
Mike Brown opened the scoring when he connected with Clint Brown with a 9-yard pass with 1 minute 45 seconds left in the first half.
Todd Smith kicked 2 extra points and a 29-yard field goal.
Tailback Adam Butterworth (10 carries for 121 yards) capped the scoring with a 72-yard touchdown run in the last quarter.
Outstanding Performances
WAKENE WALTON: scored 3 touchdowns and rushed for 275 yards, including 65 on a punt return, to help power Harvey past Boston Prep, 45-6. . . .
MIKE ABRUZESE: the quarterback of Roosevelt scored 2 touchdowns while running 165 yards on 13 carries to help the Presidents breeze past Suffern, 21-7. . . .
PATRICK WALLACE: the all-county running back for West Islip scored 4 touchdowns and rushed for 211 yards on 13 carries as the Lions crushed North Babylon, 30-7. . . .
JACKIE GAINER: kicked an extra point in Valley Stream Central (10-0) victory over East Meadow, and became the first girl to score a point in New York State. . . .
MATT FLOOD: scored 2 touchdowns while running for 111 yards on 16 carries as Irvington crushed Pine Plains, 34-6.


Style Makers; Han Feng, Accessories Designer
Han Feng, who says she is a descendant of Confucious, designs scarfs, gloves and hair ornaments that are a little more worldly than her forebear might have liked.
She trims iridescent shawls with gilded tassels, runs rows of fluorescent pink bows up the backs of black wool gloves and links velvet buttons into knobby pony tail holders.


Tribal or Ethnic?
To the Editor:
A Sept. 13 article on political strife among blacks in South Africa refers to deep "tribal" differences, while an article the same day on Yugoslavia speaks of the "ethnically" contested region of eastern Croatia.
Day after day in your pages, light-skinned people are marked by ethnicity, while people of color are wracked by tribalism.
Isn't it time to give up this outdated linguistic double standard?
Why not offer evenhanded terms to describe the cultural and political activities of peoples of differing skin colors?
Either we're all tribal, or we're all ethnic.
ALMA GOTTLIEB  Associate Professor of Anthropology University of Illinois Urbana, Ill., Sept. 13, 1991


Off Alert
Sometime yesterday, for the first time in two generations, the B-52's rolled back to their hangars and the world exhaled with relief.
Those nuclear bombers, poised on never-ending 24-hour "strip alert," have long given relentless, roaring evidence of the potential for nuclear annihilation.
Now, in his remarkable anti-nuclear initiative, President Bush has taken the planes off alert, started a massive reduction in America's nuclear arsenal and given a timely incentive for the Soviet Government to do the same.


Again, Boston College Crumbles in the 2d Half
Boston College must be getting tired of this script.
In their first four games the Eagles have played ferocious football in the first half only to see the effort crumble after intermission with a mistake here, a bad break there.


Heavy-Metal Groups Shake Moscow
Bare chested and painted in tattoos, the lead singer for a Texas heavy-metal rock group named Pantera gazed over a sea of tens of thousands of screaming Soviet fans sprawled over the Tushino Airfield Saturday afternoon and said that he was moved.
"It's a killer thing we are all here together," screamed the singer, Phil Anselmo, who had just removed a yellow devil's mask, "and shows that music is the universal language."


Quotation of the Day
"I think that I can say without any exaggeration that our position, our assessment of these proposals is positive, very positive. These proposals demonstrate the commitment of the U.S. Administration and of President Bush himself to the process of nuclear disarmament." -- President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ 10:4. ]


Zimmermann Plays New York
What is the most DIFficult work in the operatic repertory?
Christopher Keene, for one, can answer the question without hesitation.
Pointing to the score of Bernd Alois Zimmermann's "Soldaten" on his desk recently, the director of the New York City Opera declared, "This is the most difficult piece that exists."
In 1969, Mr.
Keene continued, when he was being interviewed for an assistant's post at the company by Julius Rudel, who was then the director, he saw the same score on the same desk.
"Mr. Rudel said: 'This is a great work. I'm convinced that it's the most significant work that's been written since the Second World War, and I want very much to produce it, but I don't think the company can handle it.'


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; A Bond Route To Expansion
THE developer of Franklin Mills, this area's largest off-price shopping mall, is seeking to expand it from 1.4 million to 1.8 million square feet with financing from municipal bonds guaranteed by its future tax revenues.
Faced with a tight private credit market, the developer, Western Development Corporation of Washington, has turned to a state program called Tax Increment Financing.
This lets a city or county create a district redevelopment authority -- a step this city has not yet taken -- that can issue bonds to finance an approved project.


DON'T MISS
This list of fall cultural events in New York City was compiled by Roberta Smith (art and photography), Rita Reif (antiques), Paul Goldberger (architecture), James R. Oestreich (classical music), Jennifer Dunning (dance), David Richards (theater), Jon Pareles (pop-jazz), Caryn James (film), Bill Carter (television) and Peter M. Nichols (video), Dates and times are subject to change.
ART Today


Lehigh, Behind Kempa, Rolls By Columbia to Go 3-0
In a game that saw two outstanding individual performances, Lehigh defeated Columbia at Baker Field, 22-9, yesterday.
Lehigh improved its 1991 record to 3-0 with its seventh victory over the Lions in the schools' 12 meetings.
The Lions slipped to 0-2.


Avaunt Thee, Recreant Cyborg!
With THE WASTE LANDS (Donald M. Grant, Box 187, Hampton Falls, N.H. 03844, $38), Stephen King resumes his chronicle of the odd, lethal quest of Roland of Gilead, first described in "The Gunslinger" and continued in "The Drawing of the Three." These books constitute his most ambitious and exotic project to date, a continuing series collectively titled "The Dark Tower."
While the books share with Mr.
King's horror novels bizarre villains and frequent eruptions of violence, they are otherwise a distinct departure: the series is set not in rural Maine but in what Mr.
King calls Mid-World, a realm that parallels and occasionally overlaps our own world.
The emphasis here is on Roland's long trek across the blasted landscapes of his world, filled with "death and murder and madness," in an attempt to reach the enigmatic Dark Tower, rather than on any single contest with some sort of resilient monster.
And while the references to popular culture are as constant as in his other books, the series seems to owe more to Joseph Campbell's popularization of the myths and fables of the hero than to the gaudy comic books and horror films of Mr.
King's youth.


St. Petersburg Stayed Calm in Coup Attempt
To the Editor:
The impression left by your Sept. 10 report from St.
Petersburg ("A Diary of Resistance: 48 Hours in Leningrad") is inaccurate in one fundamental way.
In recounting the events in Leningrad during the failed coup, you suggest that popular street protests burst forth immediately after the coup and that only the reluctance of police officials to obey orders to disperse the crowds averted a bloodbath.
As an American graduate student who was in Leningrad during and after the failed coup, I can affirm that the reality was different.


Definitely Not the Last Word
Sure he can hit, but can he take a hit?
At least one doctor thinks BO JACKSON should stick to baseball and concentrate on his career with the Chicgo White Sox rather than risk reinjuring his damaged hip by returning to football and the Los Angeles Raiders.
"I told Bo that his recovery is excellent to this point and that he should be leery to do anything that would jeopardize his recovery," Dr.
JAMES BOSCARDIN said in an interview with The Daily Southtown Economist in Chicago.
"From a theoretical standpoint, the fewer collision stresses he applies to his hip the better off he'll be."
Football of course, is a game of collision stresses, but Boscardin knows that Jackson will not accept his recommendation as the last word on whether to return to the Raiders.
Boscardin is the team physician of the White Sox. (AP)


Where the Orchards Grow
Here is a listing of orchards in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut that offer pick-your-own apples and pumpkins.
This listing came from agricultural guides published by each state.
For hours and other information, call the individual farms.
NEW YORK STATE
Columbia County
DON BAKER FARM, Hudson, apples, (518) 828-5890.
FLOYD MERRIFIELD JR., Claverack, apples, (518) 851-7346.
GOLDEN HARVEST FARMS, Valatie, apples and pumpkins, (518) 758-7683.
HOTALING FARM MARKET, Claverack, apples and pumpkins, (518) 851-9864.
LOVEAPPLE FARM, Ghent, apples, (518) 828-5048.
SAMASCOTT ORCHARD, Kinderhook, apples and pumpkins, (518) 758-7224.
STONE BRIDGE FARM, Hudson, apples, (518) 828-0261.
WINTJE FARMS, Germantown, apples and pumpkins, (518) 537-6072.
YONDER FARMS, Valatie, apples and pumpkins, (518) 758-7011. Dutchess County
BREEZY ACRES, Rhinebeck, apples, (914) 876-2402.
CROSS ORCHARDS ROADSIDE MARKETS, Lagrangeville, apples, (914) 223-5040.
FISHKILL FARMS, Hopewell, apples and pumpkins, (914) 897-4377.
GREIG FARM, Red Hook, apples and pumpkins, (914) 758-1234.
HENRY DYKEMAN, Pawling, pumpkins, (914) 855-5166.
JUDSON'S FARM MARKET, Wingdale, pumpkins, (914) 832-6745.
MEADOWBROOK FARM, Wappingers Falls, apples, (914) 297-3002.
ORTOLE ORCHARDS, Red Hook, apples and pumpkins, (914) 758-9355.
SECOR STRAWBERRIES, Wappingers Falls, pumpkins, (914) 452-6883.
TERHUNE ORCHARDS, Salt Point, apples and pumpkins, (914) 266-5382.
UNDERHILL FARMS, Poughkeepsie, apples and pumpkins, (914) 452-5986.
WONDERLAND FARM, Rhinebeck, pumpkins, (914) 876-4981. Greene County
HENRY BOEHM, Climax, apples, (518) 731-6196. Orange County
ACE FARMS COUNTRY BARN, Highland Mills, pumpkins, (914) 783-1381.
APPLEWOOD ORCHARDS, Warwick, apples and pumpkins, (914) 986-1684.
DAVANDJER FARMS, Pine Island, pumpkins, (914) 258-4543.
KAMARAD ORCHARD, Pine Island, apples and pumpkins, (914) 258-4771.
LAWRENCE FARMS ORCHARDS, Newburgh, apples and pumpkins, (914) 562-4268.
LINDA O'BRIEN, Pine Bush, pumpkins, (914) 744-5495.
MASKER FRUIT FARMS, Warwick, apples, (914) 986-1058.
OCHS ORCHARD, Warwick, apples, (914) 986-1591.
PENNINGS ORCHARD AND FARM MARKET, Warwick, apples and pumpkins, (914) 986-1059.
PUMPKIN PATCH, Bloomingburg, pumpkins, (914) 733-4656.
SLATEHILL ORCHARDS, Slate Hill, apples and pumpkins, (914) 355-4493. Rockland County
DR. DAVIES FARM, Congers, apples, (914) 268-7020.
DURYEA FARMS, Monsey, apples and pumpkins, (914) 356-1988.
ORCHARDS OF CONKLIN, Pomona, apples and pumpkins, (914) 354-0369. Suffolk County
A AND H DOMALESKI, Mattituck, pumpkins, (516) 734-6886.
ALBERT H. SCHMITT AND SONS, Dix Hills, pumpkins, (516) 549-1159.
CHICK'S FARMSTAND, Riverhead, pumpkins, (516) 298-5945.
COOPER FARMS, Mattituck, pumpkins, (516) 298-4949.
COVEY'S FARM, Southold, pumpkins, (516) 765-2628.
FRED LEWIN FARMS, Calverton, apples and pumpkins, (516) 727-3346.
GREEN THUMB, Water Mill, pumpkins, (516) 726-4989.
HANK'S FARM STAND, Water Mill, pumpkins, (516) 726-4964.
HOWARD LEWIN, Baiting Hollow, apples and pumpkins, (516) 929-6439.
KRUPSKI'S PUMPKIN AND VEGETABLE FARM, Peconic, pumpkins, (516) 734-6847.
LEWIN FARMS, Wading River, apples and pumpkins, (516) 929-4327.
LITTLE CHIEF FARMSTAND, Aquebogue, pumpkins, (516) 722-4369.
MAYS FARM, Wading River, pumpkins, (516) 929-6654.
MEYERS FARM, Melville, pumpkins, (516) 692-7667.
SCHMITT FARMS, Melville, pumpkins, (516) 423-5693.
TERRY'S FARM, Orient, apples and pumpkins, (516) 323-3571.
WICKHAM'S FRUIT FARM, Cutchogue, apples, (516) 734-6441.
YOUNG'S ORCHARD, Riverhead, pumpkins, (516) 727-5363. Sullivan County
REINSHAGEN FARMS, Swan Lake, pumpkins, (914) 583-4558. Ulster County
APPLE HILL FARM, South New Paltz, apples and pumpkins, (914) 255-0917.
CLARKE WESTERVELT FARMS, Milton, apples and pumpkins, (914) 795-2270.
DOLAN ORCHARDS, Wallkill, pumpkins, (914) 895-2153.
DRESSEL FARMS, New Paltz, pumpkins, (914) 255-0693.
HEPWORTH FARM MARKET, Milton, pumpkins, (914) 795-2142.
MIKE LEMBO AND SON, Modena, apples, (914) 883-7135.
NEMETH ORCHARDS, Ulster Park, apples, (914) 331-3776.
PROSPECT HILL ORCHARDS, Milton, apples, (914) 795-2383.
TANTILLOS FARM MARKET, Gardiner, apples and pumpkins, (914) 255-6196.
W. AND C. RHODES, Highland and New Paltz, apples and pumpkins, (914) 883-6667.
WALLKILL VIEW FARM, New Paltz, pumpkins, (914) 255-8050.
WILKLOW ORCHARDS, Highland, apples, (914) 691-2339.
WRIGHT FARMS, Gardiner, apples, (914) 255-5300. Westchester County
OUTHOUSE ORCHARDS, Croton Falls, apples, (914) 277-3188.
WILKENS FRUIT FARM, Yorktown, apples, (914) 245-5111. CONNECTICUT
Fairfield County
BLUE JAY ORCHARDS, Bethel, apples and pumkins, (203) 748-0119.
CANDEE FARM, Easton, pumpkins, (203) 268-5623.
JONES TREE FARM, Shelton, pumpkins, (203) 929-8425.
TAYLOR FAMILY FARM, Danbury, pumpkins, (203) 743-3331.
WARRUPS FARM, West Redding, pumpkins, (203) 938-9403.  Hartford County
ALLEN'S CIDER MILL, North Granby, pumpkins, (203) 653-6438.
APPLEBERRY FARM, West Suffield, apples, (203) 668-7252.
BELLTOWN HILL ORCHARDS, South Glastonbury, apples, (203) 633-2789.
BROWN'S HARVEST, Windsor, pumpkins, (203) 683-0266.
BUSHY HILL ORCHARD, Granby, apples and pumpkins, (203) 653-4022.
CAVANNA FARM, South Glastonbury, apples, (203) 659-1856.
CEDAR BROOK FARM, West Suffield, pumpkins, (203) 668-5026.
DONDERO ORCHARDS, South Glastonbury, apples, (203) 633-2375.
LEWIS FARMS, Southington, apples, (203) 628-9736.
LOST ACRES ORCHARD, North Granby, apples, (203) 653-6897.
MIDWAY FARMERS, Kensington, apples, (203) 828-5016.
MOUNTAIN VIEW FARM, Glastonbury, apples, (203) 633-4372.
OLD CIDER MILL, Glastonbury, apples, (203) 633-4880.
PICKIN' PATCH, Avon, pumpkins, (203) 677-9552.
ROGERS' ORCHARDS, Southington, apples, (203) 229-4240.
ROGERS SUNNYMOUNT FARM, Southington, apples, (203) 879-1206.
ROSE'S BERRY FARM, South Glastonbury, pumpkins, (203) 633-7467.
SCAGLIA FRUIT FARM, South Glastonbury, apples, (203) 633-9055. Litchfield County
AVERILL FARM, Washington Depot, apples, (203) 868-2777.
BURDICK'S ORCHARD, New Hartford, apples, (203) 379-3858.
CHURCHILL GARDENS, Woodbury, apples, (203) 263-3516.
CLAYTON GUSTAFSON, Woodbury, apples, (203) 263-3516.
CORNWALL POULTRY FARM, Cornwall, apples, (203) 672-6585.
HOLIDAY FARM ORCHARD, New Hartford, apples, (203) 482-4971.
MARCH FARM, Bethlehem, apples and pumpkins, (203) 266-7721.
TARA FARM, Watertown, pumpkins, (203) 274-3511.
TERE-KOOK FARM, New Preston, apples, (203) 868-2648.
YOUR BASIC APPLE COMPANY, Washington Depot, apples, (203) 868-2244. Middlesex County
GATOR CREEK FARM, Clinton, pumpkins, (203) 669-2720.
LYMAN ORCHARDS, Middlefield, apples and pumpkins, (203) 349-9337.
POGMORES' FARM, Middlefield, pumpkins, (203) 349-9332.
SCOTT'S CONNECTICUT VALLEY ORCHARD, Deep River, apples, (203) 526-9633.
New Haven County
BERRY FARM, Southbury, pumpkins, (203) 262-6000.
BISHOP FARMS, Cheshire, apples, (203) 272-8243.
BISHOP'S NORTHFORD ORCHARDS, Northford, apples, (203) 453-6424.
BISHOP'S ORCHARD, Guilford, apples and pumpkins, (203) 453-6424.
DRAZEN ORCHARDS, Cheshire, apples and pumpkins, (203) 272-7985.
HENRY EVANS, Seymour, pumpkins, (203) 734-4816.
HICKORY HILL ORCHARDS, Cheshire, apples and pumpkins, (203) 272-3824.
HIGH HILL ORCHARD, Meriden, pumpkins, (203) 294-0276.
IVES ORCHARD, Wallingford, apples, (203) 634-0825.
KOGUT'S ORCHARD, Wallingford, apples, (203) 235-6378.
JOSEPH FLYNN ORCHARD, Northford, apples, (203) 484-0220.
MERRY MOUNTAIN, Woodbridge, pumpkins, (203) 387-4942.
MITCHELL FARM, Southbury, pumpkins, (203) 264-1588.
OAK CREST FARM, North Haven, apples, (203) 239-0474.
ROSE ORCHARDS, North Branford, apples, (203) 488-7996.
SCHREIBER'S FARM, Oxford, pumpkins, (203) 888-3263. New London County
ALLYN RED BARN, Ledyard, apples, (203) 464-9316.
BREWSTER'S ORCHARDS, Jewett City, apples, (203) 376-4167.
GOSHEN HILL FRUIT FARM, Lebanon, apples, (203) 642-6899.
HOLMBERG ORCHARDS, Gales Ferry, apples and pumpkins, (203) 464-7305.
MAPLE LAND FARMS, Preston, pumpkins, (203) 889-3766.
PINE BROOK ORCHARD, Colchester, apples and pumpkins, (203) 537-2833.
SCOTT ORCHARD, East Lyme, apples, (203) 739-2529.
VIN'S STAND, Franklin, pumpkins, (203) 642-7458.
WILLOW SPRING FARM, Mystic, apples and pumpkins, (203) 536-3083.
YANKEE FARMER, East Lyme, apples, (203) 739-5209. Tolland County
ELM KNOLLFARM, Somers, pumpkins, (203) 749-2083.
JOHNNY APPLESEED FARM, Ellington, apples and pumpkins, (203) 875-1000.
PLEASANT VALLEY FARM, Mansfield, pumpkins, (203) 429-7303.
SMITH'S BERRY FARM, Hebron, pumpkins, (203) 228-9644.
VICTOR DALLACORTE, Stafford Springs, apples, (203) 875-9480. Windham County
ARVIDSON FARM, Woodstock, apples, (203) 928-3217.
BARN SWALLOW FARM, Woodstock Valley, pumpkins, (203) 974-0461.
BUELL AND SONS, Eastford, apples, (203) 974-1150.
CROOKE ORCHARDS, Ashford, apples, (203) 429-5336.
PALAZZI ORCHARD, East Killingly, apples, (203) 779-0674.
PUTNAM HEIGHTS ORCHARD, Putnam, apples, (203) 928-2431.
WESTVIEW ORCHARDS, Plainfield, apples, (203) 564-2136.
WOODSTOCK ORCHARDS, Woodstock, apples, (203) 928-2225. NEW JERSEY
Atlantic County
JOHN KERTZ FARM, Egg Harbor, pumpkins, (609) 965-2756. Bergen County
DEMAREST FARM HILLSDALE, apples and pumpkins, (201) 666-0472. Burlington County
CONTE FARM, Tabernacle, apples and pumpkins, (609) 268-1010.
FOUR WINDS FARM, Tabernacle, pumpkins, (609) 268-9113.
JOHNSON'S CORNER, Medford, pumpkins, (609) 654-5894.
ORCHARD LANE FARM, Chesterfield, apples, (609) 259-3684.
SPRINGVILLE ORCHARD, Mount Laurel, apples, (609) 235-1288.
STRAWBERRY HILL FARM, Chesterfield, apples and pumpkins, (609) 298-0823.
Cape May County
TARKILN FARMS, Belleplain, apples, (609) 861-2936. Gloucester County
FRUITWOOD ORCHARDS, Hardingville, apples, (609) 881-7748.
MOOD'S FARM MARKET, Mullica Hill, apples, (609) 478-2500.
NICHOLS ORCHARDS, Franklinville, apples, (609) 694-3482.
TUCK-A-LOU FARMS, Hardingville, apples and pumpkins, (609) 881-0582.
U-PICK, Mullica Hill, apples and pumpkins, (609) 478-2864. Hunterdon County
GLEN SUMMIT FARM, Pittstown, pumpkins, (908) 735-4400.
MELICKS' ORCHARDS, Oldwick, apples and pumpkins, (908) 439-3888.
PUMPKIN PATCH FARMS, Readington, pumpkins, (908) 534-4212.
SCHAEFER FARMS, Flemington, pumpkins, (908) 788-5907.
WHISTLE STOP NURSERY AND FARM, Ringoes, pumpkins, (908) 788-8552. Mercer County
GROVER FARM, Princeton Junction, pumpkins, (609) 799-1195.
LEE TURKEY FARM, Hightstown, apples and pumpkins, (609) 448-0629.
TERHUNE ORCHARDS, Princeton, apples and pumpkins, (609) 924-2310.
WATERSHED ORGANIC FARM, Pennington, pumpkins, (609) 737-6853. Middlesex County
BLOSSOM HILL FARMS, Cranbury, apples and pumpkins, (609) 799-0226.
GIAMARESE FARMS, East Brunswick, pumpkins, (908) 821-9494.
JOHN HIMICH FARMS, East Brunswick, apples and pumpkins, (908) 257-1538.
STULTS FARM, Cranbury, pumpkins, (609) 799-2523.
VONTHUN'S COUNTRY FARM MARKET, Monmouth Junction, pumpkins, (908) 329-8656.
Monmouth County
BATTLEVIEW ORCHARDS, Freehold, pumpkins, (908) 462-0756.
CASLA FARMS, Colts Neck, pumpkins, (908) 946-8885.
CREST FRUIT FARM, Freehold, apples and pumpkins, (908) 462-5669.
EASTMONT ORCHARDS, Colts Neck, apples and pumpkins, (908) 542-5404.
LAURINO FARMS, Tinton Falls, pumpkins, (908) 842-3470.
MENZEL BROTHERS, Holmdel, pumpkins, (908) 946-3060.
STATTLES' BROOKREST FARM, Marlboro, pumpkins, (908) 946-9666.
WEMROCK ORCHARDS, Freehold, pumpkins, (908) 431-2668.
WESTHAVEN FARM, Allentown, pumpkins, (609) 259-2186. Morris County
ALSTEDE FARMS, Chester, pumpkins, (908) 879-7189.
HILLVIEW FARMS, Meyersville, apples, (908) 647-3131.
ORT FARMS, Long Valley, pumpkins, (908) 876-3351.
PARKS FARMS, Chester, pumpkins, (908) 879-5509.
RIAMEDE FARMS, Chester, apples, (908) 879-5353.
TROUT BROOK FARM, Chester, apples and pumpkins, (908) 879-5935.
UNION HILL FARMS, Denville, pumpkins, (908) 989-0476. Ocean County
DEWOLF'S FARM, New Egypt, apples, (609) 758-2424. Salem County
LARCHMONT FARMS, Elmer, apples, (609) 358-0700.
NICHOLS ORCHARDS, Norma, apples, (609) 694-3482. Somerset County
BROOKVIEW FARMS, Somerset, pumpkins, (908) 526-8083. Sussex County
CAHILL'S FARM, Andover, pumpkins, (201) 786-5429.
IDEAL FARM AND GARDEN CENTER, Lafayette, pumpkins, (201) 579-3893.
KATTERMANN FARMS, Sussex, pumpkins, (201) 875-8171.
POCHUCK VALLEY FARM, Glenwood, apples and pumpkins, (201) 764-4732.
SUNSET MOUNTAIN FARM, Stillwater, apples, (201) 383-9208.
SUSSEX COUNTY BERRY FARM, Newton, pumpkins, (201) 579-5055.
VALLEY VIEW FARMS, Augusta, pumpkins, (201) 383-6565.
WINDY BROW ORCHARDS, Newton, apples and pumpkins, (201) 579-9657. Warren County
BROOK HOLLOW FARM, Hainesburg, apples and pumpkins, (908) 496-4577.
PARKS FARMS, Belvidere, apples and pumpkins, (908) 879-5509.
RACE FARM, Blairstown, apples and pumpkins, (908) 362-8151.
TREE-LICIOUS ORCHARDS, Port Murray, apples and pumpkins, (908) 689-2906.


A la Carte: Recreating Some Zanghi Favorites
NICOLA'S is going out with a bang.
A few weeks ago it was reported that the landmark restaurant in Glen Cove would close its doors in December or January.
But before the owners, Nicola and Trisch Zanghi, depart, they are pulling out all the culinary stops.
Chef Zanghi and his pastry chef, Diane Bak, are recreating favorites from the past.


Girl in a Bee Suit
FORMS OF SHELTER
By Angela Davis-Gardner. 276 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields.


Two Cents' Worth for Nothing
Proposed: A law permitting you to send letters to your Federal Senator or Representative without a stamp on the envelope.
That's right.
A people's frank.
After all, the theory of the Congressional frank is that it promotes public dialogue, that a more informed electorate is better able to govern itself.
As Thomas Jefferson wrote on behalf of the frank, communications between elected officials and their constituents should be "free, full and unowned by any." This, Jefferson said, would "give the will of the people the influence it ought to have."


Brazilian Sculptor, Celebrated at Home, Gets a Belated U.S. Debut
A BRAZILIAN sculptor, Jose Resende, is renowned in his own country, having had a dozen solo exhibitions there in the last 20 years and having participated in twice as many group shows, including three Sao Paulo Bienals.
Abroad, he has been in the Venice Biennale (1989), a survey of Brazilian art in Paris (1987) and, come 1992, will be in Documenta Kassel, in Germany.
But only now is the artist making his debut in the United States -- at the Joseloff Gallery at the University of Hartford.
This delay, though deplorable, is not surprising, for the balance of power on the international art scene usually reflects that in global economics.
But that natural law has not deterred Latin American artists from commenting defensively and with some justification on the patronizing attitude taken by the United States to art from countries south of the Rio Grande.
As the Uruguayan Conceptualist Luis Camnitzer once remarked, New York City is "the center of the empire," and "the measuring stick for success" is set "by the empire and not in the colonies."


Ms. Joh Is Wed to J. A. Carnella
Meyung Kim Joh, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Tong Hyub Joh of New York, and Jonathan Alexander Carnella, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank T. Carnella of Houston, were married yesterday at the James Burden House in New York.
Judge Joan O'Dwyer of the State Court of Claims and Anthony P. Savarese, a retired State Supreme Court judge, who are husband and wife, officiated.
Ms.
Joh, 27 years old, is an art director at Serge Sabarsky Inc. in New York.
The company organizes museum exhibitions of German and Austrian expressionist art.
She graduated from the Brearley School and Cornell University.
The bride's father, a professor of neuroscience at Cornell University Medical College, is the director of molecular neurobiology at the W. M. Burke Medical Research Institute in White Plains.
Her mother, Byung Sook Joh, is the president of the Pan Asia Company, a women's clothing importer and manufacturer.
Mr.
Carnella, 27, is an associate at the investment banking firm of Lazard Freres &amp; Company in New York.
He graduated with distinction from Cornell and received a master's degree in business from the University of Pennsylvania.
His father is the executive vice president of Texas Commerce Bank.


Ms. Donahue Weds E. L. Fine
Lauren Mary Donohue, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gene J. Donohue of Dix Hills, L.I., was married yesterday to Erik Lawrence Fine, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome L. Fine of New York.
Rabbi Irwin Lowenheim officiated and the Rev.
Charles Gartner, a Roman Catholic priest, was a witness to the ceremony at the chapel on the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University in Brookville, L.I.
Mrs.
Fine, 26 years old, is a divisional manager for Dun &amp; Bradstreet in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton, as did her husband.
Her father, a biochemist, is a director of the Wantagh Diagnostic Laboratories in Wantagh, L.I.
Her mother, Maureen Donohue, is principal of the Bowling Green Elementary School in Westbury, L.I.


Quest


Arms Plan Germinated In Back-Porch Sessions
With his characteristic thirst for secrecy, President Bush waited until early Friday morning to inform his allies about his plan to announce the broadest arms control proposal in decades that same afternoon.
Just before 11 P.M.
Eastern time on Thursday, the first cables went out from the White House to American embassies in Bonn, London and Paris and to NATO headquarters in Brussels.
At about 1 A.M., an urgent message was transmitted to the American Embassy in Moscow, and an hour after that, similar cables were sent to Tokyo, Canberra and Seoul.


Robin J. H. Maxwell Is Married
Robin Jane Hyslop Maxwell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hamish Maxwell of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Dr.
James Robert Wilentz, a son of Justice Robert N. Wilentz of Deal, N.J., and the late Jacqueline M. Wilentz.
The Rev.
Goldthwaite Sherrill, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Roy Rosenberg performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Maxwell, who is 32 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father, recently retired, was the chairman and chief executive of Philip Morris Companies Inc. in New York.


Sara McLeod Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Donald McLeod of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Sara Margaret McLeod, and William Alan Braverman, a son of Miriam and Dr.
Lewis E. Braverman of Newton Centre, Mass.
Ms.
McLeod, 27 years old, is an associate at the Washington law firm of Covington &amp; Burling.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Vesterich, Mallender, Dubois &amp; Dritsas in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.


The Bush of Their Choice
When the focus went from RANDY BUSH, the right fielder, to GEORGE BUSH, the President, dozens of Minnesota Twins fans got on the phone.
The switchboard at WCCO-TV in Minneapolis got busy with calls from fans upset that the Twins' game with the Blue Jays in Toronto Friday night was interrupted by a Presidential speech.
One minute it was Randy Bush watching a triple sail past him in right field, and the next it was President Bush talking about doing away with some nuclear weapons.


Mutual Funds; Opportunity Knocks in Europe
The stock market picked up momentum in the third quarter, as the average stock fund gained 6.1 percent through Thursday.
Small stocks kept chugging along, rising 10.2 percent as a group, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
Among specialty funds, the health-and-biotechnology group was the leader, rising 17.8 percent, with financial services funds (up 10.6 percent) and science-and-technology funds (up 9.6 percent) also performing well.


Legal Precedent Supports Tyson
To the Sports Editor:
Muhammad Ali returned to the ring in 1970 only after he sued the New York State Athletic Commission in Federal court and not, as implied by Dave Anderson, because he eschewed litigation or decided to wait until he was cleared of criminal charges for refusing induction into the Armed Services.
Rather than another example of our "litigious society," Ali's successful suit represents judicial vindication of equal protection of the laws.


POSTINGS: Carnegie Hill Tour; 24 Open Apartments
Although it is not unusual for people trying to sell their apartments to hold open houses, Manhattan buyers rarely have the chance to move casually from one apartment to the next, seeing several properties in a one afternoon the way they might in the suburbs.
But a brokerage on the Upper East Side, Carnegie Hill Properties, says it will offer just such an opportunity next Sunday.
The firm said at least 24 apartments from its listings in Carnegie Hill -- the prosperous, tree-lined neighborhood bounded by Fifth Avenue, Lexington Avenue, 86th Street and 96th Street -- will be open for inspection from 1 to 4 P.M.
Brokers will be the hosts at each open house and will provide floor plans.
Asking prices for the apartments will range from $150,000 to $1 million, and visitors can come and go as they choose.


It's Never Too Early to Start Global Lessons, Teachers Say
FOR many early-childhood educators, it is never too soon to introduce children to other cultures and experiences.
"There was a realization out there that multicultural education has to take place in every school at every level, and the earlier the better," said Mary Beth Anderson of the SUNY Purchase Westchester School Partnership.
This consortium, which represents 36 county school districts, businesses, community agencies and State University of New York at Purchase, developed a multicultural-education resource book for use from kindergarten through second grade.


P.L.O. Ousts Top Official From Main Policy Body
The Palestine National Council, the highest legislative body of the Palestine Liberation Organization, dropped Abu Abbas, whom Washington accuses of being a terrorist leader, from its ruling executive council today, apparently to meet American conditions for resuming a dialogue with the P.L.O.
Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O., told a news conference that the resignation of Abu Abbas met United States conditions for a resumption of the dialogue cut off last year.
He called on Washington to resume direct talks with the P.L.O.


Miss Millard Has Wedding
Kathleen Maura Millard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. F. Millard of Fenwick, Conn., and Hobe Sound, Fla., was married yesterday to Jack Daniel Rehm Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rehm of Fenwick, Conn., and Des Moines.
The Rev.
Michael Boughton officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Savior in New York.
Mrs.
Rehm, 24 years old, and Mr.
Rehm, 26, are graduates of the College of the Holy Cross.
The bride is a sales assistant at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in New York.
Her father, a former chairman and chief executive of the Coca-Cola Bottling Company of New York, is chairman of Lance Company, a household goods manufacturer in Hudson, Mass., and the managing partner of Millard/O'Reilly Enterprises, a private investment partnership in Fairfield, Conn.
Mr.
Rehm is a media planner with the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency in New York.
His father is president and chief executive of Meredith Corporation, a Des Moines communications company.


Review/Opera; New Try for 'Antony and Cleopatra'
The fate suffered by Samuel Barber's opera "Antony and Cleopatra" is almost as troubled and stormy as the story of its principals' torrid love affair.
Commissioned for the opening of the Metropolitan Opera House at Lincoln Center (an event whose silver anniversary was celebrated by the company earlier this week), it was an extraordinary flop.
Franco Zeffirelli created a production so overwrought and overstocked that it broke the stage's brand new turntable (creating a logistical mess for many operas that first season).
He also wrote a libretto confusingly excerpted from Shakespeare's already knotty play.
And finally, Barber's music was roundly rejected by many critics.
This was a catastrophe for the much-honored composer, who later attempted to rescue the work from oblivion with a new, condensed version, done with the help of Gian Carlo Menotti and first performed at the Juilliard Opera Center in 1975.
This time Zeffirelli's name was removed from the libretto, and while critical reaction was more muted, it was still largely disapproving.


Alice Hubbard Weds Christophe Lissarrague
Alice de Kock Hubbard, a daughter of Mrs.
Charles J. Hubbard of Shelburne, Vt., and the late Mr.
Hubbard, was married yesterday to Christophe Lissarrague, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean-Charles Lissarrague of Paris.
The Rev.
Paul Bortz, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Lissarrague, 29 years old, graduated from Smith College.
She is studying for a master's degree in education at Columbia University.
Her father was an architect.
The bridegroom, 31, graduated from the Institut Superior de Gestion in Paris and is a chef in New York.
His father, who is retired, was president of ROC Cosmetics in Paris.


Zen and the Art of Flirtation
THE LADY AND THE MONK
Four Seasons in Kyoto. By Pico Iyer. 338 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Making a Difference; Polygram's Push to Become a Big Hollywood Player
When Alain Levy became a student at one of the top engineering schools in France, he quickly learned that "there was an in crowd that set the tone, and the school was run by a handful of people," the 44-year-old chief executive of Polygram N.V. recalled the other day.
It was a lesson that he did not forget and one that he is now applying to Polygram's aggressive American expansion.
Within the past week, Polygram, which is 80 percent owned by Philips N.V., the Dutch electronics company, announced not only that it would distribute Motown's records but also that it would spend $200 million in the film business.


Linda F. Ross Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
N.
Barry Ross of Roslyn Heights, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Linda Faye Ross to Dr.
Robert Charles Wollman, a son of Barry Wollman of Los Angeles and Louise Wollman of White Plains.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Ross, 27 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is an associate producer of books on tape for Simon &amp; Schuster in New York.
Her father is a partner in the Garden City, L.I., law firm Hollenberg, Levin, Solomon, Ross &amp; Belsky.
Her mother, Jane Ross, is the director of special events for the Greater New York chapter of the National Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.


Baltic States Now Require Separate Visas
The newly independent Baltic states are now requiring visas for Americans, though the recent upheaval in the Soviet Union has not changed visa requirements for the other newly independent republics.
The states -- Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania -- have begun issuing visas at the point of entry and, in the case of Lithuania, at some consular offices.
But representatives of all three nations indicated a desire to eventually require just a valid passport for someone from a friendly nation.


Salmon on the Rise and Run
The westering sun had vanished behind a wild tumble of dark clouds when I finished probing Silver's Pool on the St.
Mary's River and moved downstream.
Atlantic salmon vaulted from the water behind, beside and before me as I cast, and in the fast shallow run at the head of Silver's I had seen their gray shapes on the bottom.
None had shown interest in my flies, however.
The water was low and most of the fish had been in the pool for a long time, waiting for a rise of cold water that would incite them to continue their upstream journey to their spawning beds.
Under such conditions, a fisherman can go for days without hooking a salmon.


Music Minus Two


Twins Win And Clinch Tie for Title
An unfortunate turn of events for the Toronto Blue Jays put the Minnesota Twins in a happy state of limbo today.
The Twins wreaked havoc in a four-run fifth inning after Tom Candiotti, the pitcher who stymied them early on, was injured.
That inning and the strong pitching of Jack Morris was more than enough to secure a 5-0 victory.


Three Days in August
MONDAY, AUG. !(: AT 8 IN THE MORNING, A PHONE CALL from Victoria Ivleva, a photographer, wakes me. "I'm sorry to call so early," she says, "but I think I'm going to have to cancel dinner tonight. You see, Gorbachev has just resigned, and I don't think I'm going to make it to the market, and I have no vegetables in the house."
My mind is fogged. "Gorbachev has
resigned?"
I repeat vaguely, and she says: "Apparently yes. That's all I know about it."


Where to Find the Church Suppers
Here are addresses and telephone numbers for the church suppers mentioned.
Call the individual churches for times, fees and other specifies.
ABYSSINIAN BAPTIST CHURCH, 132 Odell Clark Place, Manhattan; (212)862-7474.


Frankfurt
Ask a Frankfurter what it's like to live in Germany's banking and business capital, and the answer is often a defensive shake of the head and a heartfelt variation of, "It's not as bad as you think." For decades this city has been battling its reputation as a bland, commercial center with little to offer except the financial services of 396 banking concerns.
Frankfurt seems to be winning its battle.
By narrowing downtown streets, by widening sidewalks to encourage outdoor cafes and street life in general, by establishing pedestrian malls and reconstructing buildings destroyed in the war, the city is dispelling the aura of future shock that had threatened to pervade it.


Technology; Using Compressed Air To Store Up Electricity
Electric utilities confront a challenge unique in manufacturing: their product is consumed at the instant it is produced; customers can demand as much as they want whenever they want it, and running short of supply, even for a moment, is catastrophic.
Thus, for as long as the industry has existed, engineers have been looking for ways to store electricity.
They have used batteries, which are effective but expensive, and hydroelectric plants that run in both directions, which are less costly but damage the environment.


Mauriane Smith and James O'Brien Are Wed
Mauriane Kitery Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel J. Smith of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday in Ocean Beach, L.I., to Lieut.
James Kenneth O'Brien, U.S.N., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth O'Brien of Crestwood, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard Bauhoff officiated at Our Lady of the Magnificat Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
O'Brien, 24 years old, graduated from Simmons College.
Lieutenant O'Brien, 26, graduated from the State University of New York's Maritime College.
He is stationed at the Naval Air Station at Virginia Beach, Va.


Life as Theater
To the Editor:
My wife and I were participants in the cultural mission to Israel sponsored by the Anti-Defamation League that was described by Gene Saks  [ "Journey to Israel: 'Why Were Any of Us Going?,' " Sept. 15 ] .
It was the most exciting and passionate eight days imaginable.


Camera
In 1927, Herbert Hoover, then Secretary of Commerce, made one of the first inter-city video phone calls to Walter Gifford, the head of A.T.&amp;T. in New York.
After that event, many thought that soon anyone making a telephone call would both hear and see the person they were speaking with.
But that did not happen.
When Thomas A. Edison invented the motion picture, he thought movies would be a minor diversion at amusement parks.
He was wrong.


Bush's Arm Plan; Cheney Orders Bombers Off Alert, Starting Sharp Nuclear Pullback
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney ordered the military today to put into effect President Bush's plan to eliminate about 2,400 short-range nuclear weapons on land and sea in Europe and Asia, a move that could save $20 billion over the next two decades.
Under the directive, Mr.
Cheney also ordered that long-range bombers and some long-range missiles end their 24-hour alert, and that several nuclear missile programs be canceled.


Navy Falls to 0-4 After Building a 13-0 Advantage
Erik White threw for 307 yards and 2 touchdowns, including the go-ahead score with 5 minutes 29 seconds left, as Bowling Green overcame a 13-0 deficit to beat Navy (0-4), 22-19, today.
Bowling Green (3-1) trailed by 13-0 in the second quarter and by 19-14 in the final period when White directed an 8-play, 65-yard drive.
Two plays after he converted a third-and-8 with a 13-yard run, White avoided a blitz and threw a 33-yard scoring pass to Ronnie Redd.
Holy Cross 45, Penn 0
WORCESTER, Mass. (AP) -- Quarterback Tom Ciaccio and running back Jerome Fuller led Holy Cross, which set a school record since joining Division I-AA in 1981 with 37 first downs and had its third-highest total yardage with 670.
Ciaccio completed 21 of 34 passes for 370 yards and 3 scores.
Fuller finished with 164 yards on 24 carries and 2 touchdowns.
Holy Cross improved to 3-0 and extended the longest Division I-AA winning streak in the nation to 12.
Penn fell to 0-2.
Yale 24, Lafayette 14
EASTON, Pa. (AP) -- Quarterback Nick Crawford scored on a 65-yard run and Matt Fahrney had a 5-yard scoring run in the fourth quarter as Yale rallied to defeat Lafayette.
Crawford's 65-yard scoring run ended a three-play drive that began on the Lafayette 20 after a blocked field goal.
Crawford had 167 yards rushing on 22 carries.
Williams 33, Tufts 3
WILLIAMSTOWN, Mass. (AP) -- Dan Dwyer and Paul Reidy each ran for two touchdowns as Williams (2-0) extended its Division III-leading winning streak to 23 games.
The Ephs also hold the second-longest winning streak in division history, behind Augusta with 37.
Villanova 35, UConn 13
VILLANOVA, Pa. (AP) -- Pat Kennedy and Jeff Johnson each had two touchdowns, and Tom Columbo passed for 257 yards and two scores for Villanova (4-0, 3-0) in the Yankee Conference game.
Villanova had 509 total yards.
Connecticut (0-4, 0-2) is off to its worst start since the 1977, when it lost its first eight games.
Dartmouth 34, Bucknell 16
HANOVER, N.H. (AP) -- Al Rosier rushed for 167 yards in 24 carries and 2 touchdowns as Dartmouth began the season 2-0 for the first time since 1977.
Bucknell (1-3) was outrushed, 279 yards to 81.
Temple 40, Howard 0
PHILADELPHIA (AP) -- Trent Thompson threw for two touchdowns and Conrad Swanson scored twice on 1-yard runs for Temple (1-3).
Howard (2-2), a Division I-AA team playing its first I-A opponent, got into Temple territory only three times and managed only 5 yards rushing.
Trinity 35, Bowdoin 14
BRUNSWICK, Me. (AP) -- James Lane completed 19 of 28 passes for 275 yards and 2 touchdowns to lead Trinity (2-0) by Bowdoin (1-1).
Ithaca 31, Alfred 8
ALFRED, N.Y. (AP) -- Nick Ismailoff tied a school record with 10 pass receptions, two for touchdowns, as Ithaca (3-0) withstood Alfred (3-1).
Wesleyan 26, Bates 6
MIDDLETOWN, Conn. (AP) -- Rick Farnell came off the bench late in the second quarter, passing for 187 yards and 2 touchdowns, to lead Wesleyan (1-1), which also scored on a tackle of punter Sean McDonagh in the end zone and when Jon Glover returned a blocked point-after attempt 98 yards for 2 points.


Give Hyacinths a Chance for Spring
IT is time to start thinking about planting bulbs.
Almost everyone includes some tulips in their garden, but how many gardeners can boast of clusters of fragrant hyacinths?
This elegant, but too often neglected, spring flower, needs to have more consideration.
It is fragrant, quite showy and available in a wide range of colors, from the traditional blues, whites and pinks to the more dramatic reds and even a yellow.
A beautiful orange hyacinth is available now.


Cloaked in Humble Origins, Democrats Make an Entrance
Early in "All the King's Men," the candidate Willie Stark is given some valuable advice: "Just tell 'em you're gonna soak the fat boys and forget the rest of the tax stuff."
As the 1992 Presidential campaign gets under way, Democratic consultants use more delicate language but the gist of their advice is much the same: Populism and class-based appeals are being retrofitted for the 1990's.
Almost every candidate for the Democratic nomination places himself firmly on the side of The People -- in 1990's populism, this is generally referred to as the middle class -- and against an economic or governmental elite that is, at best, insensitive to their plight.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Yes, Wolfsbane Exists
Q.
Horror movies refer to a plant called wolfsbane.
Is there such a plant, or is it a facetious creation?
If it exists, what is it, and what does it look like?
I would like to grow it, for a lark. -- William J. McCarthy, New York


Johnson's Down, but Not Out of the Picture
On the walls and tables of Bob Johnson's room in Penrose Hospital in Colorado Springs are letters and get-well cards from National Hockey League executives, college coaches, former players, friends and fans.
At the foot of the bed is a television attached to a videocassette player for screening tapes of Pittsburgh Penguin games.
When Johnson sees something that requires a comment or correction, he grabs a pen and paper and writes an order, which is sent by fax machine to Pittsburgh.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a fireplace on the first floor and another below it in the basement.
When we build a fire in the first-floor fireplace, the smell of smoke is strong in the basement.
The ash pit has been removed, and the chimney flue connected to the basement fireplace has been capped.
It has been suggested that a stainless-steel liner be installed in the first-floor chimney.
Would that solve the problem?
A.
If the two chimney flues are in the same brick chimney structure, if either one or both of the flue liners is cracked or leaking and if there are no flue liners, it could be that smoke will leak from one flue to the other.
That should not occur if the flue being used draws properly, but it could happen if there are down drafts or other defects in that chimney.
Capping the unused flue was probably a mistake.
It will trap smoke that leaks into it, instead of allowing the smoke to escape through the opening at the top of the chimney.
I would suggest removing the cap.
If that does not solve the problem, have an expert check the structure.
It is very likely that lining the flue will be the answer.


Old Salamanca: Young at Heart
STUDENTS wearing the latest nonfashions wander nonchalantly around the 13th-century University of Salamanca.
White-haired retirees stroll in the 18th-century Plaza Mayor, more intent on gossiping than on admiring the decor.
Local men crowd into tapas bars to argue about tomorrow's soccer game rather than yesterday's history.
Salamanca has been Salamanca for so long that everyone just takes it for granted.
Even the influx of one-day tourists and monthlong foreign language students every summer barely alters the rhythm of this ancient city 125 miles west of Madrid.
It is used to being looked at, to being admired.
Its two cathedrals, three universities, magnificent churches and sober monasteries have long been the envy of Spain and beyond.
But for Salamancans, a walk down the Roman bridge seems just as natural as eating a plateful of fried squid.


Making a Difference; . . . and the Executive Suite
With corporate America continuing to retrench, Randolph W. Cameron has been finding himself much in demand these days, advising black executives of their options.
Mr.
Cameron, a management consultant and author of "The Black Executive's Handbook," says that black professionals are being disproportionately affected by the current wave of layoffs, a charge denied by many companies that are downsizing.
"The 'last in, first out' adage is still intact," Mr.
Cameron insists.


Accord May Improve Efficiency Of New York City Housing Court
Proceedings in New York City's housing court, long considered one of the least orderly courts in the city, could become more efficient under the terms of a settlement reached between court administrators and landlords that filed a Federal lawsuit against them two years ago.
Under the settlement, tenants will receive postcards from the court, a division of the City Civil Court, to notify them as soon as their landlords begin eviction proceedings against them.
In the past, tenants were often unaware that anything was happening until the eviction was final, several lawyers said.


L. A. Snow Wed To Ms. Wilcox
Elizabeth Warren Wilcox, a freelance business reporter, and Lucian Antony Snow, a securities broker at S. G. Warburg Securities, both in London, were married yesterday in Landgrove, Vt.
The Rev.
Lawrence Whittimore, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Community Church.
Ms.
Snow, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen R. Wilcox of South Londonderry, Vt.
Her father is the president of the Wilcox Group, which provides financial programs for American members of Lloyd's of London.


Concrete Virtues
To the Editor:
In on article on June 21, Diana Shaman wrotes about a 22-story residential building with school gyms on Third Avenue at 87th Street that is using steel structural members, rather than a cast-in-place reinforced concrete frame.


No TV Pact Is No Bother To Owners
Soon, we've been hearing.
Soon the National Hockey League will have a cable television contract.
Maybe ESPN.
Maybe SportsChannel America.
Maybe both.
Or neither.
But maybe it's not so soon.
It is possible that the N.H.L. season will start and there will be nothing remotely resembling a national television contract.
Maybe in November.
Maybe in January.
Maybe not.


What Dorothy Parker Said
To the Editor:
In her review of "Henry and Clare" by Ralph G. Martin (Aug. 18), Eileen Shanahan referred to Clare Boothe Luce's fictitious poisoning by arsenic from paint dust alleged to be sifting from the ceiling of the American Embassy in Rome.
That reminded me of one of Dorothy Parker's best bons mots.
"Here," said Parker, "come Arsenic and Old Luce."  NARDI REEDER CAMPION  Hanover, N.H.


Beisel's Record Passing Leads Hofstra Over Post
George Beisel, the quarterback, passed 507 yards for a single-game school record as Hofstra crushed C. W. Post, 54-24, yesterday at Hickox Field in Brookville, L.I., in the final meeting between the two schools.
The Flying Dutchmen (3-1), now in Division I-AA, captured the last six games in the rivalry to win the series, 15-14.
The Pioneers (2-1) compete in Division III.


'Standing Up to Ezra Pound'
To the Editor:
I can offer a footnote to "Standing Up to Ezra Pound."


Resident Surgeons Chief Reviewed in Crown Heights Death
The agency that runs New York City's hospitals is reviewing the status of the doctor who heads the surgical residency program at Kings County Hospital Center, where a Hasidic scholar died last month after being stabbed repeatedly during a racial disturbance in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.
The Health and Hospitals Corporation review of Dr.
Bernard M. Jaffe is centered on whether the physicians under him had the proper credentials and training for the tasks that he assigned, the corporation's press secretary, Steven J. Matthews, said yesterday.


The Executive Life; A Gender Switch In Grooming Rituals
Every Monday morning, as employees file into Donna Karan's New York headquarters, a dark-haired woman carrying a large tool kit joins them.
She goes in and out of the fashion designer's executive offices, shutting each door for half an hour or so, leaving behind a scent faintly reminiscent of shellac.
It's not the company physician nor the company psychiatrist.
It's Gloria Marchado, the company manicurist, who tends to the hands of Donna Karan's employees.


City Rides Added To Swiss Pass
The Swiss Pass, which allows free travel on trains, rural buses and boats in Switzerland, includes a new benefit this year: free rides on the tramways and buses of 25 Swiss cities.
This might inspire visitors to discover not only Geneva and Zurich but also, for instance, Lugano, St.
Gallen and Neuchatel.
Tramways and buses are run on the honor system: you buy a ticket from a machine either inside the tram or at the stop.
If you are caught without one, there is a fine of about $20.
Swiss Pass enables you to avoid all this.


Ready or Not, Here Comes the State Income Tax
CONNECTICUT'S unwieldy new income tax law -- hammered together in a last-minute political compromise in the General Assembly in August, then implemented in a five-week crash course by state tax administrators -- will make its first dramatic appearance in residents' paychecks this week, as payroll withholding begins.
Then again, it all depends.


Corrections
An article in Arts &amp; Leisure on Aug. 25 about the actress Melissa Joan Hart misidentified the Nickelodeon television series in which she stars.
It is "Clarissa Explains It All." A reader's letter pointing out the error was misplaced for several weeks.


Prices Decline as Gentrification Ebbs
IT was in 1986, near the height of New York City's real estate boom, when Victoria Irwin paid $125,000 for her 400-square-foot studio in the Christadora House, a newly refurbished 17-story condominium on Avenue B in the East Village.
Her eighth-floor windows were directly over Tompkins Square Park.
"I knew there was some gentrification going on, but it didn't bother me," recalled Ms.
Irwin, who is married to Mayor David N. Dinkins's press secretary, Leland Jones.
She said the things that attracted her to the East Village then -- and still do -- are its diversity, bohemian spirit and resistance to change.


Cultural Cruise In Indonesia
For an exotic vacation this winter, the cruise agency Landry &amp; Kling has developed "The Culture and Cuisine of Indonesia," a 13-night trip with Ruth Law, an author of cookbooks, as host.
The trip costs $7,400 a person and combines a 10-night cruise of Indonesia with a two-night pre-cruise program at the Grand Hyatt Resort in Bali, free shore excursions in five ports of call and flight from San Francisco to Bali and return from Singapore, where the cruise ends.
All meals, liquor, wine and tips are included.
The ship to be used is Cunard's Sea Goddess II, which has 58 suites for up to 116 passengers.
Information: (800) 448-9002.
For 1992 Landry &amp; Kling has scheduled three more theme cruises: Scottish Heritage Cruise, May 2, seven nights from San Juan to southern Caribbean ports, with a program that includes Scottish entertainers; Chocolate Fantasy Cruise, Oct. 17, seven nights from Fort Lauderdale; No Smoking Cruise, Nov. 16, four nights from Miami.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bowling Green; College Candidates Run, But Not in the Hallways
Bowling Green is a college town that is almost more college than town, with more voting-age students than full-time residents among its population of 28,000.
Now, the municipal government may take a collegial turn as four students run for political office, including for the first time mayor.
But this burst of civic-mindedness, primarily a reaction to increased friction between students and local police, has brought student candidates into conflict with university administrators over longstanding restrictions on political activity in dormitories.


Hard-Working Devils Aim To Drop an Identity Crisis
The Devils this season have carefully assembled the kind of players that could help the team to establish finally an identity in the National Hockey League and prove to be a winner on the ice, not just on paper.
The Edmonton Oilers have the reputation of having speed.
The Boston Bruins are known for being grinders and winners.
Coach Tom McVie wants the Devils to be known for victory and hard forechecking.


For a Fast-Cooking Dish, Try Risotto With Arugula
Risotto is a pretty speedy dish when you are using flavorings that do not require additional cooking.
It can be made in a total of 23 minutes, but allow 25 if you want to give yourself some room to maneuver.
If you would like to add some chicken to the risotto, grill thin strips while the rice is cooking.
Then cut the chicken into small pieces and stir into the finished dish.
Risotto With Arugula  4 to 5 cups no-salt-added chicken broth or stock  1/2 cup chopped onion  1 tablespoon olive oil  12 ounces arugula  1 cup arborio rice  1/2 cup dry white wine  2 ounces grated Parmesan Reggiano ( 1/2 cup)  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1. Heat broth.
2. Saute onion in hot oil in heavy-bottomed pot until it takes on a little color.
3. Meanwhile, trim tough stems off arugula and soak thoroughly.
4. Add the rice to the onion and stir until well coated.
5. Add the wine and stir; let the wine cook away, about 2 minutes.
6. Drain the arugula.
7.
Add about a cup of simmering broth to rice and cook over medium-high heat, stirring very often until broth is absorbed.
Continue adding broth as it is absorbed into the rice, while stirring almost continuously.
Just before adding the last of the liquid (you may not need all the broth) stir in the arugula.
8.
When the rice is tender, and there is still enough broth left in the rice to make it slightly runny, add the cheese, stirring well; season with pepper and serve.
Yield: 2 servings.


A 'Very Important' Homeless Man
Like many of my fellow residents, I believe I initially misunderstood Richard Kreimer ("After Civil Rights Victories, Homeless Man Finds Two Sides to Fame," Sept. 1).
I thought he was merely a troublemaker, a malcontent intent on destroying the Free Public Library of Morristown and Morris Township.
But after reading the article, I realized I was mistaken.
Mr.
Kreimer is doing this because, as he states, "I'm a very important person."


Mandela Urges His Group to Broaden Its Base
Broaching an issue long treated as taboo in the African National Congress, its leader, Nelson Mandela, told his organization today to learn from the ethnic antagonisms splintering Eastern Europe and to seek out more members beyond the congress's traditional black base.
Mr.
Mandela warned that the governing National Party, which opened its ranks to all races last year, was "challenging us in our own constituency" by recruiting nonwhites who traditionally suffered under apartheid.


Yaphank's Outpost for Country Dining
"YIP YAP YAPHANK," the Irving Berlin World War I musical that was written and first performed at Camp Upton, is all that many Long Islanders know of Yaphank.
For others, it is just an exit on the Long Island Expressway, briefly glimpsed as they make tracks to the East End.
The hamlet nestled along the Carmans River is light-years away from speedy expressways and even further from the trend-setting Hamptons, but Camp Upton still lives at the Carmans River Inne.
The modest establishment on Main Street, originally an Army barracks, became a German restaurant and for the last 12 years has been an outpost for country dining.


Chic Glasses to Make Reading More Stylish
The funny thing about clear vision is that it goes so suddenly.
Some people swear that on the very day they turned 40, they could no longer read menus or telephone books.
After the inevitable raging against age and decay, after the pathetic attempts to hold newspapers two feet away, most people give in to necessity and start looking for reading glasses.
But these days, they are less and less content to settle for the traditional kind -- known in the trade as half-eyes --in the usual shades of brown.


Conference Planned on Dead Sea Scrolls
To the Editor:
The announcements of a computer-generated edition of the Dead Sea Scrolls and of the Huntington Library's release of the photographs are obvious good tidings to most of the large body of investigators concerned with the interpretation of these manuscripts.
But the challenge to scholars will only grow as they increasingly scrutinize the texts.


Ginger: Rhizome With a Reason
FRESH ginger came into style in the mid-1970's.
In those days it was hard to find.
But as stir-fried food with garlic, scallions and ginger became more and more popular, ginger was soon available in even the most pedestrian supermarket.
Now, the rhizome (for ginger is a stem, not a root) shows up in the most unexpected places: as a dressing for fois gras, smoked salmon or even a chicken salad.


The Doctor's New Assistant Says 'Arf'
THE newest social worker at Bridgeport Hospital has no degree and cannot talk, but he has already had an impact on patient morale.
The newcomer, Bo, is a golden retriever.
As part of the first pet-therapy program in an acute-care hospital in Connecticut, he has his own picture identification and hospital gown.
Nursing homes, mental-health centers and other health-care organizations in the state are starting to use animals to get through to hard-to-reach patients.


Style Makers; Bob Evans, Fashion Designer
Bob Evans designs evening wear with a difference.
No floating clouds of chiffon.
No grand ballgowns.
His specialty is sportswear: jackets, blouses, skirts, pants and bustiers that can be mixed and matched just like daytime sportswear.
The difference is dressy fabrics.
"The women I know dress that way," said the 39-year-old designer.
"They mix their day and night clothes, wearing a favorite jacket with a satin skirt. Unless they need an occasion dress, women today dress down."


Sports of The Times; Time Flies, Memories Stand Still
IT was the greatest game ever played.
Go ahead and say it.
It was the greatest game ever played.
From the moment the ball left Bobby Thomson's bat, the 100,000 fans in the Polo Grounds knew they were witnessing the greatest game ever played, in any sport, in the United States.
And as they dispersed that afternoon of Oct. 3, 1951, those 200,000 fans knew that nothing like "New York Giants 5, Brooklyn Dodgers 4" could ever happen again.


Editorial Notebook; Demes, Demos, Democracy
In a remarkable birthday party, Greece this weekend celebrates the 2,500th anniversary of the world's first recognizable democracy.
This secular miracle occurred in Athens, where the seeds were planted for the free institutions that today flower as never before.
Because the Greeks also pioneered the writing of history, we know the name of the sower.
He was Cleisthenes, the Athenian noble who led a rebellion after a tyrant dissolved embryonic popular councils with the help of imported troops from Sparta.


ABUSE WIDESPREAD IN MEDICAL SALES FOR CARE AT HOME
Federal officials and other experts say unscrupulous companies are abusing the Medicare home health care program by selling elderly people millions of dollars' worth of medical equipment they do not need.
Court records show that some suppliers have used aggressive sales tactics, including telephone solicitations; have induced gullible people to accept unneeded items; have submitted inflated, fraudulent bills to Medicare, and have filed claims through states that pay the most for a particular item, regardless of where the patient actually lives.
And the records show that some doctors have falsely certified a medical need for equipment.


PARKS
Here is a sampling of events planned through Dec. 14 in New York City's parks.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Today
GRACIE SQUARE OUTDOOR ART SHOW, Carl Schurz Park, East End Avenue at 86th Street, Manhattan.
About 100 exhibits by professional artists in oil, acrylic, sculpture, photography and mixed media; sponsored by the Carl Schurz Park Association. 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 408-0226.
"HAIL COLUMBIA: SCULPTURE IN PRAISE OF WOMEN," Prospect Park, Memorial Arch, Grand Army Plaza, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
An exhibition of site-specific works by five artists inside the Memorial Arch Saturdays and Sundays through Nov. 3, noon to 4 P.M.
During exhibition hours, visitors can ascend by stairs to the top of the Memorial Arch for a panoramic view of the surrounding area.
After the exhibition, the arch will be closed for one to two years for renovations.
Information: (718) 788-0055.
PROSPECT PARK TOUR, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Tours of the park, led by the Urban Park Rangers.
Tours meet at 11 A.M., noon, 1 and 2 P.M. under the Arch at Grand Army Plaza, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
LIFE IN THE COLONIES, Van Cortlandt Park, north Bronx.
A re-enactment of a Revolutionary War battle; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers. 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., at the flagpole in front of the Van Cortlandt House.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
PLANT FOLKLORE, Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan.
A discussion of the past and present uses of plants in medicine, food, cosmetics and clothing; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
At 2 P.M. at the flagpole near the Seaman Avenue and Isham Street park entrance.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
BIRD WALK, Forest Park, Kew Gardens, Queens.
A walk to identify local species and a discussion of migration; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Metropolitan Avenue and Forest Park Drive.
Take binoculars, and wear sturdy shoes.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
Saturday
NAME THAT BERRY, Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
A walk to identify wild berries and nuts.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the Environmental Center, Section 2, Orchard Beach.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
Oct. 6
ARCHITECTURAL WALK, Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
An architectural walk in and around Prospect Park past about 12 buildings designed by the firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 11 A.M. under the arch at Grand Army Plaza, Park Slope.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall events of the New York-North Jersey chapter of the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
FANTASTIC FUNGI, Central Park, Manhattan.
A walk to identify common species of fungi in the park; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 106th Street.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
MIGRATORY BIRD WALK, Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
A tour of a popular rest-stop by birds on their way south;, sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the Pelham Bay Environmental Center, Section 2, Orchard Beach.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
WILLOW LAKE WALK, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
A walking tour along the shores of the largest lake in New York City; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the park entrance at 72d Avenue and Park Drive East.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
Oct. 12
TOUCH OF AUTUMN FAIR, Prospect Park Boathouse, Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Crafts, entertainment, children's games and educational displays presented by the Urban Park Rangers.
Noon to 5 P.M.
Also Oct. 13, 14, 19 and 20, same times.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
THE GREAT DECOMPOSERS, Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
A search for mushrooms and a discussion of their ecological importance, sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the Environmental Center, Section 2, Orchard Beach.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
Oct. 13
MIGRATORY BIRD WALK, Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
A walk to identify bird species and discuss migration; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the Environmental Center, Section 2, Orchard Beach.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
LITTLE RED LIGHTHOUSE, Fort Washington Park, upper Manhattan.
A discussion of the history of the park, the George Washington Bridge and the lighthouse, which provided the basis for the story "The Little Red Lighthouse and the Great Gray Bridge" by Hildegarde H. Swift and Lynd Ward.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the western end of 181st Street.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
FOREST FOLKLORE, Alley Pond Park, Douglaston, Queens.
A walking tour featuring traditional American woodland folk tales, sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the entrance at 76th Avenue, off Springfield Boulevard.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
Oct. 19
CENTRAL PARK WALK, Manhattan.
A four-to-six-mile walk through the park, sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Engineers Gate, Fifth Avenue and 90th Street.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall events of the New York-North Jersey chapter of the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
TOURNAMENT DAY, North Meadow Center, Central Park, midpark at 97th Street, Manhattan.
Ping-Pong, chess, checkers, bingo and card games for all ages. 11 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Games scheduled by age: 11 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. for ages 8 to 12, 1 to 2:30 P.M. for 13 to 16, and 3 to 4:30 P.M. for adults.
Information: (212) 348-4867.
GEOLOGY WALK, Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
A discussion of the geology and history of the park going back to the glacial period.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the Environmental Center, Section 2, Orchard Beach.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
Oct. 20
FALL FOLIAGE WALK, Central Park, Manhattan.
A tour of Central Park foliage led by the Urban Park Rangers.
Reservations, time and meeting place: (212) 427-4040.
FOREST AND MEADOW TOUR, Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Sponsored by the Friends of Central Park.
Meets at 1:30 P.M. at the Prospect Park subway stop on the D line, near Washington Avenue and Empire Boulevard.
Donation: $1; benefits the Camperdown Fund for tree care in historic parks.
Information: (212) 473-6283.
AUTUMN COLORS, Pelham Bay Park, northeast Bronx.
A tree identification tour and a discussion of why leaves turn colors in autumn.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the Environmental Center, Section 2, Orchard Beach.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
AUTUMN ASPECTS, Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
A walking tour and discussion of why leaves change color, sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Kissena Park Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Par ons Boulevard.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
Oct. 22
CENTRAL PARK CHRYSANTHEMUM TOUR, Vanderbilt Gate, Fifth Avenue at 105th Street.
A tour of the Conservatory Garden's 5,000 chrysanthemums, led by members of the garden staff.
Noon.
Information: (212) 360-2766.
Oct. 25
HALLOWEEN HAUNTS, Greenbelt, S.I.
A walk featuring costumed participants, followed by hot cider and a campfire; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Participants should wear a costume and take a flashlight.
Children must be accompanied by an adult.
Meet at 7:30 P.M. at Camp Pouch Parking Lot on Manor Road, Egbertville.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
Oct. 26
CENTRAL PARK FOLIAGE TOUR.
Sponsored by the Central Park Conservancy and led by Neil Calvanese, director of horticulture at the conservancy.
Meets at 10 A.M.
Fee: $10.
Information and meeting place: (212) 360-2766.
HAUNTED HALLOWEEN TOUR, Central Park.
Belvedere Castle, midpark at 79th Street, south of the Great Lawn.
Participants are encouraged to wear costumes on this tour through the Ramble, sponsored by the Central Park Conservancy.
Meets at 3 P.M.
Information: (212) 360-2766.
QUEENS LAKES AND PARKS, a tour from Willow Lake through Flushing Meadows-Corona Park to the Queens Botanical Garden and Kissena Park; sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 9:45 A.M. at Queens Boulevard and 71st Avenue, in front of the Sterling Bank.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 663-2167.
HAUNTED HOMESTEAD HARVEST FAIR, Prospect Park, Lefferts Homestead, Flatbush Avenue at Empire Boulevard, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Ghosts may make an appearance at this multi-cultural harvest celebration featuring demonstrations of food preparation and preservation, as well as entertainment and crafts workshops. 1 to 4 P.M.
Take your own pumpkin.
Information: (718) 965-6505.
HAUNTED WALK, Prospect Park Nethermead, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Park entrances at 16th Street and Prospect Park Southwest or Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
A walk along a haunted trail where ghouls, ghosts and the Headless Horseman lurk; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Participants may wear costumes and should wear sturdy shoes.
Meets at noon.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
HALLOWEEN IN THE NORTHWEST WOODS, Van Cortlandt Park, the Bronx.
A walk with Urban Park Rangers, featuring a bonfire and refreshments.
Take a flashlight.
Children must be accompanied by an adult.
Meets at 7:30 P.M. at Mosholu Avenue and Broadway.
Information: (212) 548-7070.
FURTHER FOLIAGE, Central Park.
A walk through Central Park landscapes with the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Central Park West and 72d Street.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
Oct. 27
HAUNTED HALLOWEEN WALK, Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan.
Led by the Urban Park Rangers; take a flashlight.
Meets at 5 P.M. by the flagpole at the entrance at Seaman Avenue and Isham Street.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
GREAT PUMPKIN, Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
A family workshop on carving pumpkins; take your own pumpkin.
Children must be accompanied by an adult. 2 P.M.
Reservations and information: (718) 699-4204 or (718) 353-2460.
HAWK WATCH, Greenbelt, S.I.
Birdwatching with the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Schmul Park, at Victory Boulevard and Melvin Avenue, Travis.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
Oct. 31
HAUNTED FOREST, Cunningham Park, Flushing, Queens.
An evening walk in the park with Urban Park Rangers; take a flashlight.
Several walks are planned, with the first beginning at 7 P.M.
Children must be accompanied by an adult.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
Nov. 2
HAWK WATCH, Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
An outing to look for red-tailed hawks, kestrels, ospreys and other birds of prey that frequent the park in fall; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the Boathouse, entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Also Nov. 9 and 10, same time.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
SCHAREN KNIPPEN EXHIBITION, Prospect Park, Lefferts Homestead, Flatbush Avenue at Empire Boulevard, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Opening of an exhibition on the folk art of paper-cutting, including silhouettes, mourning pictures and motifs of the Federal period.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Clara Lamers, a curator, will demonstrate the art on Nov. 9 at 3 P.M.
Information: (718) 965-6505.
TOUR OF BRONX GREENWAY AND AQUEDUCT, a strenuous 12-mile walk entirely through parkland that ends in Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the Pelham Park subway station in the Bronx, on the IRT line.
Take lunch.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall events of the New York-North Jersey chapter of the club.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
BRONX NATURE WALK, a tour along the shore of Pelham Bay Park, sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the Pelham Bay IRT station in the Bronx.
Donation: $3.
Information: (212) 663-2167.
Nov. 3
THE SHORES OF CENTRAL PARK, a walking tour of the streams, lakes, ponds and reservoirs of the park; sponsored by Shorewalkers.
Meets at noon at 86th Street and Central Park West.
Donation: $3.
Information: (212) 663-2167.
Nov. 16
ARCHES AND BRIDGES, Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A tour of the 19th- century bridges and arches designed by Calvert Vaux, sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
Nov. 23
A REVOLUTIONARY TOUR, Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A bus tour tracing the paths of the Colonial and British armies during the Battle of Long Island; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Noon.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
Nov. 24
QUAKER CEMETERY, Prospect Park, Prospect Park Southwest and 16th Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
A tour through the historic Friends Cemetery, which dates to the mid-1800's, with a discussion of the Society of Friends and the importance of its presence in America; sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
Nov. 30
THE BIG SLEEP, Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Urban Park Rangers will discuss how animals adapt to cold weather in various habitats.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Boathouse, reached from the park entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Free.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
Dec. 8
LEFFERTS HOMESTEAD WINTER FESTIVAL, Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue at Empire Boulevard, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
A multi-cultural celebration with African-American doll-making, Dutch pancake-making, candle-making, American Indian dances, storytelling and an appearance by St.
Nicholas. 1 to 4 P.M.
Information: (718) 965-6505.
ROCKY ROAD TO BROOKLYN, Prospect Park, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Glaciers, kettle ponds, and outwash plains are discussed during this geological walk through various Brooklyn neighborhoods.
Sights include Prospect Park, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn Heights and Flatlands.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at Litchfield Mansion, Prospect Park West and Fifth Street.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
Dec. 14
LEFFERTS HOMESTEAD HOLIDAY PARTY, Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue at Empire Boulevard, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Entertainment, refreshments and workshops for making holiday decorations; sponsored by the Daughters of the American Revolution, Fort Greene chapter. 2 P.M.
Information: (718) 965-6505.
All Season
CENTRAL PARK CAROUSEL, midpark at 64th Street, Manhattan.
Daily, 10:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., weather permitting.
Admission: 75 cents a ride.
Information: (212) 879-0244.
CENTRAL PARK CHESS AND CHECKERS HOUSE, midpark at 64th Street, Manhattan.
Twenty-four tables for outdoor play and 10 for indoor play.
Saturdays and Sundays, 11:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 360-2766.
CENTRAL PARK CONSERVATORY GARDEN, Fifth Avenue at 105th Street, Manhattan.
Daily, 8 A.M. to dusk.
A six-acre garden featuring 5,000 chrysanthemums and French and English-style gardening.
Information: (212) 360-2766.
CENTRAL PARK TENNIS, midpark at 96th Street, Manhattan.
Thirty outdoor courts, open daily, 7 A.M. to dusk.
Full-season permits, $50 ($20 for the elderly; $10 for children).
Permits are available at the Arsenal, Fifth Avenue at 64th Street.
Information: (212) 360-8133.
NORTH MEADOW RECREATION CENTER, Central Park, midpark at 97th Street, Manhattan.
Activities for children include board games, table-top hockey, Ping-Pong, arts and crafts, roller skating, kite-flying, basketball and football.
Today, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; weekdays through Oct. 14, 3 to 8 P.M.; Oct. 15 through December, 3 to 5:45 P.M.
Beginning Saturday, it will be open weekends from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 348-4867.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column of the Travel section today, about a cultural cruise to Indonesia, omits the sailing date in some copies.
It is Nov. 30.


Review/Critic's Notebook; The Inner Workings Of the Animator's Art
Fragments have been fashionable at the New York Film Festival this year.
An unusual number of films have incorporated sections of unrelated or incomplete material into their larger schemes.
So Gus Van Sant's "My Own Private Idaho" combines a road story about Portland hustlers with latter-day Shakespeare.
Arturo Ripstein's "Woman of the Port" tells parts of the same tale from three different viewpoints.
"The Double Life of Veronique" has its parallel heroines; Atom Egoyan's film "The Adjuster" begins with seemingly disconnected elements and gradually brings together the pieces.
And Peter Greenaway's "Prospero's Books" interweaves a dazzling array of disparate ingredients into a full-scale assault on "The Tempest."
But of all the fragmented films to be seen here, one stands out: "Beauty and the Beast," the animated Disney feature that is being presented in choppy, unfinished form and that is billed as a work in progress.
It will be shown tonight at 7:15 and on Wednesday at 11:15 P.M.
"Beauty and the Beast" is conspicuous within the festival for many reasons, not least of them the selection committee's willingness to lend its luster to such a patently commercial work, and to accept a film that is not yet fully formed.


Ginger: Rhizome With a Reason
FRESH ginger came into style in the mid-1970's.
In those days it was hard to find.
But as stir-fried food with garlic, scallions and ginger became more and more popular, ginger was soon available in even the most pedestrian supermarket.
Now, the rhizome (for ginger is a stem, not a root) shows up in the most unexpected places: as a dressing for fois gras, smoked salmon or even a chicken salad.


Serious Eaters: It's Time to Dig In
TO bona-fide gastronomes, summer is a trifling season of abstention, a three-month menu of cold thin soups, heaping platters of cellulose, carbonized steaks and flossy fruit desserts.
That's not eating, that's pecking.
Real
eating begins in the fall when the first blast of Canadian wind slaps us behind the ears and crimson leaves swirl overhead.


OFF COURSE
In his article "Off Course" (Sept. 1), Louis Uchitelle writes that "cheap travel . . . did for a while materialize," but average fares have been "inching up" since their 1987 low point of 11.08 cents a mile -- to 13.09 cents in the year ending this July 31.
But the increase has been almost exactly the same as in the Consumer Price Index: in constant dollars, it was 1/ 20th of 1 percent.
True, the numerous new airlines that we hoped would be the agents of vigorous price competition have almost all disappeared, and the increasing concentration at the national level is a proper cause for concern.
But the fact remains that the industry is far more competitive now than under regulation: that is why so many airlines have been unable to survive.
ALFRED E. KAHN
Ithaca, N.Y.


Stanford Upsets Colorado With a Rush; Hagan Hurt
Glynn Milburn got Stanford close and Tommy Vardell finished the job by rushing for three touchdowns, two in the fourth quarter, as the Cardinal stung Colorado, 28-21, today.
Colorado (2-2) lost quarterback Darian Hagan with 12 minutes 1 second left when he was sacked and injured his left knee.
There was no immediate report on the severity of the injury.


Autumn Cools Off Young's Audition
The capricious window of opportunity, wide open since August for Anthony Young, closed ever so slightly yesterday, as an autumn breeze swept through Shea Stadium and a rookie Philadelphia Phillies right-hander, Staten Islander Cliff Brantley, chilled the Mets with five and two-third no-hit innings on the way to a 6-2 victory.
Meaningless September Mets baseball has been meaningful for Young and for Pete Schourek, two pitchers the Mets must know more about before they recess next week to retool.
The injured Dwight Gooden and Sid Fernandez will go to spring training next year carrying the burden of uncertainty, while it remains unlikely or at least unclear whether free agent Frank Viola will go south with the Mets at all.


Finding Bargains in the Off-Season
A winter vacation in Europe may not suggest the travel-poster images of sunny sidewalk cafes in Paris or warm stretches of Ligurian beaches.
It does, however, promise fewer crowds, a vibrant cultural scene and some interesting bargains that tour companies and airlines have recently announced.
Everything from reduced rates on rental cars and hotels to discounts at London hair salons is being offered to the hesitant tourist in these final months of a year marked by economic turmoil.


Whitney Flegal Wed
Whitney Ashcroft Flegal, a daughter of David W. Flegal of Bernardsville, N.J., and the late Carol Carothers Flegal, was married yesterday to Charles Eliot Pierpont, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan M. Pierpont of Middlebury, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
J.
Calvin K. Jackson officiated at the Presbyterian Church of Basking Ridge, N.J.
Mrs.
Pierpont, 25 years old, and her husband, 26, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Mr.
Pierpont is an insurance broker with Alexander &amp; Alexander in New York.


Barbara Luttich Married on L.I.
Barbara Ellen Luttich and David William Knowlton, managing directors at the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company in New York, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Francis B. Creamer Jr. at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton, L.I.
Ms.
Luttich, who is keeping her name, is 32 years old.
She graduated from Adelphi University and received a master's degree in business from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry O. Luttich of Bellmore, N.Y.
Her father is a retired New York Telephone Company executive.


OTTAWA PLAN GETS WARY RESPONSES
The people of Quebec -- from members of the Cree Indian Nation and newly arrived Jamaicans to descendants of 16th and 17th century French settlers who represent most of the population -- have reacted warily to the federal Government's plan to keep Canada united.
But few, except the more die-hard nationalists, have rejected the Government's proposals out of hand, and many said a process of negotiation has begun that just might keep Quebec, the second most populous Canadian province, from separating.


New York's True Nature Is, Yes, Leafy
"NEW YORK is a devil's dream, the most urbanized city in the world," Michael Gold wrote in his 1930 book "Jews Without Money," about an observation shared by boys growing up 60 years ago on the Lower East Side.
"It is a mythical city buried by a volcano. No grass is found in this petrified city, no big living trees, no flowers, no bird but the drab little lecherous sparrow, no soil, loam, earth."
Well, balderdash!
Perhaps the only indisputable saving grace of New York City is its emerald delights, the parks wedged betwixt and between the concrete canyons, the parks that provide chipmunks and songbirds with a place to flourish, the parks that give our frazzled and fractious citizenry a chance at some fleeting sanity.
No country in America's biggest city, Mr.
Gold?
Please, kind sir, just look at the leaves!
The summer's heavy rains may make the foliage particularly fetching.


All in the Family
To the Editor:
"When You're Named Executor" (Your Own Account, Sept. 1) was accompanied by a box quoting two individuals who suggested that a bank be selected as executor.
Usually a family member can be named executor and will serve without fee -- a substantial savings to the heirs -- and rely on the advice of the business accountant or attorney to assist in the estate's administration.


Marjorie Mason, Artist, Marries
Marjorie Woodhouse Mason, a daughter of Paul A. Mason of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Patricia M. Procter Mason, was married yesterday to Charles Grinell Burnham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
A.
Burnham of Brookline, Mass.
The Rev.
David Carter performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Mason family estate in New Ashford, Mass.
Ms.
Mason, 35 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of the Rhode Island School of Design, she is an artist and a printmaker based in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was an aircraft engineer and designer.
Her great-great-grandfather William Procter was a founder of Procter &amp; Gamble.


Jane Gillern Marries Frederic Cross
Jane Frances Gillern, a daughter of Mrs.
Edward M. Gillern of Baltimore and the late Mr.
Gillern, was married yesterday to Frederic Newbold Cross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Cross Jr. of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Harper officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Washington.
The bride, 25 years old, is the registrar at the B. R. Kornblatt Gallery in Washington.
She graduated from Washington College, as did Mr.
Cross.
Her mother, M. Jane Gillern, is a program director in the Baltimore Department of Aging.


Symphony Orchestras Tuning Up All Around
THE symphonic year in Connecticut gets off to a busy start next weekend, with four professional ensembles and two splendid student orchestras in performance.
The Hartt Symphony Orchestra, based at the Hartt School of Music at the University of Hartford in West Hartford will greet its new conductor, Sidney Harth, at 8 P.M. on Friday at Millard Auditorium.
Mr.
Harth, formerly associate conductor and concertmaster of the Los Angeles Philharmonic, has chosen an ambitious program for his young players: Haydn's Symphony No. 8, "Sanctuary," by the American composer Ezra Laderman, and Rachmaninoff's Second Symphony.
For reservations, call 243-4228.


Addiction-Recovery Programs Challenged by 'Rational Therapy'
ONCE considered sacrosanct, 12-step addiction-recovery programs like Alcoholics Anonymous are being challenged.
Therapists are questioning decades-old assumptions about recovery, playing down the programs' traditional emphasis on religion and medicine while stressing will power.


Headliners; 'Night, Knight
Long before the actor Richard Boone had gun and would travel, Victor DeCosta appeared in rodeos dressed in black cowboy gear, riding a black stallion and handing out calling cards bearing the name Paladin.
Mr.
DeCosta, a Rhode Island crane operator who began doing his Paladin act in 1947, said he first learned that he was being imitated when people began to congratulate him on having a television series in 1957, when "Have Gun, Will Travel" went on the air.
Mr.
DeCosta won the first of his several suits against CBS and its former subsidiary, Viacom International, in 1966, only to see the verdicts overturned on appeal.
Last week, however, the 83-year-old horseman appeared finally to have won one.
A jury in Federal district court in Providence ordered Viacom to pay Mr.
DeCosta $3.5 million for violating his trademark, registered in 1977, by distributing the half-hour series in syndication.
"I feel I finally got justice," he said.
"This will show them who's who."


Small-Town South Clings to Jewish History
There's just one sour note in the small miracle that occurred here when Temple Gemiluth Chassed, the 100-year-old Moorish-Byzantine synagogue on Church Street, was saved from the wrecking ball and lovingly restored.
Port Gibson has no Jewish community left to worship there.


FOR REAL SPORTS
Here is a list of participatory sporting events.
All dates and times are subject to change.
It is always advisable to check with the organizers of an event to confirm starting times and locations.
Today
RAINBOW MARATHON, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
A 26.2-mile foot race with a 1-mile certified loop; sponsored by Sri Chinmoy Marathon Team. 7 A.M.
Registration: $7.
Information: (718) 291-1468.
NEW YORK CITY MARATHON TUNE-UP, Central Park, Manhattan.
A 25-kilometer foot race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 9:30 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
NEW YORK ROAD RUNNERS CLUB CROSS-COUNTRY RUN, Van Cortlandt Park, north Bronx.
A five-kilometer foot race. 11 A.M.
In addition, the BOYS AND GIRLSCROSS-COUNTRY RUN of 1.5 miles starts there at noon.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
SPRING CREEK FUN RUN, Canarsie, Brooklyn.
A five-kilometer foot race. 10 A.M.
Information: (718) 642-2725.
BIKE HOBOKEN, a moderately paced 15-to-20-mile ride on easy terrain, sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Riders should meet with bicycles at 10 A.M. at the PATH turnstiles at the World Trade Center, Manhattan.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall events of the New York-North Jersey Chapter.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
GARRET MOUNTAIN PANORAMA, near Paterson, N.J.
A 40-mile bicycle tour of mostly flat terrain with a few difficult hills; sponsored by L&amp;M Tourers.
Meets at 7:45 A.M. at City Hall Park in Manhattan, near the Brooklyn Bridge.
Admission: $2.
Information: (718) 789-8102.
WESTCHESTER BIKING: PASSAGE TO PEPSICO, a 45-mile ride on moderately difficult terrain, including a visit to the Sculpture Garden at Pepisco Inc.'s Corporate Headquarters in Purchase, N.Y.; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 9 A.M. at Jerome and Bainbridge Avenues, in Van Cortlandt Park, the north Bronx.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall events of the New York-North Jersey Chapter.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
Oct. 5
MANUFACTURERS HANOVER CORPORATE CHALLENGE CHAMPIONSHIP, Manhattan.
A 3.5-mile foot race on Park Avenue starting and finishing at the Manufacturers Hanover Building, 270 Park Avenue, between 47th and 48th Streets; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 9 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
METROPOLITAN CONGRESS CROSS-COUNTRY CLASSIC, Van Cortlandt Park, north Bronx.
Foot races ranging in distance from 3.1 to 6 miles for adults, 1.5 miles for children; sponsored by the Metropolitan Athletic Congress. 9:30 A.M.
Registration: $3 in advance, $6 on day of race.
Information: (212) 227-0071.
Oct. 6
BELMONT LAKE, Babylon, L.I.
A bicycle tour for experienced riders of 70 hilly miles along the north shore of Long Island to Belmont Lake State Park; sponsored by L&amp;M Tourers.
Meets at 8 A.M. at Parsons Boulevard and Hillside Avenue, Queens.
Suggested admission: $2.
Information: (718) 789-8102.
MYSTERY CITY RIDE.
A 30-mile bicycle tour of New York City to an undisclosed destination, intended for average riders; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club and Transportation Alternatives.
Meets at 10 A.M. at City Hall.
Fee: $15, including admission to all fall events of the New York-North Jersey Chapter.
Information: (212) 986-1430 or (212) 941-4600.
THIRD AVENUE FESTIVAL RUN, Third Avenue and 67th Street, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
A five-kilometer foot race sponsored by the Bay Ridge Road Runners Club. 9:30 A.M.
Registration is at 8:30 A.M. at Third Avenue and 78th Street and costs $8 in advance, $10 on day of race.
Information: (718) 748-9048.
Oct. 12
KIPS BAY BOYS CLUB 4-MILER, White Plains Road and Randall Avenue, Union Port, the Bronx.
In addition to the 4-mile foot race for adults, there is a 1.2-mile race for children. 9:30 A.M.
Registration: $5 in advance, $6 on day of race.
Information: (212) 893-8254.
QUEENS BIKE RIDE, a 50-mile tour of mostly flat terrain in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Alley Pond Park, and Roosevelt and Wards Islands; sponsored by Transportation Alternatives.
Meets at 8 A.M. at Columbus Circle, Central Park West and 59th Street, Manhattan.
Free.
Information: (212) 966-2029.
Oct. 13
BED-STUY 10-KILOMETER COMMUNITY RUN, Marcy Avenue and Fulton Street, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. 10 A.M.
Registration fee: $5 before Oct. 7, and $7 thereafter.
Information: (718) 636-6900.
BREEZY BRONX BIKE RIDE, a 16-mile tour of mostly flat terrain for cyclists of all capabilities; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 10:30 A.M. at the IRT subway line, Pelham Parkway Station, Morris Park, the Bronx.
Fee: $15, including admission to all events and hikes of the New York-North Jersey Chapter this fall.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
MANHATTAN COASTS, a 25-mile bicycle tour of the Manhattan coasts, designed for average riders experienced in group riding; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park, entrance at Fifth Avenue and at 72d Street.
Fee: $15, including admission to all events of the New York-North Jersey Chapter this fall.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
NEW YORK BIATHLON SERIES, Prospect Park, Brooklyn; sponsored by the Big Apple Triathlon Club.
A competition incorporating a 3-mile foot race, a 20-mile bicycle race and another 3-mile foot race. 8 A.M.
Information: (212) 289-4113.
NEW YORK ROAD RUNNERS CLUB CROSS-COUNTRY RUN, Van Cortlandt Park, north Bronx.
A five-kilometer foot race. 11 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
RACE FOR THE CURE (WOMEN ONLY), Central Park, Manhattan.
A five-kilometer foot race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 1 P.M.
Information: (212) 860-4455.
Oct. 19
ABE STARK ICE SKATING RINK, West 19th Street between Surf Avenue and the Boardwalk, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
Opens for the season Oct. 19.
Indoor skating sessions: Fridays, 3:30 to 6 P.M.; Saturdays, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. and Sundays, noon to 4 P.M.; closed Mondays to Thursdays.
Admission: $3.50 Fridays, $5 weekends; skate rentals, $3 weekdays, $3.50 weekends.
Lessons available.
Information: (718) 946-6536.
FIFTH AVENUE MILE -- OPEN DIVISION, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street, Manhattan; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 11 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
Oct. 20
FALL FOLIAGE PHANTOM TOUR, an easy 30-mile bicycle tour on flat terrain in Westchester County for any rider; sponsored by L&amp;M Tourers.
Meets at 8:30 A.M. at Fordham Road and Grand Concourse, University Heights, the Bronx.
Admission: $2.
Information: (718) 789-8102.
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS FALL BIKE TOUR.
A 35-mile ride on mostly flat terrain in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens to benefit the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
Meets at 8 A.M. at Battery Park, Manhattan.
The fee is $10 before Oct. 3, $15 thereafter or $25 on day of tour.
Information: (212) 463-7787.
ANNUAL HARRY CHAPIN MEMORIAL RUN AGAINST HUNGER, Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
A 6.2 mile race, passing such landmarks as the Croton Dam and Reservoir. 1:30 P.M.
A 1-mile race will be held at 1 P.M.
Entry fee: $10 before Oct. 17 and $12 on the day of the run; entry fee for the 1-mile race is $5 before Oct. 17 or $7 on the day.
Proceeds are to be used for hunger relief programs.
Information: (914) 271-8868.
Oct. 21
ROCKEFELLER PLAZA RINK, between 49th and 50th Streets and Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas, Manhattan.
Outdoor ice skating begins Oct. 21.
Sundays to Thursdays, 9 A.M. to 10 P.M., and Fridays and Saturdays, 9 A.M. to midnight; after Nov. 19, daily, 8:30 A.M. to midnight.
Admission per session: Mondays through Thursdays, $7 ($6 for children and the elderly; Fridays through Sundays, $8 ($6.50 for children and the elderly). Skate rentals, $4. Private lesson, $19 per half-hour; lesson for two people, $26 per half-hour; series of seven private lessons, $110. Information: (212) 757-5730. Oct. 26
A BIT OF THE BRONX, a slow 15-mile bicycle tour of mostly flat terrain in Riverside Park, Inwood Hill Park and Wave Hill, for riders with some experience; sponsored by the Appalachian Mountain Club.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Columbus Circle, 59th Street and Central Park West, Manhattan.
Fee: $15, including admission to all events and hikes of the New York-North Jersey Chapter of the club.
Information: (212) 986-1430.
WOLLMAN RINK, Central Park at 63d Street (near Fifth Avenue), Manhattan.
The outdoor ice skating season begins Oct. 26, weather permitting.
Open Mondays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Tuesdays to Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M., Fridays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 11 P.M., and Sundays 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M.
Admission: $5 for adults; $2.50 for children under age 13 and the elderly.
Skate rentals: $2.50.
Private lessons: $14 per 15-minute session; a skating course costs $150.
Information: (212) 517-4800.
Oct. 27
GATEWAY TO BIRDLAND, a 50-mile bicycle tour of mostly flat terrain in Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn and the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge and Fort Tilden, in Queens; all three are part of the National Gateway Recreation Area; sponsored by the Five-Borough Bicycle Club and the Gateway National Recreation Area.
Free.
Meets at 8:30 A.M. in Prospect Park at Grand Army Plaza, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Information: (212) 932-2300.
MAC CROSS-COUNTRY CHAMPIONSHIP, Van Cortlandt Park, north Bronx.
Distances range from one mile for children to 10 kilometers for adults; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 11 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
NEW YORK CITY MARATHON COMPUTERRUN, Central Park, Manhattan.
A five-kilometer race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10:15 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
RAINBOW MARATHON, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
A 26.2-mile foot race with a 1-mile certified loop; sponsored by Sri Chinmoy Marathon Team. 8 A.M.
Registration: $5 in advance, $7 day of race.
Information: (718) 291-1468.
TOUR OF FLOYD BENNETT FIELD, Gateway National Recreation Area, Flatlands, Brooklyn.
An easy five-mile bicycle tour with a National Park Service ranger on the historic runway where Amelia Earhart, Douglas (Wrong Way) Corrigan and Wiley Post took off.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the Visitor Contact Station.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 338-3799.
Nov. 2
ICE SKATING AT WAR MEMORIAL, Clove Lakes Park, Victory Boulevard and Clove Road, Sunnyside, S.I.
Outdoor skating begins Nov. 2, weather permitting.
Wednesdays, 3:30 to 6 P.M. and 7 to 9 P.M.; Fridays, 3:30 to 6 P.M. and 7 to 10 P.M.; Saturdays, noon to 5 P.M. and 7 to 10 P.M. and Sundays, noon to 5 P.M. to 7 to 9 P.M.
Closed Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Admission: $3.50 ($5 on Friday nights and Saturday and Sunday afternoons); skate rentals, $3 ($3.50 on Friday nights, weekends and holidays).
Lessons available.
Information: (718) 720-1010.
WORLD'S FAIR ICE SKATING RINK, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
Indoor skating begins Nov. 2.
Wednesdays, 3 to 5:30 P.M. and 8 to 9:30 P.M.; Fridays, 3 to 5:30 P.M. and 8:30 to 10:30 P.M.; Saturdays, noon to 4:30 P.M. and 8:30 to 10:30 P.M. and Sundays, noon to 5 P.M. and 7 to 9 P.M.; closed Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Admission: $3.50 ($5 on Friday nights and Saturday and Sunday afternoons); skate rentals, $3 ($3.50 on Friday nights, weekends and holidays).
Lessons available.
Information: (718) 271-1996.
Nov. 3
NEW YORK CITY MARATHON, a 26.2-mile race through the five boroughs, beginning at Verrazano-Narrows Bridge on Staten Island and ending in Central Park; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10:47 A.M.
Registration is already closed.
Information: (212) 860-4455.
Nov. 10
NEW YORK CITY BIATHLON CHAMPIONSHIP, Central Park, Manhattan. 8 A.M.
A competition with a 3-mile run, a 20-mile bicycle race and another 3-mile run; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club.
Information: (212) 289-4113.
ROTARY CLUB OF UPPER MANHATTAN, Riverside Drive and 124th Street, Manhattan.
A 10-kilometer foot race sponsored by the Rotary Club of Upper Manhattan. 10 A.M.
Registration: $7 in advance, $10 day of race.
Information: (212) 281-4100.
Nov. 16
KATE WOLLMAN ICE SKATING RINK, Prospect Park, Parkside and Ocean Avenues, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Outdoor skating begins Nov. 16, weather permitting.
Wednesdays, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Thursdays and Fridays, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M., Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 10 P.M., and Sundays, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: weekdays, $2; weekends $2.50; $1 for children and the elderly at all times; skate rentals, $3.
Information: (718) 965-6561.
LASKER ICE SKATING RINK, Central Park near 110th Street and Lenox Avenue, Manhattan.
Outdoor skating begins Nov. 16, weather permitting.
Sundays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M.; Mondays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Fridays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 11 P.M.
Admission: $2.50 ($1.50 for children under 13 and the elderly); skate rentals, $2.
Private lessons: $7 per 15-minute session; a skating course is $75.
Information: (212) 996-1184.
Nov. 17
ROAD RUNNER CLUB AGE GROUP CHAMPIONSHIP, Van Cortlandt Park, north Bronx.
Races range from 1 mile for children to 10 kilometers for adults; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
Nov. 23
TURKEY CLASSIC FESTIVAL, Central Park, Manhattan.
A five-mile foot race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
Nov. 24
34TH ANNUAL PETE McARDLE MEMORIAL CROSS-COUNTRY CLASSIC, Van Cortlandt Park, north Bronx.
A 15-kilometer run. 11 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
THANKSGIVING HALF-MARATHON, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
A 13.1-mile foot race with a 1-mile certified loop; sponsored by Sri Chinmoy Marathon Team.
Registration: $5 in advance, $7 on day of race.
Information: (718) 291-1468.
TOUR OF FORT TILDEN AND JACOB RIIS PARK, an easy, five-mile bicycle tour of Fort Tilden and Riis Park, part of the Gateway National Recreation Area in Queens, led by a National Park Service ranger.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fort Tilden, Building 1.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 474-4600.
Nov. 28
TURKEY TROT FUN RUN, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A five-mile foot race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10:30 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
Dec. 8
RUDOLPHS RUN, Shore Road and 71st Street, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
A five-mile foot race sponsored by the Bay Ridge Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration: $10 in advance, $12 on day of race.
Information: (718) 748-9048.
YOUTH FITNESS-JUNIOR ROAD RUNNERS CLUB SERIES NO. 6, Central Park, Manhattan.
Runs of 50 to 300 yards for children 2 to 6 years old and a one-mile run for those 6 to 18 years old; sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 9 A.M.
Registration fees and information: (212) 860-4455.
All Season
CLAREMONT RIDING ACADEMY, 175 West 89th Street, Manhattan.
English mounts for hire, $30 an hour.
Lessons and courses are available, with costs ranging from $32 for an hourlong group lesson to $570 for 10 private hourlong lessons.
Special events for the fall include a Halloween Ride on Oct. 31 at 2:30 P.M. and a Christmas Ride on Dec. 16 at 2 P.M.; each ride costs $85.
Open weekdays, 6:30 A.M. to 10 P.M., and Saturdays and Sundays, 6:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Reservations necessary: (212) 724-5100.
DIXIE DEW STABLES, 88-11 70th Road, Forest Hills, Queens.
English and Western mounts for hire, $17 to $20 an hour.
Lessons and courses are available, ranging from $30 for an hourlong, semi-private lesson to $175 for five private one-hour lessons.
Day trips, $150 (including transportation from the stables and lunch), 8 A.M. to twilight.
Open daily 7:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (718) 263-3500.
JAMAICA BAY RIDING ACADEMY, 7000 Belt Parkway, between Flatbush Avenue and Rockaway Parkway, Bergen Beach, Brooklyn.
English and Western mounts for hire, $19 for 45 minutes.
Private English riding lessons available, $40 an hour ($32 for children); group lessons Wednesday evenings, $35 an hour.
Open daily, 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M., with evening hours Tuesdays and Thursdays, 7 to 9 P.M.
Information: (718) 531-8949.
PELHAM BIT STABLES, 9 Shore Road (by City Island), Orchard Bay, the Bronx.
English and Western mounts for hire; $15 an hour on weekdays and $18 an hour on weekends and holidays.
Half-hour and hourlong English riding lessons available, ranging from $20 to $30.
Ten one-hour lessons cost $250.
Open daily, 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 885-0551.
VAN CORTLANDT STABLES, West 254th Street and Broadway, Riverdale, the Bronx.
English and Western mounts for hire, $15 an hour on weekdays, $18 an hour weekends and holidays.
Half-hour and hourlong lessons available, ranging from $20 to $30.
Open daily, 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 543-4433.
ROLLER BLADING LESSONS IN CENTRAL PARK, Manhattan.
Saturdays and Sundays at 10 A.M. at Columbus Circle and 59th Street; sponsored by Peck and Goodie Skate Shop, 919 Eighth Avenue, at 54th Street.
One-hour group lesson: $5.
No reservations necessary.
The store is open for roller blade rentals, Mondays to Wednesdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursdays and Fridays, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 9:30 A.M. to 6 P.M., Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Cost: $12 to $25, for 2- to 24-hour rentals.
There is also a second store at 1351 Second Avenue, at 72d Street.
Information: (212) 246-6123 or (212) 249-3178.
ROLLER BLADING IN PROSPECT PARK.
Park Drive, near the band shell, reachable from entrance at Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
On Saturdays and Sundays from noon to 4 P.M, a free roller blading clinic is sponsored by Slope Skates, 418 Eighth Street, Brooklyn.
Skate rental: $10 for two hours, $15 for four hours and $25 for 24 hours.
Store hours for rentals: Tuesdays to Fridays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.
Information: (718) 499-4933.
SKY RINK, 450 West 33d Street, 16th floor, Manhattan.
Indoor ice skating sessions: Mondays and Tuesdays, 11:40 A.M. to 1 P.M. and 8 to 9:50 P.M.; Wednesdays, 2 to 5:50 P.M. and 8 to 9:50 P.M.; Thursdays, 11:40 A.M. to 1 P.M. and 6:30 to 9:50 P.M.; Fridays, 1:50 to 3:20 P.M. and 8 to 9:50 P.M.; Saturdays, 12:30 to 2:20 P.M., 3 to 4:50 P.M. and 8 to 9:50 P.M. and Sundays, 12:30 to 2:20 P.M. and 3 to 4:40 P.M.
Admission: $7.50 per session.
Skate rentals: $2.50.
An eight-week course for beginners is $125 ($70 for children 4 to 6 years old).
Information: (212) 695-6556.
STATE KEY ROLLER RINK, 2424 White Plains Road, near Pelham Parkway, Morris Park, the Bronx.
Indoor sessions Wednesdays and Thursdays, 8 P.M. to midnight; Fridays, 8 P.M. to 1 A.M., Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 3 A.M. and Sundays, 12:30 P.M. to midnight; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $3 to $6; skate rental, $1.25.
Information: (212) 547-0700.


OFF COURSE
Hub-and-spoke networks are as old as the ancient markets of Rome, Athens and Cairo.
The unique contribution of the airlines has just been to "bank" large numbers of passenger flights within short time spans to enable quick (and hectic) transfers between planes.
The benefit to passengers is two-fold.
First, hub and spoke indeed provides larger loads and lower costs, which ultimately translate into lower fares.
Second, it enables more frequent service -- especially between small cities.
To take one example: With a single change of planes, I can now choose from 10 daily flights (and five competing airlines) for a trip from Oakland to Austin.
To me, this is a whole lot better than picking from the few nonstops between San Francisco and Houston and driving the extra distance at both trip ends.
RANDOLPH W. HALL
Berkeley, Calif.


NEW JERSEY FOLLOW-UP
AUTO INSURANCE
In its continuing effort to drive down auto insurance rates, the State Department of Insurance recently adopted regulations that require insurance companies to offer premium discounts to drivers who have auto alarms and systems for stolen-vehicle recovery installed in their cars.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21B


'Right to Farm' Laws Are Tested in Exurbs
When Norman Greig began farming in the Dutchess County village of Red Hook 17 years ago, his 170-acre collection of dairy pasture, apple orchards and berry fields was entirely surrounded by other farms.
Today he has 63 neighbors, none of them farmers.
Most commute to jobs in Poughkeepsie or Kingston, and while many have told Mr.
Greig they are glad to pass by some bucolic farmland on the way home, here are some of the things they have told him they do not like: the smell of fresh manure fertilizer in the spring, the sound of his tractor, the glare of the barn lights at 3 A.M. when he rises to milk the cows.
All of these, of course, are part of a farmer's life.
But the complaints from Mr.
Greig's neighbors point up a growing tension in many parts of New York State and elsewhere in the country that occurs as traditional farming areas give way, at least in part, to suburbanization and vacation homes.
Some communities are passing ordinances restricting farmers; farmers are responding with "right to farm" laws at the state level.


Miss Berson, A Chef, Weds
Amanda Emily Berson, a chef, and Richard Thorp, a photographer, both in Brooklyn, were married last evening by Rabbi Philip Schechter at the Metropolitan Building in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Thorp, 28 years old, graduated from Brooklyn College and is the head chef at the Heights Casino, a private club.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Theodore Berson of Gaylordsville, Conn., the owners of the Movable Feast, a Brooklyn catering company.
Mr.
Thorp, 26, attended the Gordonstoun School near Elgin, Scotland.
He is a son of Richard Thorp of Barkisland, England, an actor, and Maureen Newton-Clare of London, who runs the retail division for Caroline Charles, a British women's clothing designer.


Prosecution Summation in Bid-Rigging Trial
Completing the Government's summation in a major racketeering trial on Friday, a Federal prosecutor said five months of evidence had proved that the defendants used rigged bids, labor payoffs and extortion to control the window-installation industry in New York City.
The "corrupt engine" that ran the scheme was Local 580 of the ironworkers union, said the prosecutor, Gregory J. O'Connell.
He contended that Mafia leaders relied on the union's power to create labor problems for window contractors who refused to cooperate.


Managing; Making a Merger of Rivals Work
Merging two companies is never easy. Merging two
competing
companies can be a recipe for disaster.
Salespeople must tout the rival they once sold against.
Researchers and marketers must share trade secrets with people they were conditioned to distrust.
And everyone, even people who fear for their jobs, must make their former rivals feel welcome.
It takes heavy-duty ego stroking, attention to emotional detail and a policy of honesty even when it hurts to make that kind of a merger work.
As Elena S. Ferretti, a television news producer, put it, "Rivals are not people you're geared to think of as nice."


A Fall Wedding For Miss Kline
November wedding plans have been announced for Marjorie Lynne Kline, a senior associate at the financial consulting firm of Houlihan, Lokey, Howard &amp; Zukin in Century City, Calif., and Christopher Andrew Bowen, an assistant vice president of the Security Pacific National Bank in Los Angeles.
Miss Kline, 26 years old, is a daughter of Joan Gordon of Silver Spring, Md., and Robert L. Kline of Potomac, Md.
She graduated cum laude from Colgate University and received a master's degree in business from the University of Chicago.
Her father is a director in the information processing department at the International Monetary Fund in Washington.
Her mother teaches high school English in the Montgomery County, Md., school system.
The prospective bride's stepfather, John L. Gordon, is the controller of the Navy Federal Credit Union in Vienna, Va.


The Moral of the Story: Another Loss
Larry Glueck is tired of feeling this way on Saturday afternoons, when he has to accept progress as a substitute for victory.
His Fordham football team is 3-0 in the moral victory department, but 0-3 in every other ledger.
The Rams are quickly establishing themselves as the New York Jets of Division I-AA.
They tease themselves and their fans into believing that a breakthrough has finally arrived, only to give a game away when pressed to deliver in the final minutes.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'AMERICA' IN BREWSTER
The original version of D. W. Griffith's epic film "America," shot in the county in 1923, will be shown Saturday at 8 P.M. in Brewster's Southeast Museum, a repository of local history.
It will highlight an evening of celebration, marking the beginning of a five-year plan to redesign the museum's quarters on one floor of the Town Hall, a landmark building erected in 1896.
About $8,000 is needed to reconstruct a 2,000-square-foot exhibition space and to acquire a wider collection of documents and artifacts.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending Sept. 14  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 245,000
11 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  (Brevoort)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, terrace; maintenance $895, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Weigner Real Estate)  Carnegie Hill 800,000
1185 Park Avenue (94th St.)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, 2 maids' rooms, fireplace; maintenance $2,052, 38% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper East Side 300,000
340 East 64th Street  (St. Tropez)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area; common charge $520, taxes $3,792 (Broker: Equinox Property Co.)  Upper West Side 153,000
23 West 73d Street  (Park Royale)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 725-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $648, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: J.I. Sopher)  West Midtown 1.1 million
146 West 57th Street  (Metropolitan Tower)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, library; common charge $1,600, taxes $13,200 (Broker: Charles H. Greenthal Residential Sales)  BRONX  Fordham Road Area 140,000
845 Crotona Park East  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, in each unit; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale 280,000
3053 Henry Hudson Parkway  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining area, powder room, hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 1/8-acre lot; taxes $1,385 (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  Bay Ridge 216,000
620 79th Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,361 (Broker: Velsor Real Estate)  Brooklyn Heights 696,250
60 Joralemon Street  2-family, 4-story, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, den in upper duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in other; double-parlor, 2 fireplaces in each; 21- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $2,600 (Broker: William B. May)  Mill Basin 230,000
2712 Mill Avenue  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; dining room, in each; 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,451 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS Forest Hills Gardens 530,000
24 Rockrose Place  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, Tudor; dining room, solarium, powder room, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  Kew Gardens Hills 200,000
147-02 73d Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, house; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 40- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $2,700 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Eltingville 220,000
134 Stroud Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, high-ranch; dining room, new bay windows, 1-car garage, 40-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,696 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Grasmere 160,000
53 North Drive  (Hills North)  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; common charge $137, taxes $1,300 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


Bed and Breakfast
To the Editor: As a follow-up to the article "A New Candor Emerging in B &amp; B Guidebooks," we want to note that our firm, Innovations, rates B &amp; B's and inns throughout the U.S.
Our concern with the original article is that readers would be under the impression that only one inn rating system exists in the country.
This is untrue as our company is one of three systems currently pioneering methods and criteria to rate this much overlooked segment of the lodging industry.
Our independent panel of judges included industry experts such as Sally Jessy Raphael, who owns her own inn in Bucks County, Pa.
RON CALLARI Cranford, N.J.


Where Rape Victims Can Seek Help
JILL GREENBAUM directs the Bergen County Y.W.C.A.'s Rape Crisis Center.
With her two-person staff and 26 volunteers, she runs a 24-hour hot line and advisory service that directs victims of sexual assault to medical or psychological counseling and helps them through the legal system if they press charges against attackers.
The center handles 10 to 15 new cases each week, mostly adult women, though clients include children and men as well as victims' families.
The center is one of 21 similar rape crisis organizations serving New Jersey.


Winter-Storage Tips For Fuel-Powered Tools
GASOLINE-POWERED tools like lawn mowers, garden shredders, tillers and string trimmers need servicing before being stored for the winter.
That is not difficult, and it assures quick starting in the spring and long life.
The best place to store most gasoline-powered tools is in a dry unheated garage or shed.
If you must store items outside, wrap them with plastic sheeting to keep out moisture and tie the sheeting with rope or elastic cord to prevent wind from undoing the wrap.
If equipment is to be stored in a heated garage, basement or utility room, follow the directions given later for servicing the fuel system.


Wall Street; Getting Strict About Collagen
Consistency is one hobgoblin that has never haunted the stock market, as illustrated by its response to a regulatory flap over bovine collagen, a fibrous protein derived from cattle that is being used by several health technology companies -- most visibly, the Collagen Corporation.
Recently, the Food and Drug Administration ordered Collagen to run tougher warnings about the possible health risks of bovine collagen implants.
Collagen is staunchly defending the product's safety; its stock has nevertheless sagged.


New Goal for New York: Tourist-Friendly Image
Imagine a day when tourists arriving at New York airports might actually have a pleasant experience, even if they speak no English.
The baggage cart might be free, instead of requiring a $1.50 deposit before anyone has even had a chance to get to a currency- exchange window.
There might be signs in the terminal in other languages giving foreign visitors a clue what to do next.
They might not face a barrage of aggressive offers from often-illegal taxi drivers eager to take them for long rides into New York.
And as they gaze out their taxi windows at the city's glorious skyline, they might not find themselves distracted by mounds of litter collecting on marginally grassy strips along the road.


Changing Lire
To the Editor: Sometimes we learn that we have been, to use a phrase from my childhood in England, too clever by half.
That was certainly true of our trip to Italy this summer.
Knowing how difficult it can be to exchange traveler's checks in Italian banks -- the lines, the need to produce passports, the inconvenient hours -- I had the bright idea of buying traveler's checks in lire here in New York and taking them with us.
No more bank lines and hassles for us, right?
Alas, no; wrong, wrong, wrong.


Misgivings
To the Editor:
One must wonder what judgment and insight JoAnne Akalaitis will bring to her new theater post when she agrees with the obvious that the Palestinian plight is tragic -- without at all reflecting that the Palestinians and their backers are themselves responsible for their misery.
Given the one-sided emotionalism of her article without balancing facts, I fear the theater of Ms.
Akalaitis will irritate and anger more than just the late Samuel Beckett.
MAX G. WEINE New York


'Standing Up to Ezra Pound'
To the Editor:
Richard Gillman's piece was fascinating.
But if Pound did indeed complete "The Pisan Cantos" in 1945, "when he was imprisoned in a United States Army detention training center near Pisa, under indictment for treason," then he did it all in his head.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Chappaqua, N.Y. 215,000
56 Martha Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; playroom, fireplace, family room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $5,360.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 325,000
36 Old Town Crossing  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old town house; den, eat-in kitchen, sunken living room, marble fireplace, loft; taxes $7,392.
Rye, N.Y. 310,000
60 Fulton Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 21-year-old split-level; eat-in kitchen, deck, family room; taxes $5,606.
Avon, Conn. 230,000
32 Stony Corners  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; remodeled kitchen, sauna, whirlpool bath, 0.75-acre; taxes $3,800.
Canton, Conn. 320,000
24 Jeff's Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, new colonial; 2-story foyer, 3-car garage, studio over garage, 1 acre; taxes to be determined.
Simsbury, Conn. 204,000
1 Lawton Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, large deck, 1 acre; taxes $3,200.
OTHER AREAS Massapequa, L.I. 270,000
26 Cedar Shore Road Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 37-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $8,800.
Mineola, L.I. 180,000
177 Garfield Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old Victorian; fireplace, front porch; taxes $2,600.
Edison, N.J. 209,000
60 Livingston Avenue
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old split level; wooded lot, h/w floors, skylight; taxes $4,130.


Homeless, Yes, but Not a Social Problem Without a Solution
To the Editor:
When I read such articles as "Shift in Feelings on the Homeless: Empathy Turns Into Frustration" (front page, Sept. 2) and your Sept. 4 front-page report that families are living in homeless shelters as a route to getting apartments, I get sick to my stomach.
"They are talking about me," I say.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
SHE PLAYS A GOOD ORANGE
Some aspire to the presidency; Rana Lee Araneta wanted to be a piece of fruit.
"The first time I saw the orange I thought I've got to be him," said Miss Araneta of Hicksville, a sophomore at Syracuse University.


Corrections
A report and headline last Sunday about the marriage of Carolyn Sue Gusoff to Dr.
Jon Branden Turk rendered the bride's last name incorrectly.


Sunday Dinner; 3 Spots and 3 Variations On a Crab Cake Theme
Crab cakes are one of those foods about which everybody has a strong opinion -- they should be light, they should be dense with crab meat, or peppery, or mild -- and inside information on where to find the best ones.
Here are three restaurants that serve tasty and fresh crab cakes, each slightly different in character and each with its own partisans.
Docks Oyster Bar and Seafood Grill
633 Third Avenue, at 40th Street in Manhattan, (212) 986-8080 -- This stylish and comfortable two-level expanse has a big arching wood-and-brass bar in the center, on which are displayed all manner of iced shellfish.
In the evening, Art Deco sconces, candles and strategically placed overhead lights create a cool urbane mood.
For such a big crowded place, Docks rarely gets too loud.
As for the food, it is reliably fresh and deftly prepared.
Appetizers run from assorted oysters of the day, which are usually freshly shucked and in peak condition, to excellent rings of lightly breaded fried calamari with a cumin-laced hot sauce, and excellent clam chowder.
Other starters include generous Maryland crab cakes with tartar sauce and marinated seafood salad.
Among entrees are lobster fra diavolo with linguine, red snapper wrapped in thin potato slices, grilled Norwegian salmon and blackened medallions of swordfish.
A New England clambake is served with salad, dessert and coffee.
On the dessert menu are key lime pie and Docks' mud fudge pie.
Appetizers range from $4 to $9; main courses $10 to $19.50; desserts $4 to $6.50.
The clambake is $23 for two one-pound lobsters and $27 for one two-pounder.
Sunday dinner is from 5 to 11 P.M. (Review, Sept. 30, 1988; Article Oct. 19, 1990.) Gage &amp; Tollner
372 Fulton Street, at Jay Street in Brooklyn, (718) 875-5181 -- The 110-year-old Gage &amp; Tollner stands with defiance and dignity in the dispiritingly tacky Fulton Mall in Brooklyn.
The long dark mahogany dining room is delightfully democratic: no good tables, no bad tables, just long rows of symmetrically arranged white linen, like a college dining hall.
Arched mirrors along the felt-covered walls make the space seem even larger than it is.
From the 15-foot-high ceiling hang gas-fueled brass chandeliers.
The food is orchestrated by Edna Lewis, the renowned Southern chef and author.
Among the appetizers are Charleston she-crab, creamy and peppery with a good base of crab stock and sherry; broiled or fried soft clam bellies; lightly breaded and sauteed white eggplant and peppers in olive oil; lobster bisque, and meaty golden crab cakes.
Main-course selections include tender braised brisket of beef; the mildly spicy shrimp and crab gumbo, rich with crab meat, okra and green peppers and served over rice; sauteed jumbo sea scallops served on a bed of spinach, and Southern-fried chicken.
Appetizers range from $4 to $8; entrees $10 to $17; desserts $4 to $8.
Sunday dinner hours are 4 P.M. to 9 P.M. (Review, July 7, 1989; Article, Oct. 19, 1990.) John Clancy's Restaurant
181 West 10th Street, at Seventh Avenue in Manhattan, (212) 242-7350 -- Fresh skillfully grilled seafood is the specialty at this comfortable Greenwich Village institution.
The step-down main dining room and bar are done in whitewashed brick walls and pearl gray, with pastel garden prints on the walls; the upstairs, done in similar colors, is more intimate.
You might start with Tunisian crab cakes, seasoned with harissa and served with a tomato-garlic sauce; lemon red pepper linguine with lobster, crab meat and shiitake mushrooms; lobster tartlet with a peppercorn vinaigrette; lobster bisque, or ceviche of smoked shrimp and sea scallops with a grilled vegetable relish.
Entrees include barbecued jumbo shrimp; grilled swordfish steak with basil pesto, ginger red onion marmalade and shellfish bordelaise; sauteed sea scallops accompanied with scallop ravioli, star anise and a red wine butter sauce, and an herb-crusted red snapper with ginger-dill sauce.
John Clancy's is one of the few restaurants in town that serves English trifle -- layers of sherry-soaked genoise, raspberry puree, creme anglaise and whipped cream in a wide-mouth goblet.
Deadly, but good.
Appetizers range from $4.50 to $10; main courses $16.50 to $26.50; desserts are $6 each.
Sunday dinner service is from 5 P.M. to 10 P.M. (Review, March 11, 1988; Article, Oct. 19, 1990.)  This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times, and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (New York City and suburbs), from articles published in the last 18 months.
Touch-tone telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 a minute).


Himalayas
To the Editor:
I loved Marcia Lieberman's story.
My husband and I have taken two treks there (1987 and 1991), which had the best of both worlds: the advantages of a private trek, along with the security and other benefits of going with a leader who has conducted more than 50 treks in Nepal and nearby countries, who knows and respects both Nepal and the Nepalese and who, over the years, has built up a capable, loyal staff.


CLIO HAS A PROBLEM
Where Schama writes that Clio "is told she is a wicked good-for-nothing unless she becomes 'multicultural' ," he overstates the pluralistic critique of the Anglo-Saxon tradition.
The challenge of multiculturalism is not based on a claim that the past curriculm was good-for-nothing, but that it was merely a limited and narrow view of the world, claiming for itself a universality it did not deserve.
Scholars who do not grasp this distinction probably come from a world so filled with role models and mentors from their native traditions that they have little experience of the alienation and segregation decried by those whose ancestral traditions are ignored.
CASEY FRANK
Jamaica Plain, Mass.


Gamble Works: Rangers Play In Las Vegas
Sure Wayne Gretzky scored a goal, and for that matter the Los Angeles Kings beat the Rangers, 5-2, before a sellout crowd of more than 13,000 spectators, but for all the hockey derring-do Friday night, the exhibition game seemed more an engineering feat than an athletic achievement.
That's because the game was played outdoors in Las Vegas, Nev., in 85-degree temperature not usually associated with a sport in which ice is the essential ingredient.


Those Thin, Thin Beauty Contestants
When I read "What It Takes to Be in Beauty Contests" (New Jersey Q &amp; A, Sept. 8), the unfortunate answer is quite evident in both Miss New Jersey's photograph and interview.
Anorexia, bulimia or another self-destructive illness seems to be a major criterion for winning the contests.
At 5 feet 8 inches, 114 pounds is still not thin enough for the pageant director.
Amy Fissel states she wasn't thin enough to win Miss Atlantic County.
Perhaps the judges would like to see a skeleton parade around in a $300 swimsuit.


More Than Drugs Are At Stake in Noriega Trial
EVEN before the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega began here earlier this month, one of the lawyers in the case was referring to the proceedings as "The Starship Noriega." Two weeks into what is expected to be a four-month trial, it is already clear that the charges against the deposed Panamanian dictator have boldly plunged judge, jury, defendant and attorneys into areas of law and politics where no one has gone before -- and not merely because General Noriega is the first foreign head of state to be tried in an American courtroom.
If ever there were a case that Federal prosecutors cannot afford to lose, this is it.
Having invaded Panama, spent large amounts of taxpayer dollars preparing the case, and cut deals with the unsavory collection of renegade pilots, drug smugglers and corrupt businessmen indicted with General Noriega on cocaine trafficking, money laundering and racketeering charges, the United States Government has elevated the stakes.
If the general walks, the Bush Adminstration risks ridicule at home and abroad and perhaps further examination of its methods in dealing with dictators.  'Just Another Drug Case'
But at the same time, and for the same reasons, the prosecution must avoid conveying the impression that the former Panamanian leader is getting anything less than a fair trial.
General Noriega and his lawyer, Frank Rubino, appear to be well aware of that problem and have constructed a defense that seeks maximum political exploitation of the Government's dilemma.
In a nutshell, General Noriega's preferred explanation of the drug trafficking and arms smuggling that went on in Panama is this: The Central Intelligence Agency and the Drug Enforcement Administration made me do it, and they have the documents to prove it.


As More Tiny Infants Live, Choices and Burden Grow
The baby in the plastic case lies swathed in a Mickey Mouse blanket whose cartoon characters dwarf him in size.
One month after birth, he has already suffered major bleeding in his head, requiring brain surgery, and still needs a respirator to breathe.
Born almost four months prematurely, weighing just over a pound, the baby is sustained by a battery of tubes and machines.
His skin is thin as parchment and his eyes are sealed shut, but he is clearly a human child.
A minuscule blue and white stocking cap prevents heat loss through his head.


All About/Fat Substitutes; The Long, Hard Quest for Foods That Fool the Palate
The expression, "Having your cake and eating it too," has become an urgent battle cry for the food industry.
Fat, with its calories and artery-clogging cholesterol, has become like sugar -- an ingredient to be avoided at all cost.
As a result, the food industry is working frantically to take fat out of food by developing substitutes.
"The food business has become a technology business," said John M. McMillin, a food analyst with Prudential Securities.
"It is getting to the point where people are starting to call it 'software for the microwave.' " Whether consumers will show enthusiasm for fake fat, though, remains an open question.
Some products have not performed as hoped, and the market for ingredients that replace fat is currently less than $500 million.


Zaire Leader to Take Foes Into Coalition
President Mobutu Sese Seko and opposition leaders agreed today to form a coalition government after five days of rioting that led French and Belgian troops to evacuate foreigners.
It was the first time in the 26 years of Mr.
Mobutu's rule that he had agreed to share power with the opposition in this Central African country.
The collapse of the former Belgian colony's economy, brought on in part by widespread corruption, weakened his grip on power.


Dinkins Still Awaits Assurances on Home Port
Depite new plans to remove tactical nuclear weapons from the navy's surface ships, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday restated his opposition to operations at the home port on Staten Island for the cruiser Normandy until he is specifically assured that no such weapons will be deployed there.
"Until and unless the U.S. Navy Department is able to tell us that the ships coming into New York Harbor are not nuclear-capable, we will continue to oppose the Staten Island home port," a spokeswoman for Mr.
Dinkins, Anabel Franceschini, said yesterday.


Kathryn Dove, Therapist, Wed
Kathryn Rosee Dove, the daughter of Dr.
David C. Dove of Manhattan and the late Pamela Despres Dove, was married yesterday to James Elbert Carter 2d, a son of Col.
James E. Carter and Dorothea Curry Carter of Sunnyvale, Tex.
The wedding took place at the couple's home in Huntington Bay, L.I.
Vaughan Spilsbury, Mayor of Huntington Bay, officiated.
Ms.
Dove, who is keeping her name, is a psychotherapist in New York and Huntington, L.I.
She graduated from Colorado College and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is an internist at New York University Medical Center and is acting director of the New York University Health Services.


Isabella L. de la Houssaye Marries
Isabella Livaudais de la Houssaye and David Whipple Crane, lawyers, were married yesterday in New Orleans.
The Rev.
Frank H. Davis officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Most Holy Name of Jesus.
Ms. de la Houssaye, 27 years old, is to join White &amp; Case in New York next month as an associate.
She graduated from Princeton University and Columbia University's law school.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benton Cason de la Houssaye Jr. of Crowley, La., where her father is a physician and her mother, Isabella de la Houssaye, is a City Councilwoman.


A Nice Problem: How To Invest A Billion Bucks
James Craig has a problem.
The money is pouring in, and he can't find ways to get rid of it.
"We are finding individual stocks, but they are getting scarce because of the run-up this year," Mr.
Craig said Friday as he contemplated the hundreds of millions of dollars that have poured into his Janus Venture Fund, a small-stock fund that is up 34 percent for the year so far.
"To deploy that money would require me to loosen my disciplines." He looks for stocks where expected earnings increases are not already discounted and says they are hard to find.


Eva Smith Wed To Matt Davis
Eva Hackney Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sherwood Hubbard Smith Jr. of Raleigh, N.C., was married yesterday to Allen Mattson Davis, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Brack Davis of Rocklin, Calif.
The Rev.
B.
Daniel Sapp officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Raleigh.
Mrs.
Davis, who is 27 years old, is a design coordinator at the Polo/Ralph Lauren Corporation in New York.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Carolina Power and Light Company in Raleigh.


Miss Bytner Has Wedding
Renee E. Bytner, an account executive at Liz Claiborne Inc., and Richard Hyde Gregory, a vice president of Bayerische Landesbank, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Augustin in Newport, R.I.
The Rev.
John T. Carty performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gregory, 24 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is the daughter of Vincent D. and Jean Bytner of Albany, owners of Bytner Travel.


An Era of Change Challenges France's Self-Confidence
FOR three decades after France lost its empire, the cold war enabled successive French presidents to keep alive the myth that it remained a great power.
It had an independent nuclear deterrent, it was the political leader of the European Community, it was influential in the Middle East and it had a special relationship with Moscow that it frequently used to pique Washington.
But the events of the last year have badly shaken France's self-confidence abroad.
The country now feels intimidated by the growing political power of a united Germany, it seems unsure how to handle a turbulent Eastern Europe, it has lost clout in the Arab world and it is uncomfortable with the United States as the sole remaining superpower.


Data Update
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
July 91
June 91
July 90
New York
3,029
2,966
2,702
New Jersey
1,310
1,515
1,337
Connecticut
779
754
674
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.18
9.23
10.39
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.89
6.96
8.39
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.05
9.11
10.21
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.85
6.82
8.09
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.05
9.12
10.28
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.85
6.88
8.27
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.31
9.35
10.57
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.42
7.47
8.53
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.56
5.58
7.77
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.10
9.12
9.70
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Corrections
An article on miniature cookies and crackers last Sunday reversed the corporate affiliations of two snack makers.
The Keebler Company is a unit of United Biscuits Holdings P.L.C. of Britain.
Sunshine Biscuits Inc. is a subsidiary of G. F. Industries of Oakland, Calif.


Canadian Palaces Amid the Peaks
In 1859, the first tourist marveled at the Banff-Lake Louise area of the Canadian Rockies.
As R. W. Sanford tells the story in "The Canadian Alps," James Carnegie, the Earl of Southesk, was accompanied by porters, an inflatable India rubber bathtub and the contents of a small armory.
In spite of the wet ground for a bed, poor food, and "no companion of my own class," Carnegie professed himself "happier than I have been for years."
If only he could have waited 30 years, he might have been even happier.
By then, the Canadian Pacific Railway, which had made the mountains accessible, was busy wooing wealthy European tourists to the land it called "50 Switzerlands in one." Under the aegis of the railroad's vice president, William Van Horne, an American marketing genius who virtually invented Canadian tourism, the railway carved hiking trails, imported Swiss guides and flung up grand hotels in rugged natural settings.
Two of the earliest and most gorgeously situated, the Banff Springs Hotel and the Chateau Lake Louise, are now modern year-round resorts still mindful of their 19th-century origins.
First and for a long time foremost was the Banff Springs Hotel, which rose out of the mountains in 1888.
Its massive size, its romantic amalgam of Scottish baronial and French chateau styles and its lonely setting at the confluence of the Bow and Spray Rivers have always given it a never-never-land quality.
In his history of the hotel, "Banff Springs," Bart Robinson writes of an old-timer who said when the first saw the hotel, "It had no business being there."
Whether or not the hotel should have been there, it proved influential.
When its architect, Boston's Bruce Price (the father of Emily Post), fixed on the 16th-century chateaus of the Loire for his main inspiration, he created Canada's first national style.
With its steep roofs, towers, turrets and flat walls, the chateau style shaped the standard C.P.R. hotel from Victoria to Quebec and also served for train stations and government buildings.
Undergoing almost constant renovation and enlargement, the Banff Springs Hotel attracted more than its share of kings, queens, and movie stars as well as legends like the famous sealed off room the exact location of which remains unknown. (It happened when the north wing was added to the center tower in 1927, but no one can remember where it is.)
Today the Banff Springs is, alas, a mixed exprience.
On a recent visit, my $191 corner room (all prices are given in United States dollar, with the Canadian dollar at 87 cents,) was not large but furnished in well-upholstered, unostentatious comfort.
The dark blue brocade on the bed and windows was an updated version of a traditional pattern, and a massive oak cabinet sheltered the obliatory television and bar.
The bathroom was equally traditional, lined in gleaming white tiles, but outfitted with hair dryer and good plumbing.
All this was very well, but properly upstaged by the views on two sides of the two rivers and Rundle Mountain that's the point of the two Jacobean-style armchairs.
It should be noted that this eminently satisfactory room may have been a lucky accident in a hotel with 846 rooms, some much older than others.
When I registered, the man ahead of me was exchanging his room for one with a shower.
When I checked out, the clerk asked if my room ws the first one I had been shown to, when I asked if many guests asked for a change in rooms, he nodded.
The staff, youngish and many dressed in red and black Rob Roy McGregor kilts or the green Alberta tartan, are friendly to a fault.
Two of the hotel's pleasantest spots are bars.
Grapes, the wine bar on the mezzanine level, is a small wood-paneled room with casement windows.
The wine selection is good, the mushroom pate excellent, and the waiter was honest. ("I don't think much of the vegetable pate").
Best of all, when the sun lights up the little stained-glass shields in the windows, is the contrast between the enclosed coziness of the bar and the expansive view outside.
The Rundle Bar, by contrast, is a long room with enormous windows that relies - successfully - on sheer location.
Sip your drink - but avoid the food, which runs to hamburgers available only well done - while feasting on the sight of the Bow River snaking its way past Rundle Mountain.
Those are the pluses.
On the minus side are the extensive new convention facilities, which dominate the approach to the hotel and leave the main bulding looking overlarge and dowdy. (The tour bus entrance, which is also a prominent part of the approach, does nothing for the hotel's sense of occasion.) The public rooms in high season are typically crowded with bus-tour customers.
As for the public rooms themselves, all the traditional Canadian Pacific landmarks are there - dim lights, miles of Axminster-style carpeting, linenfold oak paneling, grotestque carved heads and other pseudomedieval details, cabinets straining to look Jacobean, distempered and distressed finishes.
It's time-hallowed Grand Hotel kitsch (much of it reproduced from castles and manses in the original Banff in Scotland), but it is kitsch and the net effect is neither cheerful nor glamorous.
Perhaps the best way to enjoy the Banff Springs Hotel is to focus on its history.
Visit the Whyte Museum of the Canadian Rockies in Banff (111 Bear Street) and peruse the Canadian Pacific posters advertising the hotel in the chic 20's and 30's.
Stock your imagination with images of soigne women in riding clothes and evening dresses drifting through the hotel (often rather mysteriously accompanied by red-coated Mounties), then repair to Grapes or the Rundle Bar and muse on the past while drinking in the view.
About 35 miles northeast of Banff, Chateau Lake Louise has aged much better, thanks in part to its more remote, almost mystical lake setting.
When the English poet Rupert Brooke visited the Rockies in 1916, he wrote of Banff, "Beautiful enough, and invigorating. But Lake Louise - Lake Louise is of another world." The emerald green sheet of water virtually encircled by overlapping mountain and Victoria Glacier was known to the Stoney Indians, who called it the Lake of Little Fishes.
No white man saw it until 1882, when a Stoney showed it to a surveyor named Tom Wilson.
Wilson promptly renamed it Emerald Lake, but a staunchly colonial age renamed it once more, in honor of Queen Victoria's daughter Princess Louise.
While the Canadian Pacific had determined from the beginning that Banff Springs would be a grand hotel, Chateau Lake Louise was intended as rustic lodgings for naturalists, sportsmen and alpinists.
It began life in 1890, as a simple frame building called Chalet Lake Louise, and the stationery promised "Fishing and Hunting at the Summit of the Rockies." The railroad's hope was that guests would adjust to the mountain air while spending a week or two at the Banff Springs, then move to Lake Louise's more demanding charms.
In 1899, the railroad hired its first Swiss guides to make clmbing more attractive to the novice, and began constructing a larger hotel.
Although habitues regretted the loss of "the little big chalet" where the housekeeper entertained the guests with old Scottish songs, the new hotel was still a wilderness lodge, albeit a comfortable one.
Only in 1925, when a new chateau building was built to replace two wings destroyed by fire, did the hotel accept its increasingly grand image and rechristen itself Chateau Lake Louise.
From the outside, the building is a fairly mechanical exercise in the chateau syle: it is, as the mountain scholar Jon White writes in "Lake Lousie: A Diamond in the Wilderness," "a hotel meant to be looked from rather than a hotel to be looked at."
Although the hotel's decor has always had alpine tendencies, its most recent makeover, finished last year, has left it more thoroughly Swiss than ever.
On paper, the Helvetian ambiance sounds as kitsch as the Banff Springs's Highland lodgings, but a shrewd placement of relatively few convincing details has jelled into something both airy and hospitable.
In the main lobby, large and light-filled as opposed to the Banff Springs' foreshortened space, the bellboys wear gray knickers and alpine jackets, wooden Swiss maidens lift their lamps in the central chandelier, and the massive Biedermeier furniture clusters in conversational groups.
In the hotel's seven restaurants, antlers form spiky chandeliers, animal skins cover walls, and the stuffed heads of mountain goats, elk and deer look down on the diners.
The original restaurant, the Victoria Dining Room, serves traditional fare in an old-fahsioned, rather unadorned setting that includes an immense stone fireplace presided over by a snub-nosed moose head.
But all eyes veer to the tall, round-headed lakeside windows; it's worth a visit if only to imagine yourself inside a Canadian Pacific poster from the 1930's.
The forest-green and white Edelweiss Dining Room, the grandest of the hotel's restaurants, greets diners with a tall white ceramic stove in the anteroom and continues in the same alpine vein.
Book a window seat facing on the lake and choose from specialties that include vension ragout St.
Hubertus for $19.95 and maultauschen (pasta stuffed with spinach, cheese, mushrooms and herbs) for $16.50.
One of the newest and most pleasant of the hotel's restaurants, the Walliser Stube, is a Swiss wine bar with an elaborate glassed-in wine cellar, an enormous grandfather clock and waitresses in credible loden and maroon costumes.
The food is not only authentic, it's delicious; cheese raclette for two costs $33, and the veal sausages with onion sauce and the Swiss potato dish called rosti are $10.
The 515 rooms in the Chateau are priced according to a simple scale, depending on the view.
My lakeside room was medium-sized and quietly wallpapered with a floral stripe.
The light-colored folkloric furniture, complete with the incised flowers and cut-out hearts common in alpine countries, included a large carved bedstead and an armoire concealing the bar and television.
Above the bed hung the delicate antlers of a chamois signed "Lenholt," presumably the person who mounted it, and the date (10/8/59).
When the cold-water tap failed to function in the first room I was shown, I was immediately taken to another; when I reported at check-out that I had had a bottle of beer from the mini-bar, the cashier responded, "Oh, that's fine," and didn't charge me.
The hotel offers all the services of a luxury hotel, from an indoor pool to one-hour photo development to a massage therapist.
Several of its 34 shops offer better than average browsing, and one is exceptional.
Freya's Trading Post has a terrific assortment of old and new Indian artifacts.
A magnificent, minutely beaded Chippewa shoulder bag, circa 1925, costs $2,175; bright blue turn-of-the-century Assiniboia child's dress made from hide, with its yoke ornamented with cowrie shells, beads and fringes, costs $2,436.
More affordably, there are small beaded purses made by Morley Indians in the $43 range, and fur-trimmed moccasins made by Saskatchewan Indians for $38,25.
Although Swiss guides are no longer firmly handing corseted ladies over crevasses, the hotel still provides the services of a certified mounted guide.
There are also more than 40 miles of hiking trails (including two strategically situated log tea houses) and excellent skiiing facilities nearby.
But the main attraction at Lake Louise is "the little gem of beauty beneath the glacier," (as Tom Wilson called the lake. Since no motorboats are permitted, the quiet is broken only by the occasional booming of the hotel's alpenhorn.
The purity of the composition, with two mountains angling down to showcase Victoria Glacier in the center, gives the setting an eerie, still quality even when attended by throngs of tourists.
At 5 in the morning when I was there, a dozen or so guests had left their beds and were standing around the lake, some taking pictures, others simply contemplating the sight of the mountains and glacier reflected in the glassy green surface.


Confederacy Rises Again
A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO, when the C.I.A. was still persuaded that the Soviet gross national product was growing, a former high official of that agency called me with a contrarian tip: "You want to consider the possibility of the first disintegration of a superpower." My nameless (actually, he has a name), my unidentified (he has an identity, too), my publicity-averse source added: "Some disunionists like you should give some thought to methods for the republics to confederate."
Confederate?
I have written extensively about
Confederates
, capitalized, as the Southerners called themselves during the Civil War, and have a few confederates of my own, though these peer-groupies now go by the name of
colleagues, associates
or
confreres
.
However, I had never used the word as a verb; as is my wont, I asked my source what the difference was between
confederate
and
federate
.
He said only to mark his words (actually, to stop marking his words), that the Soviet internal monolith would one day break up.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FORCE MAJEURE  By Bruce Wagner. Random House, $23.


Mr. Astor's Little Inn
The grand cities of the world have their grand hotels, the bed-and-breakfasts for the mighty and the moneyed.
Ward Morehouse 3d explores one of New York City's grandest in THE WALDORF-ASTORIA: America's Gilded Dream (Evans, $22.95).
Mr.
Morehouse, a former reporter for The Christian Science Monitor, is more of a guide than a historian, embellishing his meanderings about the Waldorf with entertaining anecdotes and portraits of those who have been the lifeblood of its fame, such as Elsa Maxwell and Cole Porter.
The Waldorf is 60 years old this year, and the author reminds us that it opened during the Great Depression, the descendant of the original Waldorf-Astoria that occupied the site, until 1929, where the Empire State Building now stands.
It is a hotel big enough to handle Golda Meir and Yasir Arafat at the same time, without embarrassment to anyone, and vast enough to need computers to sort out the task of housekeeping, with a staff of nearly 400 for the 1,850 rooms to be cleaned.
Mr.
Morehouse writes of pleasures and scandals, of the hard facts of running a hotel and of its romance.
This is not the last word on the Waldorf-Astoria, and the publisher is to be chided for neglecting to provide readers an index.
Even so, the hotel comes off well in the hands of its appreciative Boswell and one will find "The Waldorf-Astoria" to be a pleasant buffet.


Ms. McMullen, Teacher, Weds
Diana Latimer McMullen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Latimer McMullen of Greenwich, Conn., and Vincent James Lepis, a son of Sally Lepis of Selden, N.Y., and the late Vincent J. Lepis, were married yesterday at Rye (N.Y.) Golf Club.
The Rev.
Valerie Seyffert, a minister of the Quimby Memorial Church, officiated.
Mrs.
Lepis, 35 years old, is a special-education teacher at the Easter Seal Rehabilitation Center in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Curry College and has a master's degree in special education from Manhattanville College.
Her father was a producer, reporter and narrator of "CBS Reports" from 1959 to 1985, when he retired.


The C.I.A. Looked the Other Way
COMANDOS
The CIA and Nicaragua's Contra Rebels.
By Sam Dillon.
Illustrated. 393 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $27.50.


Asia Exhibits Support and Quiet Misgivings
Since the end of the Korean War, American strategy for keeping peace in the Pacific ultimately hinged on the looming presence of a huge arsenal of American tactical nuclear weapons, stored at its bases in South Korea and aboard the ships of its Pacific fleet.
So when Asia's leadership awoke this morning to hear President Bush sweep that deterrent away, their public declarations of support also came amid an undercurrent of misgivings -- chiefly about whether Mr.
Bush may be one step too far ahead of the pace of change in Asia.


Currency; Dollar Slips Around World
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
133.12
134.20
138.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6695
1.6850
1.5670
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1333
1.1343
1.1542
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7435
1.7315
1.8760
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$349.00
$348.30
$403.00
Currency: Friday NY Close


Yeltsin Brings a Whole New Style To the Art of Reasoning Together
TRYING to assess Boris N. Yeltsin in the six hectic weeks since the failed coup is somewhat like deciding whether the proverbial beaker is half-empty or half-full.
He has gathered considerable powers, but whether he is half-democrat or half-dictator seems to depend largely on the beholder.
On one thing all agree: that since the coup, the President of Russia has acquired more authority than any other person in what used to be the Soviet Union.
It was hardly a diplomatic nicety that President Bush telephoned Mr.
Yeltsin about his arms initiative on Saturday immediately after calling President Mikhail S. Gorbachev; it was a recognition of the fact that in an increasingly decentralized Soviet Union, Mr.
Gorbachev's "da" requires Mr.
Yeltsin's initials to have any significance.


Rutgers Surprises Mich. St.
Tom Tarver flipped scoring passes of 1 and 2 yards to tailback Antoine Moore -- the second touchdown coming with only 46 seconds left -- as Rutgers (3-1) downed Michigan State, 14-7, today.
The defeat dropped Michigan State to 0-3 and marked the second time this season that an underdog had upset the Spartans, the Big Ten Conference co-champions last season.
Central Michigan surprised them with a 20-3 victory on Sept. 14.


The Season Sets a Brisk Pace: Italy; La Scala opens with Wagner, Rome celebrates Mozart
Like its abundance of antiquity, and its profusion of pasta and prosciutto, Italy's attractions for seekers of cultural invigoration this year offer a paradoxical mixture that can be both spectacular and annoyingly uneven: some programs are not printed until the last moment, schedules change and excellence is not universal.
As fall approaches, thus, the temptation -- particularly for those, like this reporter, new to Italy -- is to fall back on the trusted favorites.
One event in particular stands out.
In Milan, La Scala opens its season on Dec. 7 with Richard Wagner's five-hour "Parsifal," with Riccardo Muti conducting and Placido Domingo as the lead tenor for the opening performances. (Performances are scheduled for nine performances from Dec. 7 to Dec. 29 at Milan's La Scala Opera House, 2 Via Filodrammatici; telephone 8879297).


3 Titles, You're Out: Oakland to Regroup
Sandy Alderson can be thankful, in a way, that he will be able to get an early start on his off-season plans this year.
The king is dead, long live the king and now Alderson's trick will be to resurrect the king and dress him up in his elegant clothes again while reducing the cost of clothing him.
For the first time in four years, the Oakland Athletics will not play in the World Series.
The Minnesota Twins, by moving to the brink of the American League West championship, have ended the longest World Series run since the Yankees reached it in 1976-77-78.


Perspectives: New Midtown Rentals; A Developer Rides the Market's Waves
TO others it fell to build hotels, office buildings and condominiumized apartment buildings in and around the theater district in central Manhattan in the 1980's.
Jason Carter took a different tack.
On the land where Mamma Leone's restaurant once stood he put up a 44-story rental apartment house last year, thinking that with all that commercial activity coming to the Broadway area there would be a surge in young professionals in midtown who would appreciate the opportunity to walk to work.


Armani Under $100 (More or Less)
When Giorgio Armani announced that he was bringing out a line of casual clothes priced from $30 to $100, his fans were intrigued.
Especially those people who could only admire from afar his $1,400 jackets.
Could they really afford to shop in the A/X: Armani Exchange boutiques he was devising to house the collection?
And would there be more than jeans and T-shirts?
How would it compare with the Gap?
Well, the first A/X store won't open before December, but buyers for other stores are now getting a look at the samples in the Armani showroom in SoHo.
In a high-ceilinged space on Prince Street, around the corner from the in-progress boutique at 568 Broadway, scores of outfits are displayed.


Marci Guttentag Is to Marry Dr. Daniel Settle
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Guttentag of North Hills, L.I., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Marci Sue Guttentag and Dr.
Daniel Fielding Settle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliott T. Settle of Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Ms.
Guttentag, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler.
She is a cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received a law degree.
Dr.
Settle, 26, a magna cum laude graduate of Duke University, has an M.D. from the Penn and is an intern at Abington (Pa.) Hospital.


Gathering the Fruits of Others' Labor
LET'S hear it for the pick-it-yourselfers: fall is their time.
The pick-it-yourselfers are the ones who only set foot on a farm once a year.
The pick-it-yourselfers could not care less about digging or fertilizing, weeding or watering.
They are results-oriented Type A's -- if Type A's did not disappear with the high-voltage 1980's -- and fall is a season of results.
It is a season of harvesting the fruits of everyone else's labors.
Literally.
After all, the pick-it-yourselfers did not have the patience to be there for the planting.


Ginger: Rhizome With a Reason
FRESH ginger came into style in the mid-1970's.
In those days it was hard to find.
But as stir-fried food with garlic, scallions and ginger became more and more popular, ginger was soon available in even the most pedestrian supermarket.
Now, the rhizome (for ginger is a stem, not a root) shows up in the most unexpected places: as a dressing for fois gras, smoked salmon or even a chicken salad.


Digging Up Israel Johnson
CLEAR POND
The Reconstruction of a Life.
By Roger Mitchell.
Illustrated. 230 pp.
Syracuse: Syracuse University Press. $19.95.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson 235,000
109 Arleigh Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,800.
Bethpage 132,000
1 Perry Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
East Meadow 152,500
320 Peters Avenue East  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,000.
Massapequa 270,000
26 Cedar Shore Road Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 37-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $8,800.
Mineola 180,000
177 Garfield Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old Victorian; fireplace, front porch; taxes $2,600.
Williston Park 152,000
39 Stratford Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, new siding; taxes $2,300.
OTHER AREAS Simsbury, Conn. 204,000
1 Lawton Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, large deck, 1 acre; taxes $3,200.
Rye, N.Y. 310,000
60 Fulton Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 21-year-old split-level; eat-in kitchen, deck, family room; taxes $5,606.
Edison, N.J. 209,000
60 Livingston Avenue
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old split level; wooded lot, h/w floors, skylight; taxes $4,130.


Market for Office Space Is More Active
AS the pace of the county's office-space market picks up, commercial real estate brokers and builders say that hard times in the construction industry have produced good times for companies seeking space in Westchester.
With some firms relocating to the county from elsewhere in the region, plus several local expansions, the vacancy rate registered a decline of three percentage points for the first six months of 1991.


A PRICE FOR SECURITY
Joel Brinkley presents a clear picture of the price Israel is paying for security in his article ("A Price for Security," Sept. 8).
However, he emphasizes the nation's weaknesses without giving enough attention to the reasons for these imperfections.
As he points out, absorption of immigrants is Israel's reason for being.
It is the only nation in the world that opens its doors to Jews without prejudice.
But Israel is a small nation, and as Alma Richter eloquently states in the article: ". . . The real problem is . . . with all the wars, we don't have time."
If lsrael is guilty of anything, it is of attempting to care for forgotten people without a wealth of resources.
MARGARET RICHTER
New York, N.Y.


Basie in Action, And at His Best
Americans have always shaped their imports to fit native necessity.
Clothes, architecture, food, languages that were indigenous in Europe and Africa have been fashioned into a new vernacular in the United States.
The process shows up at all levels of cultural life, and "The Complete Roulette Live Recordings of Count Basie and His Orchestra (1959-1962)" underlines exactly how Americans have rewritten imported musical ideas.
If these eight stunning CD's (or 12 LP's; Mosaic 135; available from Mosaic Records, 35 Melrose Place, Stamford, Conn. 06902) show anything, it is how the big-band vocabulary completely reimagined what brass instruments could do.
The disks are a catalogue of musical moans and groans, of sighs and howls, of mock talking and laughter.
Using mutes and plungers, the band inventories textures; there's a startling expressiveness at work, as if the musicians were reclaiming the instruments for themselves.


Commercial Property: Americas Tower; Incomplete, but Being Restored
"RESTORATION before completion is, in essence, what we're doing," said John Peter Barie, the partner in charge of Americas Tower at Swanke Hayden Connell Architects.
Once again under construction on the Avenue of the Americas, between 45th and 46th Streets, Americas Tower had the unwanted distinction of being Manhattan's most obviously troubled development.
Although other projects have encountered greater problems, their difficulties have been masked.
Americas Tower, on the other hand, stood nakedly incomplete more than a year: one-third glazed and clad in granite, one-third enclosed but windowless and one-third skeletal.


Mutual Funds; The Single-State Fund Ploy
As state taxes skyrocket, more fund investors are turning to single-state municipal bond funds, which invest in debt issued by a state, its municipalities or agencies.
Increases in state taxes ultimately mean better yields for most funds because income earned is exempt from Federal, state and local taxes.
The higher the taxes, the more the exemption is worth.
Besides offering the tax break, single-state funds usually pay more than national bond funds.
This is because the single-state funds' lack of diversity increases their risk.
General municipal bond funds invest in debt of many states.


Ski Federation Issues 'White Paper'
The United States Ski Federation, which last week called for the resignation of several senior officials of the United States Olympic Committee, on Friday circulated a memorandum to other sports governing bodies, proposing that the ethical standards required of athletes and federations also be applied to the U.S.O.C.
The recommendation was included in a three-page "white paper" calling into question certain practices the ski federation viewed as inconsistent within the Olympic family.
The document proposed amending the 1978 Amateur Sports Act, the Federal legislation that provided for individual sports federations under the Olympic committee, to create a permanent independent review board to insure that new and existing procedures are applied fairly.


Miss Wallace Has a Wedding
Margaret Lucinda Wallace, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fitzhugh Lee Wallace of Johnson City, Tenn., was married yesterday to Edwin Anthony Heard 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heard Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Bedford Transou performed the ceremony at Munsey Memorial United Methodist Church in Johnson City.
Mrs.
Heard, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Georgia and is assistant controller of the West End Methodist Church in Nashville.
Her father is president of Summers Hardware and Supply Company in Johnson City.


Chess
The New York grandmaster John Fedorowicz complained about the two-game knockout format of the United States championship, held July 28-Aug. 9 in Los Angeles.
"It's too nerve-racking and random," he said.
"One early loss plus a draw puts you out. You can't tell when you will produce a lemon in the course of a tournament, but at least in a round-robin you can make up for it with a string of victories."


Condemned


Director Relives Political Imprisonment
In 1984, Sibylle Schonemann and her husband, both film makers frustrated by restrictions on their work, asked the East German Government for exit visas.
The next thing they knew, they had been arrested on charges that were never made clear to them.
Ms.
Schonemann spent a year as a political prisoner, then was put directly on a bus for the West.
Her husband, who received a slightly longer sentence, and their two children were sent after her, with only a few suitcases of belongings.
"Locked-Up Time," Ms.
Schonemann's extraordinary documentary about that experience, begins with another bus on the highway, but this time the director is traveling in the opposite direction.
In 1990, after the Berlin Wall had come down, she returned to the East.
She says she wanted to confront the past, but the film is more remarkable for the way Ms.
Schonemann confronts the individuals responsible for her arrest and imprisonment.
This deft and chilling film has the style of a personal excursion into history and the urgency of a moment when history is still inchoate.
"Locked-Up Time" will be shown at the New York Film Festival this afternoon at 4:30.


A Voyage of Discovery that Doesn't Move
Look, out in the desert!
It's a zoo!
It's a greenhouse!
No, it's Biosphere 2, the more-or-less self-sustaining 3.1-acre compendium of five climate zones and 3,800 species of flora and fauna into which eight people sealed themselves last week, intending not to set foot outside for two years.
The Biosphere 2, underwritten for about $150 million by Edward P. Bass of the Texas oil family, is intended to show off miniature versions of five earthly ecosystems -- rain forest, savannah, marsh, desert and ocean -- that are to support the plants and animals that support the eight Biospherians, as the four men and four women who will live the experiment call themselves.
The project's participants say it can show how to colonize other planets or survive ecological catastrophe on this one.


Market Magic; But Just Who Is That Fairy Godmother?
SOMETHING called free-market capitalism has been declared the winner by a knockout in the former Iron Curtain countries, fanning hopes of prosperity for millions of people who have labored in vain, when they labored at all, under the centralized paralysis of Communism.
But there is no such thing as a free lunch -- Capitalist Lesson No. 1 -- and many countries are learning that "the free market" is in large measure shorthand for transitions involving cultural dislocation, unemployment, production problems and economic and political confusion.
This is true in Poland, in the vanguard of Eastern Europe's transition to capitalism, where the unemployment rate today is above 10 percent, and in Argentina and Mexico, where in the shadow of capitalism's victory, politicians are preaching free markets in place of the state capitalism that was once the popular solution to Latin America's chronic hard times.


Allison Knapp Weds D. M. Womack
Allison Mary Knapp, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David P. Knapp of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to David Murray Womack, the son of Norma L. Womack of Brooklyn and the late Mr.
Womack.
The Rev.
Robert C. Chapman, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Palm House in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Knapp, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is an account supervisor at the Wunderman Worldwide advertising agency in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Mount Holyoke College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and is completing studies for an M.B.A. at New York University.
Her father is the director of human resources at the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Her mother, Sidney Knapp, is a sales associate at Woolley's/Chartiers, a retail store for women's clothing and home furnishings, in Huntington, L.I.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 29, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
2
5
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
3
6
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon and his relationships with five women.
4
1
Q-IN-LAW, by Peter David. (Pocket, $4.99.) The marriage of members of rival spacefaring families is menaced by a powerful force: a "Star Trek" story.
5
3
HARVEST, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $5.99.) Turmoil in a Jewish family during the turbulent 1960's.
6
4
BATTLEGROUND, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.95.) The Marines' struggle for Guadalcanal.
7
5
UNDER SIEGE, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $5.95.) Chaos in Washington when the kingpin of the Medellin drug cartel is brought there for trial.
8 *
6
TIME BOMB, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.99.) A child psychologist tracks down the perpetrators of crimes spawned by hatemongers.
9
1
BUFFALO GIRLS, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $5.99.) Calamity Jane and her friends seek to recapture the excitement of the old Wild West by joining Buffalo Bill's show in London.
10
1
SWEET FORTUNE, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) A freewheeling young woman has problems: should she marry the man chosen for her by her dictatorial father?
11
36
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
12 *
4
INTO THE DARKNESS, by Barbara Michaels. (Berkley, $5.50.) An inheritance brings a woman eerie experiences and romance.
13
3
THE ROWAN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Ace, $4.95.) The coming of age of a young woman in a universe governed by telepathy.
14
9
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop on the trail of a Florida con man.
15
13
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
14
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
2
19
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
3
11
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
20
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $4.95.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
5
97
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
412
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7
12
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
8
18
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
9
28
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10 *
1
GET TO THE HEART, by Barbara Mandrell with George Vecsey. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country-music singer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
61
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
7
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3 *
41
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
20
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5
129
CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/HarperSanFrancisco, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for other people's afflictions.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


The Quarterbacks: All Pass; Some Fail
Injuries and frustration are keeping up a trend that started in the first week of the season when Philadelphia quarterback Randall Cunningham and Seattle quarterback Dave Krieg were hurt and forced out of action.
Since then, other National Football League teams have been forced to go to the bullpen for help.
Speculation ran heavy last week that the Los Angeles Raiders would yank Jay Schroeder for today's game against San Francisco in favor of Todd Marinovich, the team's first-round draft pick this year.
Marinovich started the season as the Raiders' No. 3 quarterback.


The New Morgan Is More Museum, No Less Library
Rarely has the word masterpieces been less a matter of hype and more a matter of fact than in the case of "Masterpieces of the Morgan Library," which opens Tuesday.
For nearly three-quarters of a century, the Pierpont Morgan Library's rare books, manuscripts, drawings and other precious objects have been among New York City's least accessible treasures, going on view only as the library's limited exhibition spaces allowed.
Under the leadership of its former director, Charles Ryskamp, the institution began an ambitious and rewarding program of loan exhibitions that has continued to this day.
But when those exhibitions went up, what was on view of the permanent collection often had to come down.
There was not space for both at the same time.
To a number of people, in and out of the library, it was just as well that the place remained a sanctuary for scholarship and research; but for many others, visitors to the city and residents alike, a journey to the Morgan spelled disappointment.
So in 1988, when the library undertook a $30 million expansion under Mr.
Ryskamp's successor, Charles Pierce Jr., it seemed possible that the institution might finally be able to keep a more generous portion of its holdings on display. (For conservation reasons, it can never keep drawings and manuscripts on view for long periods.)
That expansion is now complete, and the renovated library does turn out to be a more outgoing and commodious place.
But not dramatically so.
The new Morgan is more of a museum without being less of a library.
A cul-de-sac where the bookstore used to be has been restored to its first function as a gallery, and the bookstore has been moved across a new skylighted courtyard to one of the buildings that the library has bought in its expansion.
A modest gallery has been constructed just beside the courtyard.
Display cases devoted to the library's collections of manuscripts and rare books have been set up in what was J. P. Morgan's own library, one of the grand rooms in the city.
The banker's former study, with its collection of Renaissance paintings and decorative objects, has been opened to visitors, who previously were permitted only to peer through the doorway.
No big, fancy galleries have been added, no major changes made to the original buildings.
Yet the redesign provides adequate space for displays of the permanent collection while preserving the main exhibition hall at the entrance to the library for temporary shows, like the one of Mozart manuscripts and letters that was on view before the Morgan closed in August.
To celebrate its expansion, and to demonstrate the nature of the objects that can now go on regular display, the library has installed "Masterpieces," through Jan. 5, a selection of more than 275 manuscripts, printed books, drawings and other works from the collection.
This is one of the few times that a show of greatest hits makes sense.
At Pierpont Morgan's death in 1913, the Burlington Magazine observed, "What he recognized in an object was primarily its importance, the part it had played in the evolution of civilization." When he decided to buy autograph manuscripts and letters, for instance, he set his sights on the writings of Lincoln, Washington, Milton, Thoreau, Ruskin, Keats, Pope and Goethe.
One story has it that he went so far as to post an agent in Greece for years with the sole task of buying every Byron manuscript that came onto the market.
Pierpont Morgan was such a voracious collector that by the end of his life his holdings accounted for nearly half his fortune.
The collection, wrote Ron Chernow in "The House of Morgan," "was founded in an impulse that paralleled his banking ambition -- to put America on a par with the European civilization he so admired. As in banking, he honored Old World traditions even as he ransacked them."
His son, J. P. Morgan Jr., was no less aggressive and successful an acquisitor, and by his death, in 1943, the library had assumed the scale of a major institution with assortments of manuscripts, printed books, drawings and book bindings to rival the great collections of Europe.
When Dannie and Hettie Heineman decided in 1962 to donate their collections of books, autograph scores and letters, the Morgan Library was a natural place for them to turn.
When in 1973 the cellist Janos Scholz announced he would give away the 1,500 Italian Old Master drawings he had acquired, or more recently when Eugene and Clare Thaw agreed to bequeath to the Morgan their outstanding collection of 19th-century French drawings, they were playing to a strong suit.
And in almost single-handedly transforming the library through her donations into the country's premier repository of autograph musical manuscipts, Mary Flagler Cary knew she was enhancing a small but significant collection that already included a score in Beethoven's hand and Mozart's earliest letters.
On view in this exhibition are not only the Beethoven score of a violin sonata, which Pierpont Morgan bought in 1912, but also the Polonaise in A flat, Op. 53, in Chopin's meticulous hand, which came from the Heineman collection, and the libretto for Aida with annotations by Verdi, from the Cary collection.
To look at an autograph manuscript is to feel, rightly or wrongly, that a door to the musician's or writer's psyche has been unlocked.
The library has accumulated an important assortment of artists' letters.
There are in the show letters with drawings by Piranesi and Ruskin and a receipt from Picasso to the art dealer Paul Rosenberg, with a sketch by the artist of a painting that Rosenberg had just bought.
A spicy note from Seurat, displayed just beside the Picasso letter, admonishes the critic Felix Feneon for neglecting to mention Seurat by name in a monograph on the origins of Neo-Impressionist color theory.
What the great Seurat exhibition now at the Metropolitan does not make explicit about the painter's prickly personality, the Morgan's letter does.
A manuscript of "Don Juan," in which the text is written both down and across the same page, suggests the speed at which Byron's ideas tumbled forth in virtually complete and final form; with Balzac, the creative process was as much a matter of endless second-guessing, as is apparent from the galley proofs of "Eugenie Grandet," which have been emended to within an inch of their life and beyond the point of legibility.
It is in the areas of Old Master drawings, printed books and illuminated manuscripts that the Morgan has earned its reputation with the widest public.
The collection is full of firsts.
On display are the earliest datable example of printing in Europe, the first surviving book printed in Italy, the first in France, the first in Bruges, the first surviving book printed in English, the first dated book printed in Spain, the only surviving complete copy of "Le Morte d'Arthur."
What are unquestionably the most beautiful printed copies of works by St.
Augustine, Plutarch and Aristotle also belong to the Morgan: from late-15th-century Venice, they are illustrated with trompe-l'oeil paintings by the Lombard illuminator Girolamo da Cremona.
With the drawings, the show brings out many of the collection's standardbearers and some of its finest acquisitions of the last few decades, from Bernini, Filippino Lippi and Rubens to Poussin, Ingres and Watteau.
And no manuscript more succinctly sums up Pierpont Morgan's regal taste than the illumination from around 1230 in which Blanche of Castile is shown instructing her son, King Louis IX of France, a work presumably commissioned by the Queen herself.
There are manuscripts from 10th-century Spain that mix influences of North Africa, France and the Orient, and point the way toward Miro and Matisse.
There are illuminations that recall the bold, colorful stained-glass designs and murals of Ste.-Chapelle and may in fact have been painted by the artisans who did those.
Simon Bening's illustrations for the Da Costa Hours are as sweet and refined, and Don Guilio Clovio's illustrations for the Farnese Hours as spectacular and over the edge as any paintings of the 16th century, big or small.
The Morgan's collection has always been as eccentric as its founder, and it has remained so decades after his death, now encompassing children's books and Gilbert and Sullivan memorabilia and manuscripts to add to the ancient seals and other curios that Morgan acquired.
They are all in "Masterpieces," in representative numbers and of the highest quality.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Leading indicators, percent change
1.2
0.2
Purchasing managers survey
54.8
55.0
Construction spending, percent change
1.6
0.3
Wednesday
New home sales, percent change
-8.5
3.6
Thursday
Auto sales, annual rate in millions
6.5
NA
Friday
Nonfarm payroll, change in thousands
34
50
Unemployment, in percent
6.8
6.9
Monday: Agricultural prices for grains *
Canadian gross national product  Tuesday: Federal Open Market Committee meets  Friday: Minutes of the August meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee are released  (Sousrce: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Faldo, After a 3d Loss, Misses the Afternoon Tee
Before the Ryder Cup matches began, Ian Woosnam and Nick Faldo represented much of the muscle on the European team.
Woosnam is the reigning Masters champion and the world's No. 1 golfer in the Sony ranking.
Faldo, ranked No. 3, is the two-time Masters and two-time British Open champion.
Woosnam finally made a crucial putt to close out a better-ball victory today with Paul Broadhurst in the afternoon.
But the usually dependable Faldo, saying, "My touch is gone," was searching for his game with the Europeans now needing 6 points in Sunday's 12 singles to retain the gold trophy they have held since 1985.


Reagan Overcame His Fear of Flying
To the Editor:
"For Mario Cuomo, All Roads Lead to Home" (The Week in Review, Sept. 22), on the New York Governor's distaste for extended travel, is extremely amusing.


Miss Sting Wed In Connecticut
Jennifer Lang Sting, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald William Sting of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Jonathan Andrew Frattaroli, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Frattaroli of Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
John W. Bishop officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Frattaroli, 24 years old, graduated from Denison University and is a marketing specialist at Spectra-Tech, an analytical instruments company in Stamford, Conn.
Her father founded and heads the company.


The Light Side
WHEN MY BODY TALKS, I listen.
And when it wants a change of diet, I try to oblige.
By early fall, this means a desire for heartier fare than the salads of summer, but I'm still not ready for meaty meals.
In fact, it seems that my wife and I have been reducing our intake of meat more and more.
We are not vegetarians, but the dictates of good health have shifted our diet somewhat toward meals emphasizing vegetables and grains.
My wife loves pasta and rice, but potatoes in any form are my favorite starch fix.
A nice meatless menu for me, then, includes a salade nicoise as a first course.
There are many variations on this classic: some have potatoes and string beans, both of which I've used here; some have anchovy fillets and artichokes, neither of which I've included.
Basically, the mixture is left up to the imagination of the cook, although tomatoes, olives and tuna are traditional ingredients.


Language Barrier?
To the Editor:
JoAnne Akalaitis's ability to find in Palestinian Arab drama "an expression of identity, even sanity," without understanding a word of Arabic is quite marvelous.
It makes you wonder why anyone should bother to learn how to read.
Apparently one can have good access to a culture without its language.
ROBERTA KALECHOFSKY  Marblehead, Mass.


Miss Andersen Marries on L.I.
Lauren Andersen, a daughter of Dr.
Shirley R. Andersen and Dr.
H.
Willids Andersen of Oyster Bay, L.I., was married yesterday to Jonathan Litott, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew W. Litott of Oxford, England.
The Rev.
Richard Reifsnyder officiated at the First Presbyterian Church of Oyster Bay.
Ms.
Andersen Litott, 28 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in business from the Institut Europeen d'Administration des Affaires in Fontainebleau, France, as did Mr.
Litott.
She is the managing director of H. W. Andersen Ltd., the British subsidiary of H. W. Andersen Products Inc., the family's medical equipment manufacturing company in Oyster Bay.
Her father, a retired surgeon, is the company's president and chief executive.
Her mother is an internist in private practice in Oyster Bay.


FRONT PAGE TO OPERA STAGE
When John Adams promotes his musical epic "The Death of Klinghoffer" by stating, "It is so clear that we haven't taken sides," he tragically refers not just to the daunting issues of Arab-Jewish conflict in the Middle East, but to his touchstone metaphor as well, namely, the death of Leon Klinghoffer ("Front Page To Opera Stage" by Nancy Malitz, Aug. 25).
Specifically, what is it about Mr.
Klinghoffer's barbaric murder, I wonder, that chastens Adams not to "take sides." LENNY HAT
New York, N.Y.


Making a Difference; Lawsuits Into Plowshares?
If Isaiah were preaching in Washington these days, it might not be swords he would recommend beating into something more useful, but lawsuits.
And Philip J. Harter, a 49-year-old lawyer who seldom sees the inside of a courtroom, might be just the person for the job.
Since the mid-1970's, Mr.
Harter has been getting Government officials together with industry and interest groups to try to head off court challenges by agreeing on Federal regulations before they are issued.


Voices of the Past


Data Bank/September 29, 1991
New Orders for Durable Goods
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
--3.8
11.7
--1.1
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.4
--0.2
0.5
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.7
0.5
Real G.N.P. Growth
II Q'91
I Q'91
IV Q'90
1982 dollars in percent
--0.5
--2.8
--1.6
Lumber
July
June
May
Millions of board feet
3,633
3,762
2,921
3-Month Treasury Bills
Sept. 27
Sept. 20
Sept. 13
Rate in percent
5.14
5.19
5.16
Paperboard Production
Sept. 20
Sept. 13
Sept. 6
Thousands of tons
777.5
774.6
769.3
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons
1,725
1,720
1,669


Anna Walker Weds
Anna Victoria Walker, a magazine illustrator, and Geoffrey Kenneth Reiss, the general manager of Spy magazine, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Picnic House in Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
Judge W. Bromley Hall of New York State Family Court officiated.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated cum laude from Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Edward J. and Barbara Muhs Walker of Ossining, N.Y.
Mr.
Reiss, 31, graduated from the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
He is a son of Kenneth Reiss of Darien, Conn., and Patricia Reiss of Huntington, L.I.


Crazy Horse Memorial Work
The full height of the huge mountain carving of the face of Crazy Horse, the American Indian chief, under way in the Black Hills of South Dakota, has been revealed by recent work on the chin.
The 90-foot-high head is taking shape on the 1,300-acre Crazy Horse Memorial Foundation site, which is 17 miles from Mount Rushmore.
Stoneworkers have completed the forehead, both eyes are "open," the nose is being carved and the chin blocked out.
The figure will be 563 feet high.
The nonprofit project is supervised by RuthZiolkowski, whose husband, the sculptor Korczak Ziolkowski, began work in 1947 and left detailed plans for its continuation after his death.
Visitors to the site see Mr.
Ziolkowski's home and workshop and a museum con taining Indian artifacts.
Admission is $4 a person or $10 for a carload; children under 6 are free.


Wilder and Jackson Get Together For '92 Talk, and Some Tiptoeing
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, who is running for President, and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who is thinking about running, held a summit meeting here today that was more a political dance than a discussion.
The two Democrats, both black, both angling for the party's black voters, had a private breakfast of bran muffins, juice and coffee, then emerged for an hourlong news conference in which they alternately hugged, mugged and fired political zingers at each other.


Driving Tours In New Guides
The Automobile Association of Britain has long provided useful books of maps for British motorists.
Now American drivers can take advantage of the British expertise in a new series of guides, written for Americans by the association.
The series, "Driving Tours," covers Britain, France, Italy, Canada, Mexico and the United States.
Each book contains as many as 30 mapped tours starting and finishing at a major city and highlighting interesting places along the way.
The tours range from three to five days, with suggested routes of 250 to 500 miles.
Each map is keyed to informative passages about the region, and color photographs appear on every page.


Political Talk
Bedfellows Too Strange
In the convoluted world of New York politics, it seems it's worth helping an old enemy if doing so hurts a former friend.
But that doesn't mean that the old enemy always goes along with it.


It's Time to Stop Poking Along at 55
Driving 70 miles per hour on the national Interstate System of highways and 60 to 65 m.p.h. on rural Federal and state highways used to be legal and safe.
Now armies of police lie in wait for motorists who do it, bringing fat revenues to the states and to insurance and radar-detector companies.
But the economic rationale for the 55 m.p.h. limit no longer exists nor do valid safety grounds.
It's time to raise the speed limit.
In 1973, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries created a temporary, artificial oil shortage worldwide.
As people panicked on long gas lines, Congress ordered a maximum national speed limit of 55 miles per hour.
Billions in Federal highway funds would be cut off to states that defied it.
This "temporary" measure, billed as a fuel-efficiency move, became permanent in 1975.
But it has produced mass civil disobedience, engendering contempt on the part of citizens that resembles nothing so much as their reaction to the Volstead Act and Prohibition.


CLIO HAS A PROBLEM
In his article "Clio Has a Problem" (Sept. 8), Simon Schama calls for history to be what it ought to be -- an engrossing and exciting study that deserves to have pride of place in the curriculum, after the three R's, even at the elementary level.
I shall never forget the history master at my school in England.
He held us spellbound as he coursed dramatically across a tapestry of human events that stretched from before 1066 (and all that) to the times in which we then lived (Hitler was in the process of trying to break our backbone).
Our master knew that the imaginations of young boys had to be fired.
His descriptions (including cause and effect) of the Battle of Waterloo, the American Civil War, the Relief of Mafeking and the Russian Revolution -- to name but a few -- were so exciting that he outshone Cecil B. DeMille.
ROY BRITTON
Bedford, N.Y.


Clemson Overcomes Ga. Tech, 9-7
Ronald Williams, benched for the first quarter for skipping study hall during the week, scored the winning touchdown today as Clemson edged Georgia Tech, 9-7, in an Atlantic Coast Conference game.
The Yellow Jackets, who had beaten Clemson the past two seasons, had a chance to win with eight seconds left, but Scott Sisson was wide to the right on a 44-yard field-goal attempt.


Change Affects Frequent Fliers
THE end of October will bring farewell to the Pan American Worldpass frequent flier program.
As of Nov. 1, it will cease to be, and all unclaimed Worldpass points will be shifted over to Delta's Frequent Flyer program, to be redeemed at less generous levels.
Anyone who wants to claim Worldpass award coupons should do so before the end of next month.
Pan Am has sold most of its trans-Atlantic routes and the Boston-New York-Washington shuttle to Delta.
After Nov. 1, Pan Am will operate South and Central American routes and flights to the Caribbean, Mexico and Bermuda, pending Government approval, according to Elizabeth M. Hlinko, a Pan Am spokeswoman.
Pan Am's hub will shift from New Yorkto Miami, although it will continue to offer some New York service on the routes south.
Ms.
Hlinko said the line was likely to retain its Miami-Paris route.


A PRICE FOR SECURITY
There is a message in Brinkley's piece for those in our country who want to continue spending billions a year on defense against an enemy that no longer exists, instead of redirecting our resources toward the real needs of our nation -- namely, education, health care, housing, transportation, crime prevention.
KARAKIAN BEDROSIAN
Alpine, N.J.


Good Drinks and Bars: Not to Be Sniffed At
BID farewell to the season of pink drinks: the party's over.
The last little paper umbrella has been folded; the blue plastic marlins have swum to warmer waters.
It's autumn, and thoughts turn again to real drinks served in their natural setting, the serious bar.
A cocktail with a name like Sex on the Beach shouldn't exist, but if it must, a twerpy sidewalk cafe is the place for it.
A straight-rye manhattan, a Double Diamond ale, a good single-malt Scotch call for a warm and burnished place, as worn as an old shoe, built for comfort and conversation.
Samuel Johnson, who called a tavern chair "the throne of human felicity," spent most of his adult life savoring the special pleasure that only a good bar can provide.
Some of it came in liquid form, of course, but drink was not the main thing.
"As soon as I enter the door of a tavern," he once remarked, "I experience an oblivion of care, and a freedom from solicitude. Wine there exhilarates my spirits, and prompts me to free conversation and an interchange of discourse with those whom I most love. I dogmatize and am contradicted, and in this conflict of opinions I find delight."


CAMPUS LIFE: Seattle; Visiting Position For C.I.A. Officer Is Eliminated
Despite initial approval all the way from the history department to the provost's office, the appointment of a Central Intelligence Agency researcher, Thomas Lauer, as visiting professor of history at Seattle University has been canceled.
Mr.
Lauer, who has a doctorate in history from Stanford University, was hired last spring to a two-year term under the C.I.A.'s officer-in-residence program.
He was to teach classes in Chinese Communism and Western civilization.
But opposition from faculty members, students and members of the public caused the leaders of this Jesuit institution to change their minds.


SUNY Projects Growth Despite Hard Times
The State University of New York has issued a plan that projects continued enrollment growth over the next 10 years but also warns that the university might not be able to absorb more students if it does not get significant budget increases from the state.
The goals, which were adopted by the university's board of trustees on Wednesday, call on SUNY to maintain the broadest possible access, improve undergraduate and graduate education, strengthen internal management controls and play a more prominent role in public service.


Winter-Storage Tips For Fuel-Powered Tools
GASOLINE-POWERED tools like lawn mowers, garden shredders, tillers and string trimmers need servicing before being stored for the winter.
That is not difficult, and it assures quick starting in the spring and long life.
The best place to store most gasoline-powered tools is in a dry unheated garage or shed.
If you must store items outside, wrap them with plastic sheeting to keep out moisture and tie the sheeting with rope or elastic cord to prevent wind from undoing the wrap.
If equipment is to be stored in a heated garage, basement or utility room, follow the directions given later for servicing the fuel system.


Medical Team Plans Time-Share Complex
FOR a young doctor starting a new practice or for a doctor with an established practice who would like to open a second office, the concept of the medical time-share office may prove to be a cost-effective alternative to renting, furnishing and equipping an individual office.
Such is the belief of an Irvington couple: Frederick A. Gonzalez, a doctor specializing in obstetrics and gynecology, and his wife, Dianne S. Moore, a certified nurse-midwife who has a doctorate in nursing.
The couple, who have been married for 18 years, met in a delivery room while Dr.
Gonzalez was assisting Dr.
Moore during a difficult birth.


NAVY FINDS FAULT IN GULF WAR RAID
In the first official ruling on allegations of wrongdoing by American forces in the Persian Gulf war, a Navy panel has found that a Navy captain ordered United States helicopters to attack Iraqi-armed oil platforms despite sightings of Iraqi soliders who were apparently trying to surrender.
The nighttime attack by helicopters from the guided-missile frigate Nicholas on Jan. 18, in the early hours of the allied air assault on Iraq and occupied Kuwait, did not violate Navy regulations or international law, the panel concluded.
But the skipper, Cmdr.
Dennis G. Morral, demonstrated "extremely poor judgment" in not relaying to his superiors the reports of Iraqi soldiers waving pieces of white cloth several hours before the attack, the panel said.


RECORD BRIEF
D.
Scarlatti: Keyboard Sonatas (6); Beethoven: Piano Sonata No. 3; Brahms: "Paganini Variations" (Op. 35)
Mordecai Shehori, piano. Connoisseur Society CD4177; CD.


Schools Try a Multicultural Approach
UNDER the gaze of august antislavery figures from the Civil War like Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass, as well as World War I recruitment posters, the blue-jeaned teen-agers troop into Shelley Jacobson's 11th-grade history class.
As they settle down with their homework assignments and notebooks, Mrs.
Jacobson writes a single sentence on the blackboard: "Columbus discovered America."


In Prime of a Second Career, Gant Is First Without Equals
Harry Gant was back at work Monday, building an addition to his steakhouse in Taylorsville, N.C., less than 24 hours after hammering another wing onto an impressive stock-car racing streak.
On Sept. 1, Gant extended his record as the oldest driver to win a major Nascar race with a victory in the Heinz Southern 500 at the age of 51 years 7 months 22 days.
With Richard Petty, 54, not being competitive in the last few years, Gant is competing only against himself.
And in the three races since the Southern 500, he has done nothing but exceed himself.


Christine Curley Is Wed in Germany
Christine Ann Curley, an assistant vice president of Prudential Mutual Fund Management, was married in Germany yesterday to Richard Lindsay Newton Weaver, a vice president of Prudential Securities Inc.
The Rev.
William L. Travers, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Thomas More Church in Bonn.
Mrs.
Weaver, 28 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Curley 2d of Bonn.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is an attache at the American Embassy in Bonn.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 8 about the Montreux-Oberland-Bernois railway in Switzerland described it incorrectly.
It is a narrow-gauge railway with standard drive-wheel propulsion, not a cog railway.


Perception Is All
To the Editor:
As a member of the group with which Gene Saks visited Israel in June, I feel compelled to report my markedly different perceptions of our common experience.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bowdoin; Fraternity Members Give Female Members Equal Standing
Faced with the college's mandate that fraternity women receive full membership privileges, Bowdoin College's Alpha Delta Phi chapter this month became the last of four fraternities on campus to sacrifice national affiliation rather than lose college recognition.
The university administration's policy of integrating women more fully into campus life, including the Greek system, presented a tough choice for fraternities like Alpha Delta Phi, whose national organizations do not recognize women as members.
The fraternities had to decide by the first of this month.


Daniels's Blunder Is Costly As Dodgers Lose to Giants
The afternoon came down to the last out, but the Los Angeles Dodgers might have lost the game in the first inning today.
They will never know.
Left fielder Kal Daniels, ejected in the bottom of the first after an unforgivable tantrum, wasn't available to the Dodgers when they needed him most.


Openings, Reopenings And a Star, Schwarzkopf
On Thursday, the soaring sculptured bronze doors of the original Pierpont Morgan Library at 29 East 36th Street swung open for guests invited to a reception celebrating the expansion of the library into the adjoining J. P. Morgan Jr. house.
The entry is through a new garden court and the original library has been renovated.
On Tuesday, Carnegie Hall celebrated the opening of its second century with the Saito Kinen Orchestra from Japan, conducted by Seiji Ozawa, a co-founder of the orchestra.


Salvador Declares Peace -- On Paper, Anyway
It may be an exaggeration to assume that in other circumstances, the Salvadorans who sat talking peace last week at the United Nations would have found it no more difficult to reach across the table and kill each other.
But after a decade in which analysts debated whether El Salvador's was a proxy war between East and West, it remained to be seen whether the broad accords that Government and rebel representatives signed in an effort to end a dozen bloody years of civil conflict would be more than a proxy effort at peace.
As the meetings broke up, there was talk that the next day would be one of national celebration in El Salvador.
If it was, few people noticed.
Almost as skeptical now as they are tired of war, Salvadorans turned instead to the trial of an army colonel and eight other soldiers accused of murdering six Jesuit priests in 1989.
Among more than 70,000 mostly civilian deaths, it was the only case with a good chance of being brought to justice.
More Fighting
As the world has changed, El Salvador has changed, too.
But there is evidence that El Salvador has changed less.
Even before the peace plan had been signed, it was bitterly criticized by military officers and rightist businessmen.
The rebels, while saying they had sought a truce, noted pointedly that they had made no deals yet to disarm.
New fighting broke out within hours of the signing.


Hoofers


Lisa V. Forney Weds R. C. Pell
Lisa Vaughn Forney, a daughter of Robert and Joanne Forney of Middletown, Mass., was married yesterday to Richard Campbell Pell, the son of John and Janice Pell of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
George L. Cleaves performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Pell, 33 years old, is a personnel supervisor at the law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior staff engineer for the United States Air Force.


Noted With Pleasure
Culture's True, Abiding Home
The art historian Norman Bryson argues that still-life paintings are so enduring a genre because they celebrate the continuity of the humble objects that form the basis of culture.
This is from "Looking at the Overlooked: Four Essays on Still Life Painting" (Harvard University, paper).


Political Memo; Dinkin's Circle Widens (as His Allies Back Away)
It is one of the leading pastimes of politics to claim credit -- deserved or undeserved -- for all that goes right in the world.
What happens, then, when everything seems to be going wrong?
Perhaps unwittingly, politicians in New York, a city with an apparently Job-like capacity for affliction, have in recent weeks provided a demonstration.
Even many politicians agree that it has not been a cheerful sight.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate


Rise of Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
My husband and I visited Russia last week to see what's happening for ourselves.
We met a wonderful couple in St.
Petersburg who invited us home, fed us and talked freely for hours about the situation.


Mainly Mahler


Rachel Varley Has Wedding
Rachel McAlister Varley, a senior associate at Morgan Stanley Realty, and William Breece Brannan, a partner in the law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
J.
Seymour Flinn performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Brannan, 30 years old, graduated from Williams College and the Harvard University Graduate School of Business Administration.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Roe Varley of Winnetka, Ill.
Her father owns Varley Products, a manufacturer of household goods in Crystal Lake, Ill.


Sunday Outing; A Maritime Museum Where Oystering Lives
Harvesting the bounty that the sea provides has long been an important factor in the economy and folklore of Suffolk County.
The Suffolk Marine Museum in West Sayville works to preserve the county's maritime heritage and the history of the shellfishing industry in the Great South Bay, concentrating on the oyster.
The warm waters of the Great South Bay, protected along its length by Fire Island, once provided a favorable environment for the oyster.
Oystering was the main industry in West Sayville from the mid-19th century until a 1938 hurricane changed the ecology of the bay, which became saltier.
That spelled the end of oysters there, although other shellfish like scallops and clams have been unaffected.


A PRICE FOR SECURITY
Brinkley does not emphasize sufficiently the fact that, within recent years, 300,000 Soviet Jews and several thousand Ethiopians have immigrated to Israel, a country the size of Rhode Island, surrounded by hostile Arabs.
Earlier this year, Iraq sent explosive missiles against Israel's principal city.
Is it any wonder that housing and jobs are lagging behind the defense needs of the country?
ALBERT FELMAR
New York, N.Y.


From Albany, a Vision of a New New York City
One worn thread ties together the psychic and economic recovery of New York City that began in 1976 and the groping for solutions 15 years later.
When Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo unveiled his own blueprint for revival last week, Donald J. Trump's name was barely mentioned.
In 1976, the nation's bicentennial celebration and the Democratic national convention produced their share of euphoria.
But it was Mr.
Trump's bargain-basement investment in buying and then renovating the faded Commodore Hotel on 42d Street in Manhattan into the gleaming Grand Hyatt that, more than any single physical symbol, helped trigger the building boom that followed.
Mr.
Trump cannily played on City Hall's desperation to reduce his risk with property tax abatements.
But his hotel renovation was a private investment.


Yugoslavs Retreating After Reservists Desert
The Yugoslav Army announced today that it was retreating from two more disputed Croatian towns after hundreds of Serbian reservists deserted and went home.
The Government press agency Tanyug said the army had decided to abandon barracks at the ports of Sibenik and Zadar on the Adriatic coast, which were under siege by Croatian forces.


Give Hyacinths a Chance for Spring
IT is time to start thinking about planting bulbs.
Almost everyone includes some tulips in their garden, but how many gardeners can boast of clusters of fragrant hyacinths?
This elegant, but too often neglected, spring flower, needs to have more consideration.
It is fragrant, quite showy and available in a wide range of colors, from the traditional blues, whites and pinks to the more dramatic reds and even a yellow.
A beautiful orange hyacinth is available now.


A Dismissal Highlights Dispute Over Housing Law
WHEN David Bogdanoff, a 78-year-old Westchester builder, agreed to head the county's new Housing Implementation Commission last year, he said his task was to "get the county out of the motel business and to provide the long-term housing necessary to return the homeless to their previous life."
He agreed with county officials that the commission had to find a way to build 5,000 units of permanent affordable housing immediately and use some of them for the county's 4,500 or so homeless.


Lisa Righter Marries on L.I.
Lisa Righter, a special assistant to the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and Matthew Richard Sloan, the director of real estate at Hamilton, Rabinovitz &amp; Alschuler, Inc., the public policy and management consulting firm, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Alfred J. Seaman, Mayor of Upper Brookville, L.I., officiated at the Upper Brookville home of the bride's grandmother Mrs.
Oakleigh Lewis Thorne.
Mrs.
Sloan, 29 years old, graduated from Wesleyan University.
She is a daughter of Brewster A. McNair Righter of Locust Valley, L.I., and Alison Akin Righter of Boston.
Her father is a managing partner of Rowan, Righter, Silvan &amp; Company, financial consultants in Washington.
Her mother is the director of the Akin Gallery in Boston.


'Standing Up to Ezra Pound'
To the Editor:
Thank you for publishing the essay by Richard Gillman.
Rolfe Humphries's resistance to pressure and refusal to back down from his disavowal of Pound's economics, politics and prejudices deserve widespread publicity.
Such intellectual clarity and moral courage are rare.
DAVID M. MAGDER  Toronto


Bridge
The World Team Championships, beginning today in Yokohama, Japan, represent a difficult problem for those who like to predict the champions.
This is in part because the two fields, open and women's, will be far bigger than ever before.
The Bermuda Bowl, which began in 1950 as an encounter between teams representing Europe and the United States, has gradually expanded.
When it was last played, in Perth, Australia, two years ago, there were 10 teams.
Today there will be 16 teams, each from a continental zone.


A Baroque Gait for the Voice of the Enlightenment
"Le Temple de la Gloire," typically for 18th-century opera-ballet, shows order triumphing over disorder.
The mix of dancing and singing that characterizes Baroque opera ends here, as expected, with an allegorical figure to sum up a moral.
"Le Temple de la Gloire," however, had a libretto by Voltaire that was not as politically convenient as usual.
Collaborating with the eminent French composer Jean-Philippe Rameau in 1745, the voice of the Enlightenment urged Louis XV to govern with wisdom: a king covered with glory could only be a king ruling over a happy people.


Alexandra Biesada, Editor, to Wed
Alexandra Marie Biesada, an associate editor at Financial World Magazine in New York, and Nathan Lawrence Bailey Bangs, a marine geophysicist, were married yesterday at the South Newfane, Vt., Baptist Church.
The Rev.
John Fitts performed the ceremony, with the Rev.
Mark Quillen, a Roman Catholic priest, attending.
Mrs.
Bangs, 30 years old, graduated from Oberlin College and the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism.
She is the daughter of Anthony A. and Kathleen Biesada of New York.
Her father is the director of corporate media relations for Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceuticals company.
Her mother teaches reading skills at Manhattan Community College.


The Season Sets a Brisk Pace: Austria; In Vienna, Mozart's Requiem in St. Stephen's Cathedral
The most spectacular event in Vienna this winter will undoubtedly be the performance of Mozart's Requiem in D Minor on Dec. 5 -- the 200th anniversary of the composer's death -- by the Vienna Philharmonic and the Vienna State Opera Choir under the direction of Sir Georg Solti in St.
Stephen's Cathedral.
It was in this gloomy Gothic church, Vienna's most revered, that Mozart's body was laid out after his death in the early hours of Dec. 5, 1791, at the age of 35.
The performance begins at 7:30 P.M. and is free.
Seats cannot be reserved.
Another requiem, Verdi's, will be performed on Nov. 1 and Nov. 3 by the Vienna Philharmonic under Claudio Abbado.
Soloists are Jose Carreras, Cheryl Studer, Lucia Valentini Terrani and Ruggero Raimondi.
Performances in the Wiener Musikverein are at 11 A.M. and tickets may be ordered after Oct. 24 by calling 505-8190 in Vienna or by writing the Musikverein, 12 Bosendorferstrasse, A-1010 Vienna.


Corrections
A picture caption with the New Jersey Q &amp; A on Sept. 15, about foreign students in the United States, misidentified the student shown with Dr.
Joelna Marcus, coordinator of international students at Jersey City State College.
He is Wan Tin Wong of Hong Kong.


Give Hyacinths a Chance for Spring
IT is time to start thinking about planting bulbs.
Almost everyone includes some tulips in their garden, but how many gardeners can boast of clusters of fragrant hyacinths?
This elegant, but too often neglected, spring flower, needs to have more consideration.
It is fragrant, quite showy and available in a wide range of colors, from the traditional blues, whites and pinks to the more dramatic reds and even a yellow.
A beautiful orange hyacinth is available now.


Studer Sings; Her Voice Listens
"One day," the great 19th-century prima donna Maria Malibran is supposed to have said in a frustrating moment, "it is I who will give the orders, and you who will obey." The addressee was her voice.
It's a paradox of a singer's life that the instrument is actually part of the player and yet seems sometimes like a separate entity, a different person, even at times a stranger or an enemy.
The day-to-day working life of a singer is the story of an intimate relationship between a professional musician and a couple of little membranes in the throat, plus the surrounding musculature and the mechanisms of breathing and resonance, all carried around inside the body.


One Man, One Vote, One More Attempt
More than 25 years ago, the Supreme Court issued its landmark one-man, one-vote decision and counties all over New York found themselves unconstitutional and scrambling for alternatives.
Many had been run by boards of supervisors, which violated the new ruling because each supervisor could cast only one vote, regardless of the size of the town represented.
Yet some counties, like Nassau, kept their boards, altering the voting structures according to the Banzhaf Index, a complex mathematical formula that gave representatives from large towns and cities more votes than those from smaller communities.
Other counties, like adjacent Suffolk, switched to county legislatures, made up of representatives from equally sized districts.


And Us Without Our Spoons
NEEDFUL THINGS
By Stephen King. 690 pp. New York: Viking. $24.95.


German Leaders and Other Allies Welcome Plan for Weapons Cuts
President Bush's unilateral decision to do away with tactical nuclear weapons intended to be used if Europe became an East-West battlefield received an enthusiastic welcome today in Germany, where Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government has been calling for their elimination for years.
Britain and France, along with Germany and other Western allies, also hailed Mr.
Bush's decision to scale back deployment of some intercontinental nuclear missiles and suggest a negotiated elimination of the biggest multiple-warhead land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles, though some analysts thought they might soon come under political pressure to cut back their own independent nuclear deterrent forces of missiles and bombers as well.


'My Fair Lady' Makes Sentimental Stop
IT was March 15, 1956, the opening night of "My Fair Lady" at the Mark Hellinger Theater on Broadway.
At the end of the first scene, Moss Hart, the director, rushed over to Alan Jay Lerner, the lyricist and book writer, and Frederick Loewe, the composer, who were pacing in back of the theater.
"I knew it," Hart said.
"It's just a New Haven hit. That's all. Just a New Haven hit."
Hart's "first and only" sign of frenzy was recounted by Lerner in his indispensible memoir, "On the Street Where You Live." The historic musical's six days of rehearsals in New Haven, its premiere week of performances at the Shubert Theater and the following four pre-Broadway weeks in Philadelphia are finely remembered in Lerner's book.
There were the technical difficulties (the real and the invented, to cover up for the temperamental male star), the inordinate length (two songs and a ballet were cut out in New Haven) and, inevitably, the triumph.


New York in the Nineties
From the outside, gray puffs of steam escaping from the windows are the giveaway.
Inside the grimy, anonymous Lower East Side loft buildings, scores of Asian and Hispanic immigrants (like the woman shown at left) methodically assemble name-brand garments, usually for 10 hours or more a day, sometimes behind locked fire doors and often for less than the minimum wage.
Except for their fluorescent lighting, these factories are not that different from the sweatshops that Jacob Riis uncovered a century ago.
When Riis's "How the Other Half Lives," a graphic chronicle of New York's slums, was published in 1890, it shocked the nation, prompting the city to pass the first important legislation imposing health standards to make tenements more livable.
But some of the progress made has proved illusory.
At the turn of another century, guns, drugs and race are redefining urban poverty, which seems to have grown deeper and more ubiquitous since the time Riis prowled the streets of the Lower East Side as a police reporter.
Half the children born this year are likely to be on welfare before they turn 18; when they die, about 1 in 25 New Yorkers will be buried in a pauper's grave.
he biggest New York slumlord is government itself.
The city routinely houses 8,000 single people and 5,000 families in hotels and shelters so uninviting that some homeless New Yorkers would rather risk fending for themselves.
When sober enough, Louis Watson (top) furnishes his shanty adjoining the Manhattan Bridge with jetsam he picks up while rummaging through garbage for deposit bottles.
"I'm 48 now and should be doing something else," he says.
On East Sixth Street, Lauren Craig (right), a 38-year-old former dancer, survives by peddling books and staying in an abandoned tenement.
"I'm not into this as a movement," she says.
"I'm into it as something I had to do." Her wall calendar is kept blank as a reminder to leave.
But for Heidi Perez (far right, top), a 26-year-old Bronx woman,
where
to live was the least of her problems.
She, together with her 21-month-old daughter, Ashley, moved in with her mother-in-law during a hiatus in their hospitalization for a late 20th-century plague.
Her husband had contracted AIDS from a former girlfriend who had used drugs intravenously.
"He always hoped he would go first, then the baby, then me," Ms.
Perez said.
"Then he'd know that the baby would be well taken care of." By last fall, all three had died of AIDS, in that order.


Answering The Mail
Q.
We have a fireplace on the first floor and another below it in the basement.
When we build a fire in the first-floor fireplace, the smell of smoke is strong in the basement.
The ash pit has been removed, and the chimney flue connected to the basement fireplace has been capped.
It has been suggested that a stainless-steel liner be installed in the first-floor chimney.
Would that solve the problem?
A.
If the two chimney flues are in the same brick chimney structure, if either one or both of the flue liners is cracked or leaking and if there are no flue liners, it could be that smoke will leak from one flue to the other.
That should not occur if the flue being used draws properly, but it could happen if there are down drafts or other defects in that chimney.
Capping the unused flue was probably a mistake.
It will trap smoke that leaks into it, instead of allowing the smoke to escape through the opening at the top of the chimney.
I would suggest removing the cap.
If that does not solve the problem, have an expert check the structure.
It is very likely that lining the flue will be the answer.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
SOMEBODY AND THE THREE BLAIRS.
By Marilyn Tolhurst.
Illustrated by Simone Abel.
Orchard. $13.95. (Ages 3 to 5) One day, when the three Blairs -- Mr.
Blair, Mrs.
Blair and Baby Blair -- are out for a walk, Somebody comes to visit and makes an awful mess.
Baby Blair recognizes Somebody, asleep in the baby's bed, as a bear.
A very nice twist on a familiar story.


Diane Margison Wed
Diane Carol Margison, a vice president of marketing at Chase Manhattan Bank, and Francis Pentlarge Gehring 3d, a vice president of sales at CRT Government Securities, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Lidabell Pollard officiated at the First Church of Christ, Congregational, in Farmington, Conn.
Mrs.
Gehring, 32 years old, graduated cum laude from Boston College and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Calvin S. Margison of Farmington.
Mr.
Gehring, 33, a graduate of Roanoke College, is a son of Mrs.
Gage Averill of New York and Mr.
Gehring Jr. of Charlottesville, Va.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Sept. 1 about the reopening of a former Heineken brewery as a museum in Amsterdam misstated the times of public tours, based on information from an official of the museum, and the admission fee.
Through next June 14, the tour times are 9:30 and 11 A.M.
Monday through Friday.
Admission is about $2.
The report also misstated the museum's local telephone number.
It is 5239239.


Q and A
Study of Co-op Expenses  Question: Maintenance costs in my New York City co-op are skyrocketing and very little information is coming from the board.
I realize that generally costs and taxes are increasing and some are unpredictable.
But my maintenance went up almost 18 percent from January 1990 to January 1991.
Can you tell me if there is any way to compare these costs with those of comparable buildings?. . .
Elmira Mangan, Manhattan  Answer: Yes.
The Council of New York Cooperatives, a nonprofit organization to which co-ops and condominiums belong, does an annual comparative study of operating costs for 283 co-ops and condominiums.
The comparisons, on a per-room basis, include wages and benefits, fuel, repairs, insurance, management, water and sewer fees and real estate taxes.
Mary Ann Rothman, executive director of the council, said capital improvements are not included because they are most often paid from reserve funds, rather than operating budgets.
"Each building is different," said Ms.
Rothman, "but by comparing the statistics of buildings of comparable size and type, you can get a rough idea of how your building is doing in various areas."
The 1990 study should be available early in November.
The charge for each copy is $5.
For more information call the council at 496-7400 or write to the office at 167 West 72d Street, New York, N.Y. 10023.
Broken Sidewalk Question: I own a brownstone and have a problem with the sidewalk in front of my house.
One section was pushed up above its surroundingsby a tree root.
I need to correct the situation.
Which city agencies must I contact for permission to remove the tree and repair the sidewalk?  . .
Mary Evans, Manhattan  Answer: The work you describe requires permits from both the Manhattan Forestry office in the Department of Parks and Recreation, and the Bureau for Street Maintenance in the Department of Transportation.
Norman Garrett, a spokesman for the Department of Parks, said that the sidewalk might be repaired by cutting back the roots rather than removing the tree.
The agency used to have the staff to do this, but because of cutbacks you will probably have to hire a tree specialist yourself.
Repairing the sidewalk will also be your responsibility as the owner of the property that faces it.
The telephone number for the Manhattan Forestry office is 860-1844, and for the Manhattan office of the Bureau of Street Maintenance it is 323-8545.
New Rule for Tenants Question: My condominium board has recently made a new rule that tenants may no longer have the use of the swimming pool, which is a common element.
Can they do this? . . .
Thomas Foster, Brightwaters, L.I.
Answer: Maybe, but the rule may be enforceable only if condominium's declaration or bylaws were amended to bar tenants from the pool.
"Generally," said Ronald A. Shur, a lawyer specializing in real estate matters, "most condominium declarations and bylaws provide for the full use of amenities and facilites by unit owners or their tenants. A reduction of services or rights probably would require an amendment of these documents through a vote of the unit owners, not merely a board resolution."
Moreover, in cases where tenants were in occupancy when a conversion took place, state rent regulation laws may prohibit a board from taking away a service or amenity that they enjoyed when the building was a rental property.


BEST SELLERS: September 29, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
2
2
3
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
3
3
4
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older brother.
4
5
4
FLOWERS IN THE RAIN, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $20.) A collection of short stories, many of them set in Scotland and dealing with family relationships.
5
4
29
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6
1
THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) To escape forced early retirement, Sam McCready recalls his years in the British secret service.
7 *
6
14
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
8
7
3
RUSSKA, by Edward Rutherfurd. (Crown, $25.) Eighteen centuries in the lives of four families of different cultures residing in a Russian village.
9
1
THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $21.) An American woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious stranger more attractive.
10 *
11
10
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
11 *
10
21
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
12
9
79
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
13
8
19
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
14
14
4
THE GARDEN OF RAMA, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $20.) In the 23d century, astronauts from Earth contend with alien forces.
15
1
IMAJICA, by Clive Barker. (HarperCollins, $23.) A fantasy in which three residents of Earth seek to improve its lot by reuniting it with four other Dominions.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
2
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
2
5
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
3
9
2
LA TOYA, by La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski. (Dutton, $19.95.) Growing up in a show business family, by Michael Jackson's sister.
4
4
15
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the workings of the Federal Government.
5
3
45
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage from boyhood into manhood.
6
1
EXPOSING MYSELF, by Geraldo Rivera with Daniel Paisner. (Bantam, $21.50.) The autobiography of the television personality.
7
8
10
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
8
5
20
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
9
6
13
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
10
10
4
ANNE SEXTON, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The life of a gifted poet who was hampered by mental illness.
11 *
7
15
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
12
11
3
HARD COURTS, by John Feinstein. (Villard, $22.50.) A journalist's behind-the-scenes look at a year of professional tennis.
13
1
J.
EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career of the longtime director of the F.B.I.
14
13
13
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
15
11
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) Two former F.B.I. agents report on the downfall of Paul Castellano, head of the Gambino crime family.
16 *
14
4
THE MANSIONS OF LIMBO, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) A collection of pieces about currently celebrated people.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
2
12
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
3
4
50
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
4
5
46
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
5
88
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) Illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
VLADIMIR NABOKOV: The American Years, by Brian Boyd. (Princeton University, $29.95; $35 after Dec. 31.) The second volume of Mr.
Boyd's definitive biography fully redeems its length (783 pages) and immense detail by its unraveling of Nabokov's endless verbal puzzles and its relation of them to his life.
MATING, by Norman Rush. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Rush's first novel builds its sprawling comedy of manners around its female narrator's successful search for the absolutely perfect man.
AFRICAN VISAS: A Novella and Stories, by Maria Thomas. (Soho, $19.95.) Funny, poignant, incisive, sexy, polished and enlightening fiction that makes wise use of its author's life in Africa.
THE DIVINE SARAH: A Life of Sarah Bernhardt, by Arthur Gold and Robert Fizdale. (Knopf, $30.) An encyclopedic knowledge of things French underlies this splendid evocation of the actress who ruled Western theater from the 1870's to well into our century.
FREUD'S MOSES: Judaism Terminable and Interminable, by Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi. (Yale University, $25.) An elegant, suggestive, subtle examination of Freud's preoccupation with a historical figure who resembled himself in interesting ways.
LETTERS FROM A LIFE: The Selected Letters and Diaries of Benjamin Britten, 1913-1976, edited by Donald Mitchell and Philip Reed. (University of California, $125.) This absorbing two-volume collection documents better than ever before Britten's place in the artistic world and his life with the tenor Peter Pears.
THE SWEET HEREAFTER, by Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $20.) The author of "Continental Drift" coolly but generously engages an appalling theme: a town's need to fix the blame for a dreadful school bus accident so the world will make sense again.


A PRICE FOR SECURITY
In his article, Brinkley describes the melancholy cost to Israelis of their country's whopping defense budget.
What he does not say is that Israel's preoccupation with security is not the perverse whim of a hardline Government.
It is, rather, the consequence of living in the toughest neighborhood in the world.
ARNOLD S. GREENSPAN
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.


A Prescription for the School-Weary: Excitement!
Here is a sampling of children's activities, compiled by Dulcie Leimbach, scheduled this fall in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
ALL AGES October
"DANCE LATIN STYLE," a workshop with the musician and band leader Chico Mendoza, who will play mambo, rumba and merengue music with the Bomba and Mendoza Dancers, with participatory dancing.
On Oct. 14 at 2 and 3:30 P.M. at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street.
Cost: $1 a person for the workshop and admission fee of $4 for adults and children.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
"THE SWALE," a family nature walk, led by an instructor, through the New York Botanical Garden's swale to learn about such plants as swamp rose mallow and joe-pye weed, and grasses, sedges and rushes.
On Oct. 19 from 10:45 A.M. to noon, at the garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx.
Admission: $3 for adults, $2 for children and the elderly.
Children under 6 years old, free.
Information and registration: (212) 220-8747.
AUTUMN CELEBRATION, with 19th-century crafts making and cooking demonstrations -- to celebrate the harvest -- including refreshments and children's activities.
On Oct. 20 from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the Richmondtown Restoration, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I.
Admission: $6 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (718) 351-1611.
"GREETINGS FROM CONEY ISLAND," the theme of the 14th season of the Big Apple Circus, with a re-creation of the neighborhood's beach, Boardwalk and amusement parks at the turn of the century.
Featuring, among others, the Flying Vazquez Family and featuring a quadruple somersault, steeplechase stallions, Keystone Kops and Elena Panova and her solo trapeze act.
From Oct. 24 through Jan. 5.
At Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center, with performances every day (except Mondays, Dec. 23 and 30).
Admission: $10 to $45.
Information and reservations: (212) 268-0055.
ALL-HALLOW'S EVE CAMPFIRE, where scary stories will be told around an outdoor campfire.
Oct. 26 from 7:30 to 9:30 P.M., at the Richmondtown Restoration, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I.
Admission: $7 for adults and $3.50 for children.
Information and reservations: (718) 351-1611.
CHILDREN'S FALL FESTIVAL, with a costume parade, sack races, a trinkets-in-a-haystack hunt, clowns, a petting zoo, pony rides, hayrides and pumpkin selecting and painting.
On Oct. 27 from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission and parking: free.
At the Queens County Farm Museum, 73-50 Little Neck Parkway, Floral Park.
Information: (718) 347-FARM.
November
FAMILY NATURE WALK, informal forays into the grounds of an arboretum, with attention given to the trees, birds and other animals that are making winter preparations; followed by a magic show.
On Nov. 17, 2 P.M., at the Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
Gate admission: $3 a car.
Information: (516) 922-9201.
December
KWANZA CELEBRATION, with a lecture by a poet and teacher about the holiday's origins and suggestions about how to celebrate it, followed by a performance by Universal Language, a multi-cultural ensemble of dancers and singers.
On Dec. 7 at noon, at the Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Queens.
Admission: $5 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (718) 658-7400.
"SHARE THE SEASON," a holiday party consisting of performances, games, refreshments and sharing many of New York's multi-cultural traditions.
From 1 to 4 P.M., Dec. 15, at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Admission: one ornament per family for the museum's tree.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
"POR QUE BROOKLYN?," in conjunction with an exhibition of the same name, where David Gonzalez, a Brooklyn storyteller, will tell folk tales about magic and animals from Latin American countries and the borough.
With audience participation.
On Dec. 15 at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Admission: $2.50 for adults and $1 for children under 12.
Information: (718) 624-0890. 3 AND UP October
"HANSEL AND GRETEL," a marionette play, with music from the Humperdinck opera, produced by Nicolas Coppola.
Every Saturday at 12:30 P.M. and Sunday at 12:30 and 3 P.M.
Oct. 5 through Dec. 15.
At the Puppetworks Theater, 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Admission: $5 for adults and $4 for children.
Reservations: (718) 965-3391.
"DO YOU HEAR WHAT I HEAR?." A Lolli-Pops concert for children 3 to 5, with music by, among others, John Philip Sousa, Aaron Copland and Franz Joseph Haydn, produced by the Little Orchestra Society.
On Oct. 5 at 10:15 and 11:30 A.M. and Oct. 6 at 1:15 and 2:30 P.M. at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 704-2100.
INDIA DAY,with a mask maker, puppet maker and face painter who will celebrate the culture and crafts of India through demonstrations and performances.
On Oct. 19 at 3 P.M. at the Brooklyn Children's Museum, 145 Brooklyn Avenue, Crown Heights.
Admission: $3 a person.
Information: (718) 735-4400.
"BLIND AS A BAT," a workshop for children 4 to 6, which will teach them about bats, and will include a snack, craft project and walk through nature trails.
On Oct. 19 and 20 from 1 to 3 P.M. at the Alley Pond Environmental Center, 228-06 Northern Boulevard, Douglaston, Queens.
Admission: $4 for members, $5 for nonmembers.
Reservations: (718) 229-4000.
"COYOTE IS A FALLING STAR," a performance by the Koo Dance Company, based on an American Indian legend about the importance of animals in all cultures, with music and a slide show.
On Oct. 26 at noon and 1:30 P.M. at the Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Queens.
Admission: $5 for adults, $3 for children.
Information: (718) 658-7400.
November
"THE JEWS OF NEW AMSTERDAM," a reading and discussion of a children's book of the same name, detailing the historical passage, in 1654, of 23 Brazilian Jews trying to flee to the Netherlands who ended up in New Amsterdam.
Read by Eva Costabel, the author.
At 2 P.M. on Nov. 3, at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Free with museum admission fee of $6 a family.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
NATIONAL CHILDREN'S BOOK WEEK CELEBRITY READ ATHON, a reading of well-known children's books in honor of Children's Book Week, a national celebration.
At the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, on Nov. 16 between 1 and 4 P.M.
Reading, $2; museum admission, $3 a person.
Information: (718) 273-2060.
RODZ PUPPETS, who will tell the story of Oafus, an imaginary wild animal that only wants to "oaf" around in the wilderness, but is stalked by a hunter: with music and audience participation.
On Nov. 23 at noon , at the Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Queens.
Admission: $5 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (718) 658-7400.
"WILL THE REAL AUDREY DUCK PLEASE STAND UP," a show about ducks and other birds that vie for attention, presented by Susan Linn, a Boston ventriloquist.
On Nov. 23 and 24 at 10:30 A.M. and noon, the Puppet Playhouse, Asphalt Green, 555 East 90th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3.50 a person.
Information and reservations: (212) 369-8890.
December
"THE LAND BELOW," a new jazz musical about a group of children who take a subway on Christmas Eve and end up going on an underground adventure where they meet a rat artist and museum mummies.
By Tada, the children's theater company.
At the Tada Theater, 120 West 28th Street, Manhattan.
Dec. 13 through Jan. 19, at 7:30 P.M. on Fridays and 1 and 3:30 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays, with additional performances for the holidays.
Admission: $7 for adults and $5 for children.
Information and reservations: (212) 627-1732.
"WE LIKE COOKIES," a workshop with a chef who will teach children how to make their own holiday cookies, which they get to take home.
On Dec. 21 at 1, 2 and 3 P.M., at the Staten Island Children's Museum, Snug Harbor, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston.
Workshop: $2 plus museum admission of $3 a person.
Information: (718) 273-2060. 5 AND UP October
"DOGS," a workshop where children and adults can learn intriguing legends and facts about dogs, with information taken from a medieval encyclopedia, and involving art activities.
On Oct. 5, 1 P.M. in the Main Hall of the Cloisters, Fort Tryon Park, at the end of Fort Washington Avenue, Manhattan.
Workshop, free, with museum admission of $6 for adults and $3 for children.
Information: (212) 923-3700, extensions 126 or 159.
CITY SPORTS FOR KIDS, a running and fitness program for children 5 to 12 involving cross-country and track-and-field events.
On Oct. 6, 13, 20 and 27; Nov. 10 and 17, sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club and Asphalt Green.
All events are held in Central Park, 97th Street and Fifth Avenue entrance, from 2 to 4:30 P.M.
Admission: $10 one-time registration fee.
Information: (212) 737-7480.
"PUERTO RICAN DISCOVERY AND HERITAGE," an art workshop involving Taller Boricua, an East Harlem group of artists who use a variety of media and styles, from Neo-Geo to Neo-Expressionism; in conjunction with the exhibition "A New Season: Art From the Taller Boricua." At 2 P.M. on Oct. 12 at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Members, free; $3 for nonmembers.
Information: (212) 534-1672, extension 206.
JEWELRY WORKSHOP, where children will create their own pins, necklaces and bracelets, using clay, paper and found objects.
In conjunction with a jewelry exhibition at the Newhouse Gallery, Snug Harbor Cultural Center, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, S.I.
The Sunday drop-in workshops start at 2 P.M. in the Main Hall on Oct. 13 through Nov. 24.
Fee: children 5 and up, $2.
Information: (718) 448-2500.
"SCIENCE HALLOWEEN," workshops where children get to follow scientific clues to track down hidden ghosts, explore the "Glow Gallery" and participate in a "glow in the dark" demonstration and a magic show on how to haunt one's house.
On Oct. 26 and 27 from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the New York Hall of Science, 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
The magic show is on Oct. 27 only, at 3 P.M. and costs $2.50 for adults and $1.50 for children.
For the other workshops, the museum admission fee is $3.50 for adults and $2.50 for children.
Information: (718) 699-0005.
November
"BEADWORK, CORNHUSK DOLLS AND CRADLE BOARDS," an exhibition of American Indian objects, including dolls that represent the Six Iroquois Nations and cradle boards made of wood, fur and beads, handmade by Tammy Rahr, a Cayuga Indian.
From Nov. 13 through March 15 at the National Museum of the American Indian, Smithsonian Institution, Broadway at 155th Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $3 for adults, $2 for children 7 and up, free for children under 7.
Information: (212) 283-2420.
STORYTELLING, with stories about myths and legends of the sky told by Gerard Tsonakwa, an Abenaki Indian storyteller.
On Nov. 16 at 10:30 and 11:45 A.M. at the Hayden Planetarium, Sky Theater, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Admission: $8 for adults and $6 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5920 or (212) 769-5900.
"PUERTO RICO: A HISTORY IN PICTURES," a lecture, with slides, to give an overview of Puerto Rico, coordinated for the exhibition "Contrasts: 40 Years of Change and Continuity, Photographs by Jack Delano." On Nov. 17 at 2 P.M. at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, South Bronx.
Free.
Information: (212) 681-6000.
"STAR OF CHRISTMAS," a holiday sky show with a narrative traveling back 2,000 years to explore the skies of the first Christmas.
At the Hayden Planetarium, Sky Theater, Central Park West at 81st Street, Manhattan.
Nov. 27 through Jan. 1, with weekday shows at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M., Saturdays at 11 A.M., 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M. and Sundays at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 P.M.
Admission: $5 for adults and $2.50 for children.50.
Information: (212) 769-5920 or (212) 769-5900.
December
"HOLIDAY LIGHTS AND CAROLING BUS TOUR," where families can sing traditional carols, hopping on and off a bus, through Brooklyn's Bay Ridge and Bensonhurst neighborhoods.
A tour of the neighborhoods' holiday decorations and Christmas stories will also be included.
Sponsored by the Brooklyn Urban Park Rangers; on Dec. 21 starting at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Reservations: (718) 287-3400. 7 AND UP
October
"HEALING OUR PLANET," a workshop tour for families and groups of at least 10 people, to explore Rodmans Neck, a wetlands area in Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx, where participants will learn how pollution and other harmful agents affect wetlands and the wilderness.
Children will also learn what they can do to protect the environment.
Conducted by appointment in October and November by the North Wind Undersea Institute, a nonprofit environmental organization, 610 City Island Avenue, City Island, the Bronx.
Fee: $4.50 a person.
Information: (212) 885-0701.
"CHANGING FACES," a new exhibition, opening Oct. 4, of more than 350 artifacts and photographs dealing with the history and development of Hollywood makeup and hair design, including life masks of Laurence Olivier, Sylvester Stallone and Max von Sydow; makeup reconstructions; full body suits, and more than a dozen wigs.
At the American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Hours, noon to 4 P.M.
Tuesdays through Fridays, and Saturdays and Sundays from noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5 for adults, $4 for the elderly and $2.50 for children.
Information: (718) 784-4777 (travel instructions) and (718) 784-0077 (program details).
"WHAT'S UP?," a drop-in art workshop and gallery visit for children 8 to 12 to learn, explore and create art, always related to a current exhibition.
Every Saturday and Sunday from 2 to 3 P.M. (except Thanksgiving weekend).
At the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights.
Meet in the Grand Lobby, first floor.
Admission: $4 for adults and free for children accompanied by an adult.
Information: (718) 638-5000, extension 236.
"RE-CREATING RADIO," where children re-create radio programs related to mystery, adventure and science fiction, using radio scripts from such shows as "The Lone Ranger," "The Shadow" and "Buck Rogers in the 25th Century." Saturdays from Oct. 5 through Dec. 28, from 10 to 11:30 A.M. at the Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
Fee: $5 a person.
Reservations: (212) 621-6600.
BEEKEEPER'S WALK, a visit to two local hives to learn about bee behavior with Frank Bowen, a beekeeper.
On Oct. 19 at 1 P.M. at Wave Hill House, 675 West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Admission: $4 for adults and $2 for students and the elderly.
Children 6 and under, free.
Information: (212) 549-3200.
SCIENCE CLUB, where the natural world, focusing on geology, ecology, biology and physics, will be explored with an in-house scientist and educator.
With such projects as creating a terrarium, dissecting owl pellets and re-creating skeletons from the remains.
On Oct. 19, Nov. 16 and Dec. 21 from 10 A.M. to noon at the Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place, St.
George.
Fee: $3 for members, $5 for nonmembers.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
HAND-WOVEN BASKETS AND RAVEN'S-TAIL ROBE SAMPLER DEMONSTRATIONS, in conjunction with a current exhibition, given by Teri Rofkar, a Tlinglit Indian from Alaska.
At the National Museum of the American Indian, Broadway at 155th Street, Manhattan, Oct. 22 through 26, from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $3 for adults, $2 for the elderly and children 7 and up, free for children under 7.
Information: (212) 283-2420.
"THE GHOSTS OF CLEAR COMFORT," a dramatic presentation with costumed ghosts who will bring back to life the Austen family and other residents of the 300-year-old Alice Austen house.
With an outdoor costume parade, refreshments, games and pumpkin painting.
On Oct. 26 (rain date, Oct. 27), from 1 to 4 P.M. at the Alice Austen House, 2 Hyland Boulevard, Rosebank, S.I.
Admission: $3 a person.
Information: (718) 816-4506.
November
"SUPER SEED SECRETS," where children 5 to 10 can learn about seeds, which that blow in the wind, grow into plants and can be eaten.
Young explorers will gather and investigate such seeds as milkweed pods, maple samaras and sweet gumballs, dissect them using hand lenses and create seed mosaics.
On Nov. 2 from 10 A.M. to noon.
At the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx.
Admission: $11 for members and $12 for nonmembers.
Information and registration: (212) 220-8982.
"HOME VIDEOS: EDIT AND ADD," a workshop where participants learn to edit their home videos (VHS-SP speed) by adding special effects and sound effects.
Take your own video camera and a blank tape.
At the Media Center of the Children's Museum of Manhattan, 212 West 83d Street, Nov. 2 at 1:45 P.M.
Workshop fee: $1.
Museum admission: $4 for adults and children.
Information: (212) 721-1234.
ZOO CLUB, for children 8 to 12 who "share a fascination and love for wildlife," with a focus on animal survival, with games and other participatory activities.
Meetings: Nov. 2, Dec. 7 and Jan. 11, with three additional meetings between January and June.
Sessions 10 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. or 1:30 to 4 P.M. at the Bronx Zoo, Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road.
Fee: $90 for members, $95 for nonmembers for all six meetings.
Registration: (212) 220-6854.
"PRODUCTS OF THE TROPICAL FOREST," a workshop where children ages 8 and up can learn about products derived from tropical forests, like chocolate, chewing gum, medicines and bananas.
With a preparation of tropical ice-cream sundae.
On Nov. 23 from 2 to 4 P.M. at the Staten Island Zoo, 614 Broadway, West Brighton.
Fee: $4 for members, $6 for nonmembers.
Registration: (718) 442-3100.


Andrea Gerstell, An Editor, Wed
Andrea Roeth Gerstell, a beauty editor at Lear's magazine, and Ethan Michael Topper, an associate in mergers and acquisitions at Morgan Stanley, both in New York, were married in New York yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson officiated at the Brick Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Topper, 27 years old, graduated from Princeton University.
She is a daughter of A. Frederick Gerstell of Beverly Hills, Calif., and Barbara K. Gerstell of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is chairman and chief executive of Calmat, a producer of construction materials in southern California.


CRIME
She opened the book: it was THE MANDEVILLE TALENT (John Macrae/Holt, $19.95), a new crime novel by George V. Higgins, literary big gun and bona fide master stylist.
It was near noon by the desk clock, a cracked electric Westclox whose missing minute hand made more accurate chronometric reckoning impossible.
She read the first chapter, admiring the manly heft of the prose ("The man pulled the trigger"), the descriptive precision ("The pellets in the shell . . . collided with the maxillary, zygomatic, nasal, temporal, parietal, and frontal bones"), the terse dialogue (" 'The job is done,' he said").
Settling into the story -- the reinvestigation of the 23-year-old murder of a Massachusetts bank president -- she tuned her ear to the old courtroom testimony, the contemporary depositions.
Characters emerged: jumped-up, self-absorbed, money-grubbing, thin-blooded bores speaking immaculate English in flawlessly grammatical sentences.
Lines of dialogue became paragraphs, paragraphs bled into pages.
And pages.
And pages.
And. . . .
She woke up with her head on the typewriter, an ancient wide-body model whose component parts she could not identify.
It was 7-something by the goofy clock.
Had she finished the book in her sleep?
There were coffee stains on the pages, notations in pencil (Mongol model No. 482) in the margins.
But there was neither evidence nor memory of the joy of reading.
She pawed through the reams of dialogue, hunting for a decent character, a scrap of significance in the dull story -- even a lively metaphor, for pity's sake.
But of pity there was also no sign.
Like the crime, this heartless telling seemed "purely a matter of business."


A Young Playwright Takes His Cue
David Rodriguez speaks so softly that light traffic below a second-floor window plows his words under in midair.
But the 19-year-old Manhattan playwright seems to have little trouble making his writing heard.
His first play won a citywide contest.
His second, "I'm Not Stupid," is one of four winners in the 10th annual Young Playwrights Festival, which received 725 entries from writers under 19 nationwide.
"I think theater is my calling," said Mr.
Rodriguez, whose poker face is framed by a hoop in one ear and an ankh in the other.
In many ways he embodies the hopes behind the festival, which was established by Stephen Sondheim and the Foundation of the Dramatists Guild to find and nurture young talent.


Good for the Gap, Not for Society
To the Editor:
"Washington's Mistaken Apparel Policy" (Forum, Sept. 1) is an example of a concept much more important than "giving mills an incentive to compete in the global marketplace." We are talking about the reasons why our standard of living is in decline.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bowdoin; Fraternity Members Give Female Members Equal Standing
Faced with the college's mandate that fraternity women receive full membership privileges, Bowdoin College's Alpha Delta Phi chapter this month became the last of four fraternities on campus to sacrifice national affiliation rather than lose college recognition.
The university administration's policy of integrating women more fully into campus life, including the Greek system, presented a tough choice for fraternities like Alpha Delta Phi, whose national organizations do not recognize women as members.
The fraternities had to decide by the first of this month.


Breathing Easier at McDonnell Douglas
Last Jan. 24, as F-15 fighters and Tomahawk missiles made by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation were screaming through the skies above Iraq, the aerospace company's chief executive, John F. McDonnell, made a shocking request of the Pentagon.
McDonnell Douglas, Mr.
McDonnell wrote in a letter to Undersecretary of Defense Donald J. Yockey, was suffering through a cash crunch caused by a mounting debt load, weapons-contract cancellations and problems in its commercial aircraft division.
Shut off from further bank financing and worried about the company's ability to handle any unexpected problems, Mr.
McDonnell asked the Pentagon to give McDonnell Douglas an advance on its weapons-contract payments.
A billion dollars would be sufficient, he wrote.


Hartford's Morning Man Heads for the Sunset
ALMOST out of money, without a job and more than 3,000 miles from home, Bob Steele was not exactly on top of the world on Sept. 30, 1936.
After five months in Hartford, during the peak of the Depression, he had decided to accept a friend's offer of a ride back to California the following day.
With little else to do, Mr.
Steele had a half-hour to kill before a Sherlock Holmes movie matinee was to start at the old Princess Theater on State Street.
Spotting the Travelers Insurance Company building nearby, Mr.
Steele decided to go inside and see if he could get an audition for an announcer's job with radio station WTIC.


Old Habits
I SEE WILL ONCE A year or so, when he comes back east.
His is the only friendship I have that dates back to the second Eisenhower Administration -- or, more precisely, to the Catholic elementary school near Philadelphia I attended.
"You know what I remember most about you then?" he asked on a recent visit.
"When I used to get smacked in class, I wailed like a banshee. When the nuns whacked you, you never cried. Why?"


Social Events
Bellevue Benefit  Sept. 30 -- Founded in 1949, Children of Bellevue provides funds and volunteers for programs at Bellevue Hospital, including its AIDS pediatric clinic, a Chinese translation service and clothing for the children of homeless mothers.
Its 42d annual dinner benefit will be at the Rainbow Room at 7 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 561-5221.
Victim Center Awards
Sept. 30 -- The National Victim Center, an advocate group for the rights of crime victims, will honor James S. Brady, President Reagan's press secretary, for his efforts to further gun control, and Jean MacArthur, the widow of General of the Army Douglas MacArthur, for her support of the center, at a black-tie dinner dance at the Plaza at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 685-1095.
Young Playwrights
Sept. 30 -- The Foundation of the Dramatists Guild's Young Playwrights Festival will mark its 10th anniversary with a benefit performance at the St.
James Theater.
Mandy Patinkin, B. D. Wong, Stephen Sondheim, Wendy Wasserstein and others will read and perform.
A supper at the Four Seasons follows the 7:30 show.
Tickets, $150, for the performance, $500 for the evening, from (212) 529-5626.
Spanish Heritage
Oct. 1 -- Spanish Heritage, which sponsors student exchanges between the United States and Spanish-speaking countries, will hold a benefit preview of an art exhibition, "Ignacio Zuloaga 1870-1945," at the Wildenstein Gallery, 19 East 64th Street, from 5:30 to 8:30 P.M.
Tickets, $75 for individuals, $100 a couple, from (718) 268-7565.
For AIDS Care
Oct. 1 -- In a tent next to Mortimer's, Lexington Avenue at 76th Street, an evening of food and drink will benefit the AIDS Care Center at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
From 6 to 9 P.M.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 685-1095.
From Cardinal's Committee
Oct. 1 -- The Cardinal's Committee of the Laity, which provides social services to the needy in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, will honor Celeste Holm, the actress; Sirio Maccioni, owner of Le Cirque, and Thomas Reese, general manager of the Marriott Marquis Hotel, at a dinner at the Marriott at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 371-1000, ext. 2085.
Honoring Carnegie Hall
Oct. 1 -- The Hundred Year Association of New York, made up of institutions and nonprofit organizations more than 100 years old, will award its annual gold medal to Carnegie Hall.
Carnegie's president, Isaac Stern, will receive it at the Association's 59th annual dinner, a benefit for scholarships and awards to outstanding civil service employees.
At 6:30 P.M. at the Plaza.
Tickets, $500, from (914) 654-4689.
French-American Benefit
Oct. 1 -- A party to benefit the French-American Foundation, which finances forums on childhood education and child care, will be held at the new Galeries Lafayette in Trump Tower and at the Trump Tower Atrium next door.
The party starts at 9 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 737-3597.
Brooklyn Historical Society
Oct. 2 -- The Brooklyn Historical Society will hold its annual fund-raising affair beginning with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. at the society, 128 Pierrepont Street, and continuing with dinner at Borough Hall.
Tickets, $175, from (718) 624-0890.
Jazz at '21'
Oct. 2 -- Dinner, jazz and gambling at the "21" Club will benefit the Henry Street Settlement House.
Black tie, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets $100, from (212) 272-3502.
Pet Lovers at Macy's
Oct. 2 -- The Bide-a-Wee Home Association, which cares for animals, will benefit from a reception from 6 to 8 P.M. at Macy's ninth-floor Corner Shop Antique Galleries.
Tickets, $150, or $75 for those under 30, from (212) 355-1756.
Lenox Hill Honors Mrs. Astor
Oct. 3 -- The Lenox Hill Neighborhood Association will honor Brooke Astor for her aid to the Upper East Side social services organization at a black-tie dinner at the St.
Regis Roof.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 685-1095.
St. Vincent's Hospital Gala
Oct. 3 -- The Angelus Award Gala, seeking to raise funds for St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New York, will begin at 6:30 P.M. at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Helen Mara Nugent, a donor, Dr.
Frank Hardart Jr., a staff physician for almost 50 years, and Sister Mary Robert Nagle, recently retired as the hospital's nursing school director, will be given awards.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 790-7676.
Lesbian and Gay Studies
Oct. 4 -- The Center for Lesbian and Gay Studies will hold a benefit reception at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York, for which it has taken a research role; it is said to be the first such university-based center.
At the Graduate Center, 33 West 42d Street, from 6 to 8 P.M.
Tickets, $40 from (212) 929-2639 or $50 at the door.
Floating Film Benefit
Oct. 4 -- A benefit for the American Film Institute, which preserves films and television tapes, will take place aboard the Club Med 1 yacht at the Passenger Ship Terminal, Pier 88 at 55th Street and the Hudson.
A champagne reception is at 9 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Yachting attire encouraged.
Tickets $125, or $50 for champagne and dessert after 11 P.M.
Call (212) 398-6890.
'Miss Saigon'
Oct. 4 -- Three homes for the elderly -- Morningside House and Aging in America, both in the Bronx, and United Presbyterian Residence in Woodbury, L.I. -- will share the proceeds of a benefit performance of "Miss Saigon" at 8 P.M. at the Broadway Theater.
Cocktail reception at 6:30 P.M. at Viacom International, 1515 Broadway at 45th Street.
Tickets, $225, from (212) 355-6363.
Protecting the Hudson
Oct. 5 -- The Hudson Riverkeeper Fund will hold a benefit aboard the Club Med 1 yacht, Pier 88 at 55th Street and the Hudson River, to help support environmental efforts in behalf of the Hudson.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. followed by dinner, dancing and "Caroline's Comedy Club Show." Tickets, $150, or $75 for champagne, dessert, dancing and show from 8:30 P.M. to 1 A.M., from (914) 424-4149.
For the Technion Institute
Oct. 5 -- The American Society for Technion, the Israel Institute of Technology, will celebrate its 50th anniversary with a black-tie dinner at the Plaza.
Walter H. Annenberg, the publisher, a former Ambassador to Britain, and Max M. Fisher, a Detroit businessman, will receive honorary degrees.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 262-6200.
Helen Hayes Is 91
Oct. 5 -- A double 91st birthday celebration will be staged under a tent next to the Helen Hayes/Tappan Zee Performing Arts Center in Nyack, N.Y., honoring Miss Hayes, a local resident, and the first theater on the site.
The party at 7 P.M. benefits the theater.
Tickets, $125, from (914) 358-6333.


Jamie Fortunoff, Physician, Wed
Dr.
Jamie Allison Fortunoff, a resident in anesthesiology at the Mount Sinai Medical Center, and Dr.
Paul Peter Romanello, an attending cardiologist at Lenox Hill Hospital, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Old Westbury (L.I.) Gardens.
Justice Andrew J. DiPaola of the Appellate Term of State Supreme Court in Mineola, L.I., officiated.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from Brown University and received an M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen Fortunoff of Muttontown, L.I.
Her father, a urologist, is the chief of surgery at North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
Her mother, Madeleine Fortunoff, is a dealer in fine prints in Locust Valley, L.I.


East Germans, Nurtured by Bonn, Take Heart and Begin to Prosper
In the dead of last winter, Lutz Hesslich often sat alone in his bicycle shop here, staring out at the snow and wondering whether he had made a terrible mistake by opening a business in eastern Germany.
Mr.
Hesslich, a Cottbus native and former world cycling champion, no longer doubts the wisdom of his investment.
His shop is so busy that he hardly has time to chat with visitors.
He now has four mechanics working for him, and next month he will open a second store on the other side of town.


Prices and Inflation
To the Editor:
From Leonard Silk's Sept. 13 Business Scene column ("Urgent Remedies for the Soviet Ills") or "A Bleak Economy Dims Soviet Hopes for a Free Market" (front page, Sept. 9) one would conclude that "thousand-percent rates of inflation by the end of the year" are "sending the ruble toward perdition." These dire predictions assume that the 100 percent rate of inflation after the April 2 price reform or the 100 percent rise of wholesale prices over the year is evidence of galloping inflation.


Dulcet Harmonies In Clay and Glass
"CLAY AND GLASS," the title of the fall exhibition of the New Jersey Designer Craftsmen, can serve equally well to describe the group's handsome new gallery.
The warm, natural tones and subtle textures of the two media, clay and glass, set up dulcet harmonies that play well against the rough brick-lined walls and glass-enclosed front display area.
The broad variety of styles and approaches gives the show its vigor.
"We wanted a sampling of clay and glass from across New Jersey and I think we got it," said Fran Nimeck, program director of the gallery.


Yes, Fanny Is Neglected. But Unjustly?
In May 1847, Fanny Hensel was leading a rehearsal of Mendelssohn's "Erste Walpurgisnacht" when she suddenly fell ill and died.
She was, by all accounts, remarkably gifted, a prodigy who could, at the age of 13, play all of Bach's "Well-Tempered Clavier" from memory; by her death at age 41, she had composed over 500 works.
She was also Felix Mendelssohn's sister.
Six months later, still mourning his older sibling's death, Felix, too, suddenly died.
He had been the leader of German musical life, the inheritor of Beethoven's mantle, hailed by Goethe and Queen Victoria.
Immediately after his death, though, he was relegated by developing Wagnerian taste to the land of the frivolous and cheerful.


Football Movies Kiss Rah-Rah Goodbye
Paramount Pictures' new football comedy, "Necessary Roughness," has a story line as new as last week's Sports Illustrated: a pair of college football coaches (played by Hector Elizondo and Robert Loggia), stung by National Collegiate Athletic Association sanctions against their university's football team, set out to clean up the program and return the game to amateurs.
Given the rampant professionalism of modern college football, one is hard pressed to decide whether the coaches' task comes under the category of comedy or science fiction.
"Necessary Roughness" is simply the latest example of a somewhat arcane and uniquely American genre: the football movie.
Although the origins of this genre are hard to pinpoint, it is clear that by the early 1920's feature films about football were well established.
But between "Brown at Harvard" in 1921 and "Necessary Roughness" 70 years later, a profound change took place.


World Markets; Software Star on a Roller Coaster
Alias Research Inc., a young software company here, hit the big money almost by accident, but analysts were soon predicting a dazzling future.
Lately, however, its stock has been battered by problems of too rapid growth, but some backers remain convinced it is destined to become the world powerhouse of design automation.
Operating in a former chocolate factory in downtown Toronto, the company created the software that the animators of "Terminator 2: Judgment Day" used to create the homicidal cyborg T-1000, which assumes the shape of anything it touches and does battle with Arnold Schwarzenegger.


Results Plus
TENNIS A Disappointing Duel


Talking: Deposits; Making Sure They Are Safe
THE size and safety of the deposit money handed over when a buyer signs a contract for a home may need renewed attention.
First, the recessionary market is making it easier to put down less than the customary 10 percent.
"There's no law anywhere in the country that says it has to be 10 percent," said Forrest Pafenberg, director of real-estate financing research for the National Association of Realtors.
He said, for example, that he paid only $750 when he signed a contract to buy a $250,000 home in Arlington, Va., even though the seller had expected more.
"I made the size of the deposit part of the negotiations," he said.


Karen Frind Is Married to Malcolm E. Delaney
Karen Frind and Malcolm E. Delaney were married yesterday at the First Baptist Church in Bronxville, N.Y..
The Rev.
Dr.
Russell Gundlach performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Delaney, 27 years old, was until recently a lawyer for the New York City Campaign Finance Board, which provides funds for candidates to public office.
A cum laude gradauate of Wellesley College, with a law degree from Cornell University, the bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Denis B. Frind of Ardsley-on-Hudson, N.Y.


This Week: Time To Avert Trouble
Pull up plants as they stop producing, and add them to the compost pile.
But if plants are diseased, put them in a bag for the garbage collector.
The idea is to keep garden beds clear of dead plant material, to discourage pests and disease from wintering over.
Pull up weeds before they drop their seeds all over the garden and come up like gangbusters next summer.


Business Diary/September 22-27
COMPANIES I.B.M.'s Strategy for the Future: Making Itself Indispensable


Difference Between Coslet and Shula? 293 Victories
Winning.
While Don Shula has perfected a formula for it, averaging more than 10 victories a season with two different National Football League teams, Bruce Coslet is still trying to get the knack of it.
Shula, who coached the Colts before he moved on to Miami, was the youngest coach to win 100 games in the league, and the youngest to win 200.
Last Sunday, the Dolphins presented him with a 16-13 victory over Green Bay making him 2-2 this year and only the second coach in pro football history to win 300 games (his record is 300-139-6).
George Halas had a coaching record of 325-151-31 in 36 years.
Shula, by comparison, is in his 29th year.


Hip-Hop's Prophets of Rage Make Noise Again
Public Enemy always wanted to be significant.
From its first album, "Yo! Bum Rush the Show" in 1987, the group marketed itself as a distillation of black anger and resistance.
It set out to be the voice of a community, not just one more posse of boasters; its logo, drawn by the group's main rapper and writer, Chuck D. (Carlton Ridenhour), was a silhouette of a black man in a rifle's crosshairs, and for millions of people that logo is now as recognizable as the CBS eye or the Coca-Cola wave.
Public Enemy has become a self-made and self-conscious symbol, hip-hop's "prophets of rage."
Significance can weigh down a band, making songwriters didactic and overly deliberate; look what happened to Bruce Springsteen.
Yet significance can also help performers grow up faster and think harder.
Both happen on Public Enemy's fourth album, "Apocalypse 91 . . . the Enemy Strikes Black" (Def Jam/CBS 47374; all three formats).


Miles Davis, Trumpeter, Dies; Jazz Genius, 65, Defined Cool
Miles Davis, the trumpeter and composer whose haunting tone and ever-changing style made him an elusive touchstone of jazz for four decades, died yesterday at St.
John's Hospital and Health Center in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 65 years old.
He died of pneumonia, respiratory failure and a stroke, his doctor, Jeff Harris, said in a statement released by the hospital.


K. A. Richieri Weds Ms. Obler
Kathryn Ellen Obler, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph M. Obler of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Kenneth Alan Richieri, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aldo J. Richieri of Chatsworth, Calif.
Judge George M. Dell, who is retired from Los Angeles County Superior Court, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Richieri, 33 years old, is an associate counsel at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Santa Barbara and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is a psychiatrist in private practice in Los Angeles.


Colombian Held as Drug Assassin May Be Tied to Queens Shootout
Investigators are looking for a possible link between a man they say is a top assassin for a Colombian cocaine cartel and a shootout in a crowded Queens bar two weeks ago in which four people were killed, including another cartel assassin.
"This was a premeditated thing," a detective said of the shooting in the bar in Jackson Heights.
"The shooter went in there specifically to do this."


France's Site for the Olympics
If you had asked a Parisian six months ago where Albertville is, he or she might have frowned, shrugged or otherwise shown that it did not merit a place in the sophisticate's lexicon.
One history buff did recall that Hannibal tramped through this valley, elephants, regiments and all, on his war path through the Alps.
Another noted that the Savoy region, home to Albertville, cut loose from Italy only in 1860 and became French.
After that, it seemed, little happened.


Atlanta Journal; Scarlett O'Hara Is Back, And City Is Again Taken
Where to begin?
The valiant effort to restore "The Dump," the now-vacant, rat-infested hulk where Margaret Mitchell wrote "Gone With the Wind"?
The poignant interview in the Atlanta Journal and Constitution with the still-remorseful retired cab driver who ran her over, killing her, 42 years ago?
The 3,000 book buyers who showed up at a local mall today before Alexandra Ripley even began autographing copies of "Scarlett: The Sequel to Margaret Mitchell's 'Gone With the Wind' "?


Haitian's Visit to New York Is a Celebration
With a crush of reporters clamoring to ask one more question of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti on Thursday, an aide announced that the President had other appointments and that the questioning was over.
Mr.
Aristide, with a cock of his head and a raise of his right hand, signaled that he had not yet gotten his message across.


Catherine Cook Weds
Catherine Cook, a systems analyst for Standard and Poor's, and Mark Steven Doxey, an assistant vice president at Shearson Lehman, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
William Donovan officiated at St.
Dominic Roman Catholic Church in Oyster Bay, L.I.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated cum laude from the State University of New York at Stony Brook, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Collen Cook 2d of Clearwater, Fla.
Mr.
Doxey, 27, graduated from the New York Institute of Technology.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Francis Doxey of East Norwich, L.I.


Warren McCleskey Is Dead
Warren McCleskey, who died in Georgia's electric chair last week, was no saint or hero.
He was a robber, part of a gang that shot and killed an off-duty police officer during a holdup.
Thirteen years later, however, a question reverberates: Did Warren McCleskey deserve the chair?
For the question to outlive him is a damning commentary on capital punishment in the United States.


Cynthia Ridde Weds David Jenkins
Cynthia Ricarda Ridde, the daughter of Gilda and Rudolph G. Ridde of Mahopac, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Kennedy Jenkins, a son of Diane and Evan Jenkins of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert J. Broesler, an Episcopal priest, officiated at Ceola Manor in Jefferson Valley, N.Y.
Mrs.
Jenkins, 27 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton, as did her husband, and has taught kindergarten in the New York City school system.
Her father is a senior code inspector for the City of White Plains.
Her mother is a bookkeeper at the Port Chester Nursing Home.


By Air or by Sea, the Weather Was Still Perfect


Faced With Fines Under a New Law, Pet Owners Turn Out
CASEY came all the way from Peekskill, Rocky traveled down from Somers and Caesar had just a short car ride over from Elmsford.
Many, when they arrived, though, were not sure the trip was worth the trouble.
One or two, with their feet planted squarely on the floor, had to be dragged inside.
And Willow was so unhappy about the entire affair that she had to be shaken out of her pretty carrying case.


Oil Needs Management, Not Price Hikes
To the Editor:
"A World Overly Greedy for Oil" (Forum, Sept. 1) predicts "worldwide shortages" of crude oil developing in the 1990's, and the author, Dimitrios Koutsomitis, recommends that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries raise prices to expand supply, reduce demand and avert "economic convulsions."


Corrections
An article about blimps on Sept. 1 incorrectly characterized Virgin Lightship's airship passenger ride business.
It is not the nation's first ride service.


Of Trekkies And Trekkers
To the Editor:
As a veteran Trekker, I would like to clear up one thing about James Gorman's article " 'Star Trek': It's a Wonderful Galaxy"  [ Sept. 15 ] .
Mr.
Gorman makes numerous references to Trekkies, a term generally assumed to mean all "Star Trek" fans.
But as any "Star Trek" devotee will tell you, there is a big difference between Trekkies and Trekkers -- much the same as that between music groupies, who follow a group around either for personal gain (autographs, band parties) or to "belong," and aficionados (who enjoy and are very familiar with the music of a group).
Trekkers are offended by the term Trekkie, as it connotes a certain mind-set that is truly abhorrent to many.
IAN ALTERMAN  New York


Celebrations on the Street
Here is a sampling of street fairs and festivals in New York City through December.
The information was provided by the Community Assistance Unit of the Mayor's office.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today


Winter-Storage Tips For Fuel-Powered Tools
GASOLINE-POWERED tools like lawn mowers, garden shredders, tillers and string trimmers need servicing before being stored for the winter.
That is not difficult, and it assures quick starting in the spring and long life.
The best place to store most gasoline-powered tools is in a dry unheated garage or shed.
If you must store items outside, wrap them with plastic sheeting to keep out moisture and tie the sheeting with rope or elastic cord to prevent wind from undoing the wrap.
If equipment is to be stored in a heated garage, basement or utility room, follow the directions given later for servicing the fuel system.


30 Contemporary Artists Take Over a Rockland Hunting Lodge
WOULD-BE visitors to "The Sterlington Exhibit: Art to Live With" should bring money, for it is a charity event with proceeds from sales being shared by the Arts Council of Rockland and Good Samaritan Hospital.
A donation of $5 is suggested.
The hospital is an 89-year-old health-care center in nearby Suffern and is run by the Sisters of Charity of St.
Elizabeth.
Reflected glory (and publicity) go to the Pierson Lakes/Ramapo Land Company, the owner and developer of the 4,200-acre estate where the show is staged (in a hunting lodge).
With so much competition from the setting, the show cannot have been easy to mount.
But its curator, Sister Adele Myers, has done a good job, working under the aegis of the Rockland Arts Council and drawing on her experience as director of the Thorpe Intermedia Gallery in Sparkill.
All the same, it is disconcerting to enter a post-Civil War lodge built of cedar to find not trophies but works by 30 contemporary artists living in the county, among them Jasper Johns, Richard Pousette-Dart and Stephen Greene.


Lessons Learned From Unscrolling Two Religions' Turbulent Pasts
There was great rejoicing in many academic circles last week over the release of sections of the Dead Sea Scrolls long held secret by a small band of scholars.
But there was also a widespread sense that while new revelations might be in store, the best of what the scrolls have to offer is already known.
"I think we pretty well know what is coming," said Dr.
James C. VanderKam, professor of Hebrew Scriptures at the University of Notre Dame.
"More examples of what we already have." And that means a more confident grasp of the origins of the Old Testament and the two great religions that sprung from it.
The new material is not expected to have near the seismic impact on scholarship made by the disclosures that followed the discovery in 1947 of the first scrolls in a cave on a cliff overlooking the Dead Sea, just south of Jericho.
Over the next nine years, bedouins and archeologists unearthed 800 leather and papyrus manuscripts in the nearby caves and ruins.
From the beginning, the work of translating and publishing the manuscripts was entrusted to seven scholars; over the years they and their intellectual heirs have released what they say is 80 percent of the material.
Last week, over the protests of the custodians, the Huntington Library in San Marino, Calif., where photographic copies of the scrolls are stored, began making the balance of the material available to the public.
The caution against high expectations expressed by Dr.
VanderKam and seconded by many other scholars interviewed is twofold.
For one thing the gist of much of the remaining material has already leaked out, through associates and students of the custodians.
Another reason for the caution is that scholars do not want to generate the high expectations that came with the initial finds three and four decades ago.
Although startling to the academic world, the discovery never lived up to its billing.
Early reports warned that the scrolls would undermine the authenticity of the Bible and rewrite the history of the early Christian church.
In reality, the research has tended to confirm the integrity of the Hebrew Scripture and the accepted history of Christianity.
Link With the Past
Still, the material already in the public domain continues to be regarded, in the words of scholar after scholar, as "the greatest manuscript discovery of modern times," one that has confirmed and enriched contemporary knowledge of Judaism and Christianity.
Scholars differ sharply on the details, but a few broad areas of consensus have emerged.
One of the most surprising discoveries was that, quite remarkably, the Scripture has not changed significantly in 2,000 years, although minor variations in words have been found and it has become clear that some sections were added later.
Every book of the Old Testament, with the exception of the Book of Esther, was included in the find, either complete, as with Isaiah, or in fragments.
Until the discovery, the earliest editions of these Hebrew Scriptures were from the Middle Ages.
From the point of view of the lay person sitting in church or synagogue, this meant that the Old Testament they were reading, whether in Hebrew or English translation, was true to the one in use in the first century.
For historians, many of the scrolls shed light on what religious life was like in early Palestine, around the time when the Second Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed, in 70 A.D., and numerous sects were vying for influence.
Most scholars believe that the majority of the Dead Sea Scrolls were written by one such sect, the Essenes, which flourished at Qumran for two centuries ending about 68 A.D. and held many of the beliefs later found in Christianity.
The documents include descriptions of their religious practices and beliefs, including the conviction that the arrival of a messiah was imminent.
Of equal importance are polemics in which the elders of the Essene sect defended it against the Pharisees, the dominant strain of Judasim, and against other sects.
Other documents tell of groups allied with the Essenes and their predecessors.
Since early Christianity shared with the Essenes an emphasis on messianism and other beliefs, and since the Pharisees, who moved many practices out of the temple and into the home and synagogue, were the precursors of rabbinic Judaism, the scrolls illuminate the connections and differences between the two faiths.
While the Essenes died out and Christianity took on a life of its own, rabbinic Judaism survived to become what we know as Judaism today.
"We used to think of Judaism as the mother and Christianity as the daughter religion," said Hershel Shanks, who as president of the Biblical Archeology Society waged a six-year battle to make the scrolls public.
"But now we see evidence that they are sibling religions. Both grew out of Second Temple Judaism, but emphasized different strands as if they were two children who had inherited different genetic material. Christianity emphasized the apocalyptic, the eschatological, the messianic. Judaism, on the other hand, emphasized the mitzvot -- the laws and the ethical commands of daily living."
Several scholars said it was overstating the case to describe Judaism and Christianity as siblings -- they held fast to the mother-daughter analogy -- but they agreed that the scrolls have helped demonstrate the incredible diversity that Judaism enjoyed during and immediately after the Second Temple period.
From a theological point of view, many scholars said, the scrolls mean more to Christians than to Jews.
Dr.
Eileen Schuller, an associate professor of religious studies at McMaster University in Ontario, who has published widely on the scrolls, said that Christians have long acknowledged their debt to Judaism but that the scrolls helped forge stronger links.
She cited, as an example, the Gospel of John, which had long been regarded by scholars as strongly influenced by Greek and Gnostic sources.
Among the Dead Sea documents, however, are texts that used language and metaphor similar to those found in John.
"It showed us the ties are ultimately to Judaism," she said.
Dr.
Lawrence Schiffman, professor of Hebrew and Judaic Studies at New York University, said the scrolls are "largely irrelevant" from the point of view of modern Jewish movements since they descend from rabbinic Judaism.
"Since the Qumran sect was opposed to the Pharisees, their writings aren't taken as authoritative for modern Jews," Dr.
Schiffman said.
But the scrolls are significant, he said, for "the civil religion" of Israel.
By establishing the existence of Jews in Palestine, he said, the scrolls represent a historical claim of Jewish roots.
The Dead Sea Scrolls have fascinated scholars for half of the 20th century.
As the veil of secrecy is lifted from the final portions, scholars are not expecting major revelations that will change their knowledge of two religions that have done so much to shape the world.
But this has not dampened their enthusiasm as they marvel at how words left in caves 2,000 years ago continue to speak to the world today.
The scholars who held back this legacy for so long have only served to heighten the drama.


Corrections
A report on Sept. 8 about the marriage of Margaret Miles Carpenter to Arthur Raymond Fantaci Jr. misidentified the bride's father.
He is Hendrik Barnard Van Rensselaer Jr. of St.
Thomas, V.I.


Autumn's Basic Black
One of autumn's early signs is the basic black suit.
It was once considered an investment because of its versatility.
It can be dressed down for day wear and dressed up for evening, with a jeweled pin and evening shoes.
It's perfect for the theater and parties.
What's new?
The personal choice of multiple skirt lengths and styles.
There are thigh-high pleated ones and trumpet-shaped ones that dip to ankle length.
Many younger women choose leggings instead of a skirt.
The black suit can be the backbone of a wardrobe and last 10 years.


Tech Notes; 98.6, With No Waiting
A medical equipment company in San Diego has introduced a home version of a thermometer that displays a person's temperature after being inserted in the ear for just one second.
Infrared thermometers of this sort have existed for about five years but have been used only in some hospitals and doctors' offices.
Priced at $100, Thermoscan Inc.'s Instant Thermometer is now available through the Sharper Image catalogue, and it will appear in stores after Jan. 1.
Known as a tympanic thermometer, the device measures infrared heat radiating from the eardrum.
Clinical studies show that the tympanic membrane and surrounding tissue are an accurate indicator of true body temperature, Thermoscan says.
This is because the eardrum shares blood supply with the hypothalamus, a portion of the brain that regulates body heat.


Headliners; Networking
On Career Day at Cambridge University in the 30's there must have been quite a queue at the K.G.B. booth.
Last week, a former British intelligence agent named John Cairncross admitted that he, too, had signed on to spy for the Soviet Union while at Cambridge.
Mr.
Cairncross thus confirmed reports that he was the unnamed "fifth man" in the famous espionage ring that included Kim Philby, Guy Burgess, Donald Maclean and Anthony Blunt, who were also recruited at Cambridge.
Philby defected in 1963 and Burgess and Maclean were exposed around then.
Years later, Blunt was unveiled as the fourth man.
Mr.
Cairncross, who is 78 years old and now lives in France, was first named as the spy last year in a book by a Soviet defector.
He denied it then, but in admitting it last week to The Mail on Sunday, said he had confessed to the British Government and had been granted immunity.
"I hope this will finally put an end to the 'fifth man' mystery," he said.


The Doctor Pays Off His Medical Bill
THE cars started to move through the green and white tent at 1:05 P.M.
There were 57 of them, roadsters, sedans, race cars, all classics.
It was a clear New England day, and 1,500 people watched and waved their bids.
It took nearly three hours to split up the collection.
The cars were worth a bundle in anybody's book, maybe $15 million in a good year.
But this has not been a good year, and when the last of the cars, a 1952 Mercedes factory racer, went on the block at 3:45, the tally came to only $4,066,893.50.


Cuttings; Trees Planted In the Autumn Get a Head Start
There's a melancholy edge to some fall days, when the sky is gray and rain is in the air.
But it's a good time to be out in the garden, digging up herbs to bring indoors, pulling up the old tomato plants and cleaning tools.


Bright and Crisp, Autumn Ushers In a Quickened Pace
THERE'S an internal shift that takes place in the fall, sort of like everything else in nature.
The birds are flocking south, their mating over for the time being. (Do they take a break from the kids in winter? Knit sweaters? Read books?)
The leaves turn brilliant colors, as their chlorophyll fades away and nutrients move into the roots, revealing the reds and yellows that have been there all along, like hidden parts of a personality.
If the days are bright and the nights cool, sugars manufacture anthocyanins that deepen the leaves to scarlet or purple.
We don't understand exactly what triggers this intricate fugue, but it's genetically programmed, and hormones are the conductors.


The Season Sets a Brisk Pace: Britain; East Comes West, in a Four Month Japan Festival
With its seven miles of corridors, the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum in London is one of Britain's most spectacular and most eccentric cultural institutions, a giant attic full of stuff, from medieval candlesticks and stained glass windows to Constable landscapes and Elizabethean snuffboxes.
But this fall, the V &amp; A, in the South Kensington area, is bringing its visitors something completely different: karaoke (booths with musical accompaniment for singers) s), models of Godzilla and other "Visions of Japan," an extraordinary exhibition of contemporary Japanese culture and life style.
The exhibit, which runs through Jan. 5, is one of the largest ever mounted inside the V &amp; A. At its heart is an imaginary reconstruction of contemporary Tokyo, a garish fantasy of bright lights, flashing vending machines and flags, bathed in the sounds and even the smells of the city.


After 3 Years, Lemon Law Is Proving Handy for Car Buyers
EARLY last year, Daniel Barry of Brick Township bought a new Isuzu Trooper from a Toms River automobile dealer.
Two months after he bought it, the Trooper would for no apparent reason occasionally fail to start.
Mr.
Barry returned the car to the dealer several times for repair, but the dealer's mechanic, unable to reproduce the problem, was never able to fix it.
Mr.
Barry filed a complaint under the state's Lemon Law, and within a month his case was heard and the manufacturer was ordered to accept the return of the vehicle and refund Mr.
Barry's money.


Heckscher Museum Submits Another Expansion Proposal
FOR 30 years, the Heckscher Museum of Art in Huntington has sought to expand to accommodate its eclectic and highly regarded 750-work collection.
Proposals have failed because of financial problems and community opposition.


Bucharest Is Calm After Protest Is Dispersed
The city was calm today after Romanian security forces moved into University Square at dawn, using tear gas to disperse the protesters and coal miners who had remained there after three days of rioting.
A 24-year-old student who was killed in rioting Wednesday night was buried today.
About 200 mourners hailed him as a national hero.


Florida State Is Much Too Mighty for Michigan
They call it the Sod Cemetery, a collection of gleefully confiscated natural and plastic real estate, souvenirs from college football kingdoms that have been tastefully laid to rest near a practice field in Tallahassee, the home of the Florida State Seminoles.
Next to transplanted memories of victories at places like South Bend, Lincoln, Columbus and Athens, there will have to be a special spot reserved for the fresh sod to arrive tonight under circumstances that a Seminole team has never known.


Review/Rock; B.A.D. II: The Beat Is All
Mick Jones, the leader of Big Audio Dynamite II, wouldn't mind being called trendy.
Since he left the Clash, the eminent English punk band, and formed Big Audio Dynamite in 1983, Mr.
Jones has been a barometer of dance-club culture.
He borrows current techniques and rhythms, from sound-system reggae to hip-hop sampling to house music.
B.A.D.
II was formed last year after Mr.
Jones dissolved the original lineup.
In the last few years, England has been swept by psychedelic dance parties called raves, featuring disk jockeys playing bass-heavy house music and reggae, along with live bands that top dance-music drumbeats with garage-rock and punk guitars.
On Wednesday night at the Sound Factory, Mr.
Jones was as self-consciously hip as ever.


In Mile-Square City, Buses Are Waging War for Commuters
EVERY weekday morning, as the sun rises over the Hudson River, a war is waged on the traffic-clogged streets of this mile-square city.
It's not a drug war or a gang war.
It's a bus war.
"I hate to use that term," said Lieut.
John Aiello, commander of the Police Department's traffic division.
"But that's pretty much what it seems like it's come to."
Hoboken residents who work in Manhattan don't have to race to catch their buses; one stops at each corner along Washington Street nearly every minute during the morning rush.


Miss Thrasher Is Wed in Rye
Carolyn Lee Thrasher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton F. Thrasher 2d of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Peter Drake Vehslage, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Drake Vehslage of Cedar Grove, N.J.
The Rev.
David L. Uhl performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Vehslage, 30 years old, is the sales manager of Computerland of Scarsdale, N.Y.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father is a regional manager for Computer Design Inc., a software manufacturer in Grand Rapids, Mich.
Mr.
Vehslage, 29, is the president of Precision Video, a production company in Bloomfield, N.J.
His mother, Pamela S. Vehslage, is a substitute teacher in the Glen Ridge, N.J., elementary schools.
His father is a manager at Bio Dynamics, a medical equipment manufacturer in East Millstone, N.J.


Bed and Breakfast
To the Editor: Your Practical Traveler comments on B &amp; B's (July 21)really hit home.
All of our B &amp; B accommodations in the United States, and comparable lodgings in Europe, have been enchanting, until a trip we took to the Finger Lakes.


Ali's Court Case
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson's piece on Muhammad Ali and Mike Tyson ("The Ali Connection to Tyson," The Times, Sept. 15) was excellent, but suggests that New York voluntarily relicensed Ali in 1970.
In fact, New York only issued the license because it was ordered to by a Federal court in a case brought on Ali's behalf by the N.A.A.C.P.
Legal Defense and Educational Fund.


'Standing Up to Ezra Pound'
To the Editor:
Ought not the open season on Ezra Pound be closed?
After 46 years, to continue shooting at a great poet and, subsequently, at his posthumous reputation is obscene.
Particularly is this so since the shots in Richard Gillman's essay ("Standing Up to Ezra Pound," Aug. 25) hit nowhere near the heart of the matter.


PARADES
Here is a sampling of parades in New York City in the fall.
The information was provided by the Community Assistance Unit in the Mayor's office.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
QUEENS HISPANIC DAY PARADE, 37th Avenue between 70th and 94th Streets, Jackson Heights, Queens. 1:30 P.M.
Oct. 5
RAGAMUFFIN PARADE, Third Avenue between Wakeman Place and Marine Avenue, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. 11 A.M.
Oct. 6
PULASKI DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue between 26th and 52d Streets, Manhattan. Noon. Oct. 13
BRONX COLUMBUS DAY PARADE, from White Plains Road and Morris Park Avenue to Williamsbridge Road and Pelham Parkway South, Morris Park, Bronx.
Noon.
HISPANIC COLUMBUS DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue between 44th and 72d Streets, Manhattan. 12:30 P.M.
Oct. 14
COLUMBUS DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue between 44th and 86th Streets, Manhattan. 11:30 A.M.
Oct. 31
VILLAGE HALLOWEEN PARADE, Avenue of the Americas between West Houston and 14th Street, Manhattan. 6 P.M.
Nov. 11
VETERANS DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue between 24th and 39th Streets, Manhattan. 9 A.M.
Nov. 28
MACY'S 65th ANNUAL THANKSGIVING DAY PARADE, Manhattan.
Starts at 77th Street and Central Park West, moves south to Columbus Circle, turns onto Broadway and continues south to 34th Street. 9 A.M. to noon.
Float and balloon preparations may be observed on Nov. 27, from 8 P.M. to midnight, at 77th and 81st Streets between Central Park West and Columbus Avenue.


CLIO HAS A PROBLEM
While on the topic of the narrative tradition, a number of points need to be made.
First, not all history is grand opera.
Vitally important subjects ranging from the long-term, incremental development of agriculture or trade to the belief systems of peasants are not necessarily best presented in narrative form.
Second, neither footnotes nor historiographical discussions are simply hollow rituals calculated to constrain Schama's fertile imagination.
Both enable the reader to judge the fairness, accuracy and reliability of the author.
Third, certainly there are mounds of bad and trivial historical articles.
But there are often nuggets of gold amid the pyrite.
Without lots of minute research, the grand syntheses that Schama cherishes would be impossible.
DEREK S. LINTON Associate Professor of History, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
Geneva, N.Y.


U.S. Maneuvering Gingerly After P.L.O.'s Nod on Talks
Bush Administration officials said today that they were extremely pleased by the Palestine Liberation Organization's apparent endorsement of the American-sponsored peace conference, but that the hard part would now begin: juggling the P.L.O.'s desire to get increasingly involved and the Israeli Government's insistence that the organization remain out of sight.
The Palestine National Council, which acts as the P.L.O.'s parliament-in-exile, ended a week of talks in Algiers on Friday by issuing a statement outlining the terms under which the P.L.O. would be willing to take part in the peace conference, which American officials still hope to convene somewhere in Europe by the end of October.


CAMPUS LIFE: Stanford; Freshmen Learn The Many Faces Of Diversity
The latest buzz word for diversity, "multicultural community," was heard over and over again at Stanford University during its orientation for new students last week.
The phrase not only reflects a shift in the terminology used by the Stanford administration but also incorporates the administration's efforts to extend multiculturalism to include all students.


10 Members of Violent Vietnamese Gang Indicted
Ten members of a violent Vietnamese gang, including the man said to be its leader, were indicted last week on Federal racketeering charges linking them to robbery, murder and a foiled bombing of a Chinatown restaurant.
Gangs have been a fixture in Chinatown for generations, but the violence of this 70-member gang, called "Born to Kill," created ripples of fear in Asian neighborhoods around the metropolitan area.
Its members, mostly in their late teens and early 20's, are known for terrorizing restaurant owners, storekeepers and other merchants.


A PRICE FOR SECURITY
Your author frames Israel's dilemma in terms of how its priorities affect its Jewish population.
But the real "price for security" is paid by the Palestinians who are still being shot, arrested without charge, illegally deported and denied a homeland.
Nothing sheds light on the plight of the Palestinians more starkly than a comment at the end of the article offered by the director of Hadassah Hospital: "Our slogan is, and should be: Never again. Not to us." The only morally defensible slogan based on the Holocaust should be "Never again. Not to
anyone
." ALFIE KOHN
Cambridge, Mass.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Diary last Sunday about the Resolution Trust Company misidentified the source of a new $191 billion estimate of the cost of bailing out the savings and loans associations.
It was made by the Congressional Budget Office, not the General Accounting Office.


Q and A
For Wheelchair Travelers
Q.
Are there good sources of information on wheelchair accessibility to tourist sites in the United States -- especially national parks -- for someone who does not wants to travel as part of a group? -- Anne Rosenthal, Brooklyn


How Does Seinfeld Define Comedy? Reluctantly
Jerry Seinfeld was free-associating in his serene, off-center way about his decidedly off-center sitcom, the one that NBC has cleverly titled "Seinfeld." "Some of the writers who want to work on the show, they have a hard time getting a grip on what funny is," he was saying in his calm cadences.
"They give us all these sitcom ideas. I tell them we don't want sitcom ideas. I tell them what we don't want to do, but it's hard to explain what we do want."
He was pacing his improbably clean apartment on Central Park West in Manhattan on a recent afternoon, trying once again for a precise calibration of the idiosyncrasies of human experience, just as he has done on thousands of comedy stages for the last 15 years.
"But then," Mr.
Seinfeld said, "we'll come up with an idea about -- well, what if you heard that Robert Stack lived in the building across the street -- and you set out trying to find out if that were true? Or then we'll have another odd idea about going out on a date with a Vietnamese girl who owns a pig. Now that, that's a
great
idea."


Cuomo on Finance? Don't Ask
ADDRESSING
the Association for a Better New York last week, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo spoke softly and carried a big shtick.
He delivered a Jackie Mason-style monologue, outlining the mandate of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, which was created during New York City's 1975 fiscal crisis to borrow on the city's behalf; the role of its chairman, Felix G. Rohatyn, and the fact that the M.A.C., supported by private bond rating analysts, among them Hyman Grossman of Standard &amp; Poor's, has suggested that the city pare expenses before the M.A.C. releases money generated by refinancing its bonds.
Here is an excerpt:


Saddam Hussein's Neighbors Grow Bolder, Tentatively
WHAT is to be done about Saddam Hussein?
The question, like the man himself, has a disconcerting way of reimposing itself on Washington, the capitals of Europe, and especially the Middle East.
For despite what was once considered -- erroneously, it now seems -- the virtual obliteration of Iraq's offensive military capability and all political credibility, Saddam Hussein hangs on.
Last week, with the failure of Mr.
Hussein's effort to prevent United Nations inspectors from leaving with sensitive Iraqi nuclear documents, another display of brinkmanship ended with yet another humiliating retreat, but not before it prompted the first significant deployment of American arms to Saudi Arabia since the end of the Persian Gulf war.


TRANSACTIONS
Olympics
USOC -- Named William J. Hybl interim president. Football  National Football League


A Calorie Burner's Primer On Fat Control
THERE are three times a year when you want a gym in your life.
The first is on Jan. 2, when you are bursting with New Year's resolutions and indigestion.
The second is in early spring when bikinis go on sale and you know that buying one is out of the question, since you can't possibly afford the liposuction.
The third is fall, just as that back-to-school reflex kicks in and you have to buy something new or die.
But shopping means confronting your size, not to mention the dressing room's fluorescent lights.
Because despite your best efforts this summer to live on endive, arugula and air, you kept barbecuing burgers and burying your face in Haagen-Dazs.


POSTINGS: S. Klein Renovation; Something New on the Square
S.
Klein -- "On the Square" -- was about bargains.
The developers who have renovated the former Klein's department store annex on Union Square East, between 15th and 16th Streets, believe bargains can still be found there.
"Our feeling was that Park Avenue South was overpriced," said Edmund Nassim, one of the developers.
"This is just around the corner from Park Avenue South but we felt Union Square was stronger because of the park views."


Batting a Thousand
JOHN KIM IS FEELING OPTIMISTIC.
AS THE president of the 20-year-old Beautee Sense (the maladroit spelling allows him enough characters for an 800 number), a Manhattan-based importer of false eyelashes, he's seen some hard times over the past two decades.
The 80's weren't kind to the genre, as Liza and Diana -- those paragons of perky, pointy lashdom -- saw the waning of their icon status and Tammy Faye lost her empire.
"In the early 70's, it was, how you say?" -- Kim hesitates for the right word -- "fabulous,
fantastic
.
Lots of business.
And then it was not so good.
But now we are maybe going to be all right again." Maybe it's because Liza's at Radio City, or because the photographer Steven Meisel is remaking the world in his own glam-queen image. Whatever. False eyelashes are suddenly enjoying a felicitous, albeit rather quiet, comeback.
"Nineteen years ago, I was putting eyelashes on people all day long," says Ilana Harkavi, president of Il-Makiage, the Manhattan boutique that's makeup mecca to models, makeup artists and those bold-faced names in the gossip columns.
"Then it stopped cold. Now, it's an everyday thing again. I get all kinds: teen-agers, girls in their 20's,
ladies
.
One designer came in the other day.
Very sexy, very animalistic.
She wanted to look like Shana, you know, the old Guess jeans girl.
So I gave her the lashes and she was thrilled. 'Perfect!' she told me. 'Just right for the Hamptons.' "


Comics Characters Beloved by Brussels
LIKE a modern totem, the faces of a boy and his dog smile genially on the city of Brussels from atop the Editions du Lombard office building near the Gare du Midi, the central train station.
The pair appears time and again throughout the city in such disparate locations as a shop in the historic Grand' Place, on a mural at the Stockel metro station and in a downtown museum.
One has arrived in the Land of Tintin.
The characters are the creations of Herge, the pen name of the Belgian cartoonist Georges Remi ("Herge" is an inversion of the initials G.R. written as they are pronounced in French).
Tintin, a peripatetic boy journalist, and Milou, his canine companion, first set out for adventure in 1929 on a trip to the Soviet Union.
Eventually, they would circle the globe, turning up in Tibet, the Congo and the American West, among other places, and even making a visit to the moon more than 15 years before Armstrong and Aldrin.
The 24 Tintin comic books by Herge are currently published in more than 40 languages and have become familiar to three generations of readers.


Yale Center Helps Families Learn to Live With AIDS
SITTING next to the blue light of her television screen, Darlene S., a 35-year-old New Haven resident watched her 4-year-old son play with a set of plastic horseshoes on the living room floor as she talked about their future.
"I just pray that I make it until he is a teen-ager," she said about the boy.
"I'd like to die knowing that he can take care of himself."
Five years ago, when Darlene was six weeks pregnant, she learned that she had contracted the HIV virus, which causes AIDS, from a sex partner who eventually died of the disease.
Her pregnancy posed a heart-wrenching dilemma, she said.
Studies have shown that about 30 percent of babies born to HIV-positive mothers end up infected themselves.


A Plague of Wasps and Stings Hits the Northeast
They look like bees, love hot dogs and soda, can sting more than once and have swarmed with feisty and unwelcome abandon into the lives and picnics of millions of East Coast residents as summer has turned to fall.
The forces of nature have joined the conspiracy: a mild winter, followed by a hot dry summer, which ended with a hurricane, dovetailed this year to produce what scientists and bug watchers say is a bumper crop of yellow-jacket wasps.


In Tie on Thomas, Room to Maneuver
The Senate Judiciary Committee's deadlocked vote on Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination says less about its prospects on the Senate floor next week than about deep reservations among some lawmakers over his fitness to serve as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.
Despite the committee's 7-to-7 vote on Friday over whether to recommend his confirmation, Judge Thomas's fate does not appear in doubt because his lifetime appointment hinges only on his hanging on to a bare majority of 51 votes.
And unlike other Presidential appointees who squeak by in committee or in the full Senate and then lose influence in the Administration, Judge Thomas will not see his ultimate authority diminished once he is seated.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Summit
THE name Summit for this Union County city seems appropriate in more ways than one.
It is atop the 450-foot-high Second Watchung Mountain, many of the houses on its winding, tree-lined streets sell for more than $1 million and its income level is among the state's highest.
The area was part of the Elizabethtown Purchase, a half-million-acre tract the English bought from the Leni Lenape Indians in 1664.


Hillary Miller Wed
Hillary Kim Miller, a law student at Fordham University, was married last evening to Rodger Russell Krouse, a vice president of Shearson Lehman in New York, by Rabbi Norman Kahan at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
A graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, as is her husband, Mrs.
Krouse, 25 years old, is the daughter of Gail Miller of Roslyn, L.I., and the late Steven Miller.
Mr.
Krouse, 29, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Allan Krouse of Penn Valley, Pa.


Health Clubs in Manhattan To Match Almost Every Goal
Interested in sweating or socializing?
There's a health club in Manhattan for you.
Here is a selective sampling, ranging from the state-of-the-art variety to the starter gym:
MANHATTAN PLAZA, 482 West 43d Street.
Open Mondays through Fridays, 6:45 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 8:30 A.M. to 7 P.M.
A one-year membership fee is $750 to $975.
Swimming, aerobics, weight-lifting, tennis and racquetball.
Information: (212) 563-7001.
Popular and crowded, the place is full of actors in awesome shape.
If you're not, wear your sweats and hope that no one will notice.
But don't count on it.
NEW YORK HEALTH AND RACQUET CLUB.
Six locations: 39 Whitehall Street, (212) 269-9800; 24 East 13th Street, (212) 924-4600; 110 West 56th Street (212) 541-7200; 132 East 45th Street, (212) 986-3100; 20 East 50th Street, (212) 593-1500; 1433 York Avenue, at 76th Street, (212) 737-6666.
One-time initiation fee of $500.
One-year memberships range from $445 to $845.
Aerobics classes, swimming, weight-lifting, tennis courts, indoor golf.
Hours vary by club; weekdays, generally 6 A.M. to 10 P.M.; weekends, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., with some clubs open until 9.
Exercise snobs call it a good starter gym, since much of the equipment is outdated and the atmosphere is more social than sweaty.
The up side is the number of locations.
The down side is excessive crowding.
PRINTING HOUSE FITNESS AND RACQUET CLUB, 421 Hudson Street, Greenwich Village.
Open Mondays through Fridays, 6:30 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.
A one-year membership ranges from $795 for unlimited aerobic dance to $1,295 for a full fitness program.
Information: (212) 243-7600.
Tres chic, especially among the Village literary crowd.
And there are people who actually
like
the reggaecize class.
VERTICAL FITNESS AND RACQUET CLUB.
Four locations.
The original and still largest is the Sutton Place club, 330 East 61st Street, (212) 355-5100.
Open Mondays through Fridays, 6 A.M. to 11 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 9 A.M to 9 P.M.
One-year memberships for tennis, squash and racquetball range from $1,000 to $4,000.
Other locations: Penta Hotel, 139 West 32d Street, (212) 465-1750; Bank of America Plaza, 43d Street between Madison and Vanderbilt Avenues, (212) 983-5320, and Worldwide Plaza, 750 West 50th Street, (212) 265-9400.
Open Mondays through Fridays, 6 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Membership fees begin at $1,000 at all clubs.
It's a little slick, but the equipment is state-of-the-art.
And the television selections in the machine room are hilarious: simultaneous viewings of MTV and "Crossfire." Pat Buchanan sounds so much better accompanied by Guns 'n' Roses.
WORLD GYM, 404 Lafayette Street.
Mondays through Fridays, 6 A.M. to 11 P.M.; Saturdays, 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Sundays, 9 A.M. to 8 P.M.
A one-year membership is $600; a six-month membership is $450.
Day memberships are available for $15.
Aerobics, weight-lifting, tanning beds, treadmills.
Information: (212) 260-2534.
Everyone from L.L.
Cool J to Ivan Boesky has worked out here, and members take their exercise seriously.
The "in" gym of the moment.


SOVIETS HAIL U.S ARMS PLAN AND SIGNAL THEIR OWN CUTS; BRITAIN AND FRANCE JOIN IN
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev declared today that President Bush's announcement of a large-scale cut in American tactical nuclear weapons was "positive, very positive," and Kremlin officials indicated that the Soviet Union would agree to Mr.
Bush's request that it do the same.
Mr.
Gorbachev, speaking in a brief television interview, said the initiative raised many questions and would require further study and discussion.
But he left no doubt that he was pleased by an American action that would enable the Soviet Union to scale down its own arsenal, one that is increasingly problematic and unaffordable.
Shares the Credit
The Soviet President referred to Mr.
Bush's move as a "major step," as a "large-scale initiative," "a new major breakthrough" and a "great event." He proudly declared it a product of the "new thinking" that he introduced into Soviet foreign policy when he came to power six years ago, which eventually led to the lifting of Communist dictatorships in Eastern Europe and finally in the Soviet Union.  [ Transcript of Mr.
Gorbachev's remarks, page 12. ]


Tara A. Wyman, Teacher, to Wed
Mrs.
Richard I. Roberts of New Canaan, Conn., and William W. Wyman of New York have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Tara Anne Wyman and Thomas J. Quigley Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Quigley of Potomac, Md.
Ms.
Wyman, 26 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She teaches science at the Newtown (Pa.) Friends School.
Her father is a managing partner of Oliver, Wyman &amp; Company, management consultants in New York.
Her stepfather is the president and chief executive of Liberty Asset Management in Westport, Conn.


Mutual Funds; Opportunity Knocks in Europe
The stock market picked up momentum in the third quarter, as the average stock fund gained 6.1 percent through Thursday.
Small stocks kept chugging along, rising 10.2 percent as a group, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
Among specialty funds, the health-and-biotechnology group was the leader, rising 17.8 percent, with financial services funds (up 10.6 percent) and science-and-technology funds (up 9.6 percent) also performing well.


A Deadlocked Ryder Is Down to 12 vs. 12
After being blitzed to the brink of a rout in this morning's matches, Europe roared back in the afternoon against a floundering United States team to even the Ryder Cup and take the momentum into Sunday's climactic singles competition.
With the score 8-8, the 29th version of the biennial matches will come down to whether the United States can win more of the 12 singles matches over 18 holes than the Europeans.


Light Fare for Shoppers and Moviegoers
FOR film buffs, Rue de Croissant could be a dandy refueling station.
Its location, directly across the street from the Trans-Lux Plaza theater, makes it handy for a pre- or post-movie snack or light supper.
It's an equally convenient lunch stop for anyone on a shopping spree along Greenwich Avenue.
Rue de Croissant is not fancy, but its quiet casualness has a certain charm.
As you enter the modest storefront, you pass a display case of cakes, cookies and breads and a delicatessen section with the day's salads.
To the right of the entrance and in the rear dining area are tables and black bentwood chairs with caned seats.
Cream-colored walls, pressed-tin ceilings and ceramic- tiled floor provide a neutral monochrome look to the single room.


November Bridal for Thayer Tolles
Mr. and Mrs.
Bryant F. Tolles, Jr., of Westover Hills, Del., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Thayer Coolidge Tolles, to Paul J. Mickel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Mickel, of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Tolles, 26 years old, is a research assistant at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and a doctoral candidate in art history at the City University of New York.
She graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Delaware, where her father is a history professor and a director of the Museum Studies Program.
Her mother, Carolyn Tolles, is the director of corporate and foundation support at Haverford College.


Miss Esposito Weds
Elizabeth Esposito, an account supervisor at the medical advertising agency of Lally, McFarland &amp; Pantello, and David Thornton Ellis, a vice president of J. P. Morgan Securities, both in New York, were married last evening.
The Rev.
Carter Via officiated at the Reformed Church in Bronxville, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ellis, 29 years old, graduated from Smith College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Peter Esposito of Ardsley, N.Y.
Mr.
Ellis, 30, is a cum laude graduate of Amherst College and the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Thornton Ellis of Hillsborough, Calif.


OFFBEAT
Here is a sampling of offbeat fall events in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
VIEW A VIKING SHIP, Piers 16 and 17, South Street Seaport, Manhattan.
A replica of a Viking ship sailed by Leif Ericsson nearly 1,000 years ago will be docked at the seaport through Wednesday.
Part of "Finland Revisited -- 1,000 Years of Discovery," a series of events commemorating Ericsson's voyage to North America.
Visitors can meet the captain of the Viking ship, Ragnar Thorseth, and the crew who completed the trans-Atlantic voyage from Norway.
Free.
Daily, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 669-9430.
TASTING TOUR IN MANHATTAN WINERY, Schapiro House of Kosher and Sacramental Wines, 126 Rivington Street, Manhattan.
Founded in 1899 to supply the Jewish community of the Lower East Side with kosher wines, the winery is the only one in the city still producing wines.
Sundays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 674-4404.
A FEAST OF WILD HERBS, MUSHROOMS, FRUITS AND NUTS, Inwood Park, Manhattan.
Tourgoers will discover wild edibles on a walk through the park with Steve Brill, a naturalist.
Participants will meet today at 11:45 A.M. at the A train station at Dyckman Street and Broadway; they should take bags for gathering mushrooms and berries, a container of water and lunch.
Mr.
Each tour lasts four hours, rain or shine.
Fee: $10 ($5 for students and the elderly).
Reservations required: (718) 291-6825.
HIGH VISTAS AND HONORS, Hall of Fame for Great Americans, Bronx Community College, University Avenue and West 181st Street, the Bronx.
Established as a pantheon for historically significant Americans, this Greco-Roman complex houses the bronze busts of 97 distinguished men and women, including Alexander Graham Bell, John James Audubon, the astronomer Maria Mitchell, Booker T. Washington, Edgar Allan Poe, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Walt Whitman and others.
The hall, on New York City's highest natural summit, offers sweeping views across the Harlem and Hudson Rivers to the New Jersey Palisades, the Cloisters and Fort Tryon Park.
Open daily, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 220-6003.
Tomorrow
VINTAGE CIRCUS MEMORABILIA, Paine Webber Art Gallery, Avenue of the Americas between 51st and 52d Street, Manhattan.
"On With The Show! Circus and Theater Posters From the Collection of the New-York Historical Society," a display of more than 100 turn-of-the-century circus and theater posters.
Through Dec. 6.
Open Mondays through Fridays, 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 873-3400.
Oct. 4
TIBETAN DOLL-MAKING, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street, Manhattan.
In the museum's Hall of Birds of the World, four Tibetan monks from the Drepung Loseling monastery in India will demonstrate the art of Tibetan doll-making, using clay, paint, applique and fabric. 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
The demonstrations continue daily through Nov. 8.
Museum admission: $5 ($2.50 for children).
Information: (212) 769-5000.
Oct. 5
WINDMILL DAY, Alley Pond Environmental Center, 228-06 Northern Boulevard, Douglaston, Queens.
After an arsonist destroyed the historic 19th-century Douglaston Estate Windmill in 1988, the Alley Pond Environmental Center decided to reconstruct it.
Visitors may tour the rebuilt, water-pumping windmill and see how much water is pumped with each turn of the vanes and learn about groundwater testing and alternative energy potentials.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Admission: $2 for adults, $1 for children.
Information: (718) 229-4000.
BREAKFAST WITH THE BEASTS, Staten Island Zoo, 614 Broadway, West Brighton, S.I.
Visitors can breakfast with the zoo's hungry charges as zookeepers serve meals to the animals.
Humans get a continental breakfast; the meal ends when the zoo opens to the public. 8 A.M. to 10 A.M.
Admission: $7.
No children under 7 years old.
Registration required.
Information: (718) 442-3174.
Oct. 6
UNUSUAL ARTISTS' STUDIOS, Manhattan.
A visit with artists who have created workplaces in such unlikely locations as a stable, a storefront and a turn-of-the-century skyscraper.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $17.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
Oct. 11
CAMPING IN THE URBAN OUTBACK, Floyd Bennett Field, Ecology Village, Building 70, Gateway National Recreation Area, Flatlands, Brooklyn.
For rugged urbanites: a nighttime walk on the trails and runways at Floyd Bennett Field, led by National Park Service Rangers, followed by a night of old-fashioned camping at the site; the next day, the Jamaica Bay area will be explored.
Tents will be provided, or participants may take their own; they should also take a sleeping bag and a ghost story. 7 P.M.
Free.
Reservations required.
Information: (718) 338-3799.
Oct. 12
TREASURE HUNT, a flat 35-mile bicycle tour through New York City.
Sponsored by the Five Borough Bike Club, the hunt will be led by "Christopher Columbo," a mythical descendant of the explorer.
Riders will use maps and clues to lead them to the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria.
Cyclists should meet at 9 A.M. at Columbus Circle.
Participants are encouraged to take helmets and water.
Free.
Information: (212) 932-2300, extension 243.
Oct. 13
ALL NITE SOUL, St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue and 54th Street, Manhattan.
A 12-hour jam session featuring Billy Taylor, Jane Jarvis, Yolande Bavan, the Harlem Blues and Jazz Band, and Frank Foster. 5 P.M. to 5 A.M.
Donation: $10.
Information: (212) 935-2200.
Oct. 18
MORNING IN FULTON FISH MARKET, Manhattan.
An early-morning walk and talk with those who work in the market, sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 5:45 to 8 A.M.
Admission: $15.
Reservations required.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
LANDING OF KWAKIUTL INDIANS OF BRITISH COLUMBIA, 79th Street Boat Basin in Riverside Park, at the Hudson River, Manhattan.
As part of the exhibition "Chiefly Feasts: The Enduring Kwakiutl Potlatch," at the American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street, the Indians will arrive by boat at the boat basin at 10 A.M. and then travel to the museum for a flamboyant potlatch, or lavish feast celebrated by the tribe, which will feature musical performances and dance at 11:30 A.M.
The exhibition continues through Feb. 23 in the hall of the Northwest Coast Indians.
Museum admission: $5 ($2.50 for children).
Information: (212) 769-5800.


S. E. Evers Wed To Miss Russell
Tracy Neil Russell, a daughter of Richard L. Russell and Joan H. Russell of New York, was married yesterday to Stewart Elam Evers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Bernard Evers Jr. of Telluride, Colo., and Nashville.
The Rev.
Thomas D. Bowers, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Evers, 32 years old, is the southern regional sales manager for New Science Associates, a market research company in Atlanta.
She graduated from the Nightingale-Bamford School in New York and the University of Colorado.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Baer Marks &amp; Upham, and her mother is the director of development at the International Center for the Disabled, both in New York.


Wall Street; Free Trade for Mutual Funds?
The winds of globalization have swept away many of the barriers that corporations and brokerage houses once faced when they tried to trade securities or raise capital beyond their home market.
From London to Tokyo, from Toronto to Thailand, markets have opened their doors -- grudgingly, perhaps, but steadily -- to foreign money and foreign muscle.
Foreign companies sell bonds and stock in the United States, and American firms compete for underwriting business abroad.
Foreign currency trading follows the sun, influenced more by time zones than by national borders.
Americans open bank accounts denominated in German marks; Asians invest in United States Treasury bills.


Ann C. Greiner, Negotiator, Wed
Ann Claire Greiner, a negotiator for the New York State Nurses Association, was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephen Robert Sleigh, the deputy director of the Center for Labor-Management Policy Studies at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York.
The Rev.
David Toolin officiated at St.
Theresa's Roman Catholic Church in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Ms.
Greiner, 31 years old, graduated from Hobart and William Smith Colleges in Geneva, N.Y., and has a master's degree in city planning from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Ann and James H. Greiner of Millwood, N.Y.
Her father is a physicist and the manager of the research division of I.B.M. in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


Telltale Clues Found by the U.N. Inspectors in Iraq
United Nations inspectors and American intelligence agencies got clear indications that Iraq was trying to hide the plans behind its ambitious nuclear weapons program when inspectors discovered that Iraqi nuclear sites suspiciously lacked paper records and that the Iraqi scientists working there had a high level of theoretical knowledge about bomb-making.
The discoveries led to the raids this week on two document-storage centers by special inspection teams that included American and British scientists with practical experience in designing nuclear weapons.
The raids touched off the Security Council's most serious clash with Baghdad to date in its campaign to eliminate President Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction, according to involved officials.


Text Book Controversy
California's new textbooks seek to portray the diversity of American society while emphasizing Western civilization.
To some, the books smack of "political correctness." To others, they are insensitive to minorities.
Magazine, section 8.


A Lifelong Outsider Looks At Outsiders in America
In 1946-47, Henri Cartier-Bresson, already respected for the innovative work he began in 1931 with the Leica, spent over a year in America to complete a "posthumous" show for the Museum of Modern Art.
The report that he had been killed in the war was greatly exaggerated; in fact he had been captured by the Germans in 1940 and escaped three times, finally reaching France on the third try.
He continued to photograph in the United States off and on for three decades, but not until the James Danziger Gallery put up "Henri Cartier-Bresson: American Photographs" this month (through Oct. 19) had the American work been exhibited on its own.
Many of Cartier-Bresson's best American pictures were taken during that first postwar trip, and he planned to make a book of them, but the project fell through.
Although he made brilliant pictures here, as elsewhere, America was probably not the scene of most of his greatest triumphs.
There was something here that he missed or that his audacious intuition did not always respond to; if you see too much of the American work, some of it begins to look slack.
Fortunately, the 29 pictures at Danziger include enough prime examples to make up for a lapse or two.


Washington Memo; Win or Lose, Democrats Frustrated by Bush Veto
Congress is mounting three serious challenges to President Bush's streak of 22 successful vetoes, contesting him over unemployment benefits, civil rights and abortion counseling.
But however those bills are settled, the results will not threaten the powerful White House strategy of saying no to Congressional Democrats first and negotiating later, if at all.
It is a strategy that breeds and thrives on partisanship in Congress, and one that often leads to no legislation at all.
But at a time when there are few great problems that both Mr.
Bush and the Democrats are committed to solving, that seems a small loss, one high-level Administration official said Friday.
Congressional leaders see it differently, saying the lack of give and take results in domestic drift.


The Man Behind the Asterisk: Another Side of Maris
A recently published book, "Roger Maris*, A Title to Fame," (Prairie House, 1991) by Harvey Rosenfeld is not simply the best, fully documented brief in behalf of installing Roger Maris forthwith into the baseball Hall of Fame.
It is also a gripping, sensitive, yet angry story that defies the reader to put it down.
Moreover, the pairing of the book's author and the book's subject seems to make up a publishing event that challenges any press agent.


The Season Sets a Brisk Pace: Belgium; Portugal is the centerpiece in Brussels and beyond
As it has since 1969, the biennial Europalia will dominate the cultural scene in Belgium this fall.
This European Harvest Festival celebrates the artistic achievements of a different country every other year.
This year it is Portugal's turn and, if the past is any guide, the 20 exhibitions, 100 concerts and other events should attract an audience of well over 1.5 million.
The centerpiece exhibition, "Triumph of the Baroque," has just opened at the Palais des Beaux-Arts (10 Rue Royale; 507 8480) and will continue until Dec. 29.
Eighteenth-century sculpture, paintings and silverware exemplify the pomp, sacred and profane, typical of the Baroque, culminating in a magnificent silver carriage built to carry the Portuguese ambassador through the streets of Rome to the Vatican.


Mary Lambert Wed to Jerome Gary
Mary Martha Lambert, a film director, and Jerome DuVivier Gary, a film producer and director, were married yesterday in Helena, Ark.
The Right Rev.
John Maury Allin, the 23d Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church in the United States and an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
John's Church.
Ms.
Lambert, 39 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jordan Bennett Lambert Jr. of Helena.
A graduate of the Rhode Island School of Design, she directed the films "Siesta," "Pet Sematary" and "Grand Isle." Her father is the president of the Lambert Corporation, a farming and real-estate company in Helena.
Mr.
Gary, 43, produced and directed "Pumping Iron" and "Stripper." He graduated from Yale University.
He is the son of Mrs.
Marquette de Bary of New York and Southampton, L.I., and of David DuVivier of Princeton, N.J.
His mother, Patricia de Bary, is a board member of the Central Park Conservancy and the New York Botanical Garden.
His father, who is retired, is a lawyer who headed the New York Legal Aid Society and was a partner in Coudert Brothers in New York.
The bridegroom's stepfather, the late Theodore S. Gary, was the vice chairman of General Telephone and Electronics.


Coins
The Mexican Revolution in 1910 began when the Mexican President, Porfirio Diaz, had himself re-elected after promising to step down.
That act began a long series of battles and feuds, assassinations and swings of power that was more a civil war than a revolution.
Generals like Emiliano Zapata and Venustiano Carranza, and bandit-generals like Pancho Villa, formed armies and, strangely enough, mints.
Some of the coins from that time will be auctioned by Pontero &amp; Associates on Oct. 9 in Beverly Hills, Calif.
President Diaz was overthrown and exiled to Paris.
His successor, Francisco Madero, was imprisoned and murdered.
The Government was taken over by Victoriano Huerta, the general who overthrew Madero and may have ordered his murder.


Miss Walsh Weds
Alexandra Barnard Walsh, a professional cook, and Justin Robert Couillard, the northeast sales manager of H. O. Water-skis, both in North Salem, N.Y., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Jack Bishop officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Couillard, 23 years old, graduated from Peter Kump's New York Cooking School.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
William E. Roschen Jr. of North Salem and Richard S. Walsh of Greenwich.
Mr.
Couillard, 33, graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce R. Couillard of Bangor, Pa.


Janet M. Appel, A Teacher, Wed
Janet Marie Appel, a daughter of Thomas F. Appel of Old Westbury, L.I., and the late Marie Drennan Appel, was married yesterday to Michael Frank Puntillo, the son of Michael S. and Helen Puntillo of Sands Point, L.I.
The Rev.
John A. Adams officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Roslyn, L.I.
Mrs.
Puntillo, 29 years old, graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in education from Long Island University.
She teaches second grade at the Barnard School in New York.
Her father is a commercial real-estate broker on Long Island.
Her stepmother, Maureen Appel, is the head of admissions at the School of the Holy Child in Old Westbury.


New &amp; Noteworthy
NEMESIS, by Rosamond Smith. (Onyx, $5.50.) After a composer-in-residence at a Connecticut school rapes a young male student, revenge comes in the form of a poisoned box of chocolates.
Last year our reviewer, Teresa Carpenter, said the novel, written pseudonymously by Joyce Carol Oates, "calls to mind a David Lynch film, a work full of grotesqueries and intrigue appealing irresistibly to the curiosity though not necessarily to the emotions."
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) Whether scuba diving off the Bahamas, listening to icebergs or holding forth on the history of the potato chip, the evolution of the kiss or how perfumes are made, Diane Ackerman invites readers to celebrate the portals through which we experience the world.
"To borrow a phrase from Allen Ginsberg, she is a 'great experiencer,' and she is eager to share her experiences with us," Anatole Broyard said here last year.
"Her book is rather like an ecology of the body. It fairly buzzes with information."


INSIDE
A Christian Science Furor
The church has been torn by a dispute over an obscure 44-year-old book about its founder.
At stake is a $90 million bequest.
Page A11.
Haunted by a Kidnapping
A man who apparently abducted a 25-year-old Alabama woman on Sept. 11 has a voice chillingly familiar to several people.
But who is he?
Page A10.
CBS Plays Hide the Baseball
After paying $1.06 billion for the rights to Major League Baseball, CBS is trying to protect its fall lineup from the coming playoff games.
Page D1.
U.S.
Golfers Take Back Cup
The Ryder Cup competition went down to the final putt, which Bernhard Langer of the European team missed.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Syncor International reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Nonsense Clouds Affirmative Action Debate; Duty of the Alumni
To the Editor:
I must dissent strongly from your views on the Leonard Jeffries matter at my alma mater, City College, in "Don't Punish City College" (editorial, Sept. 19).
I read most carefully the text of the speech by Professor Jeffries.
If a man with his distorted views -- anti-white, anti-Semitic and filled with conspiracies in every corner -- can be the head of a department at City College, then the college has truly lost its way.
I believe it is the duty of the alumni to insist on a rapid review of his status.


Taylor Injures Left Thumb
Lawrence Taylor suffered a torn ligament in his left thumb today in the fourth quarter of the Giants' 21-16 loss to the Dallas Cowboys.
But the Giants' outside linebacker was expected to play next Sunday against the Phoenix Cardinals.
Taylor was hurt when he assisted on a tackle of Tommie Agee after the Cowboys' running back caught a pass for a 6-yard gain.
Taylor walked off the field.
Later, he left the bench and went inside for X-rays, which showed no broken bones.


To Our Readers
Starting today, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on weekdays is increased to 50 cents in New York City, within 75 miles of the city, and on all of Long Island.
The change is prompted by increasing costs.
The Sunday price is not changing, nor is the weekday price outside the 75-mile area.


New Products Due From Sun and Apple
In a host of product introductions this week, Sun Microsystems Inc. will introduce powerful new computers, Apple Computer Inc. will announce sophisticated new printers and two companies will begin to challenge the Intel Corporation's dominance of the microprocessor business.
In addition to important computer products that will be introduced this week, details of the alliance between Apple and the International Business Machines Corporation are expected to be released.
The flurry of announements reflects both the opening of Seybold Publications' desktop publishing conference in San Jose, Calif., this week, and an anticipation of Comdex, the huge personal computer trade show in Las Vegas in late October.
And partly it is just coincidence.


Newbridge Networks reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


A. L. Philpott, Virginia Speaker And Ally of Governor, Dies at 72
A.
L.
Philpott, the Speaker of the Virginia House of Delegates and a political ally of Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, died of cancer at his home on Saturday.
He was 72 years old.
Mr.
Philpott struggled with cancer for nearly two decades.
Most recently, he had suffered from lymphatic cancer.
Earlier he had suffered from cancer of the stomach, prostate gland and gallbladder.
On Tuesday he had announced he would not seek to extend his 33-year legislative career because of declining health.


System Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Transnational Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bush's New Tack: An Offer to the Soviet Republics
In addition to rewriting the rules of arms control with his landmark announcement on Friday, President Bush took a major step toward fundamentally altering the broader Soviet-American relationship as the political order in Moscow weakens in the wake of the Kremlin putsch.
In form at least, Mr.
Bush's decision to eliminate most short-range nuclear weapons, take American bombers off alert status and offer to negotiate cuts in multiple-warhead missiles seemed to follow the traditional way of doing business: The American head of state made proposals to the Soviet Union, and the Soviet head of state, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, replied.


Mets Dismiss Harrelson


Small Stocks Did Best in Quarter, as Impatient Investors Looked for Growth
During a quarter in which the large stock exchanges advanced only modestly, the over-the-counter market showed robust growth.
"The over-the-counter market led the way," said Laszlo Birinyi, the head of Birinyi Associates, the Wall Street research firm.


Reversal of Fortunes: Jets Romp, Giants Flop; Dolphins Can't Match Big Plays As They Go Down to 41-23 Defeat
After two weeks of exerting maximum effort and walking away with nothing to show for it, the Jets finally got the formula right today, exploding for their highest point total of the season in a 41-23 victory over Miami at Giants Stadium.
The victory purged the Jets' psyches of two bitterly disappointing losses and gave their sagging confidence a lift.
It also placed the Jets, now 2-3, in a better light in the American Football Conference East Division.


Documents Said to Name Iraq Suppliers
Documents seized in Baghdad last week are yielding new details about Iraq's nuclear weapons program, including the names of Western companies that illegally supplied Baghdad with equipment and technology, international agency officials in Baghdad and Vienna said today.
The officials refused to release the names of the suppliers, and it was unclear when or if they might be made public.
Nuclear arms experts said that assembling a list of smugglers of nuclear equipment and expertise would be a major achievement in the drive to dismantle Iraq's bomb-making capacity, and one United States official called it "a top priority."


Rubicon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


World Economies


Review/Television; Reopening the Wounds Of an Old Murder Case
Picking through this season's crop of television movies can be more challenging than a Saturday morning trip to the neighborhood farmers' market.
There are an awful lot of rotten apples in the electronic barrel.
Generally, though, the most reliable clues to possible quality can be found in the credits; solid track records can't be easily dismissed.
And "Carolina Skeletons," the "NBC Monday Night at the Movies" presentation tonight at 9, is bursting with them.
In this instance, talent wins out.
Directed by John Erman ("An Early Frost," "The Two Mrs. Grenvilles") and written by Tracy Keenan Wynn ("The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman"), "Carolina Skeletons" is based on a 1989 Edgar Award-winning novel by David Stout, an editor at The New York Times, that was in turn inspired by an actual incident.
The year is 1967.
James Bragg, a black man and a Green Beret much decorated in Vietnam, returns to the small town of Crawfordville, S.C.
He promises his dying mother that he will find the real culprit behind the 1934 murders of two young white girls, a crime for which his 14-year-old brother, Linus (Kenny Blank), was executed.


Wespercorp reports earnings for Year to June 30


3-Faced Industry: Complaints, Sniping, Bad Luck
At expense-account movie hangouts like Le Dome and the Ivy, the producers and agents and studio executives are hardly beset by the kinds of questions and concerns that rack ordinary people.
Forget the floundering economy and Saddam Hussein.
Forget house payments, school bills and the Mastercard account.
The only names that seem to be mentioned are Michael and Jeff (as if they were one word), Bruce, Meryl, Frank and "Hook."
Michael and Jeff -- Michael Eisner, chairman of the Walt Disney Company, and his close friend Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of Walt Disney Studios -- are two millionaire executives whose film company, for the first time in years, is taking a critical and financial beating.
By all accounts the two men spend a lot of time yelling at each other, but like a lot of people here, the two men yell at each other even in the best of times.
These are not the best of times, and the two men, who treat each other as if they were an older and a younger brother, are fully aware of it.


Saints 5-0? O.K. So Take Next Sunday Off.
With help from the fumble-prone, penalty-ridden Atlanta Falcons, the New Orleans Saints ran their record to 5-0 this afternoon, giving them early command of the National Football Conference's Western Division.
Third-year wide receiver Floyd Turner caught two touchdown passes from Bobby Hebert and running back Dalton Hilliard ran 65 yards untouched early in the fourth quarter to account for the Saints' three touchdowns in the 27-6 victory.


Vivra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Merrill and Harrelson: Is There a Message Here?
When Stump Merrill was told today that Bud Harrelson had been dismissed by the Mets, he shook his head in dismay.
Merrill, the manager of the Yankees, will apparently retain his job for at least one week longer than his counterpart from the Mets, but he was not rejoicing.
"I don't ever feel good when I see someone else lose their job," he said a few hours before the Yankees lost to the Indians, 5-2.
"What stands to be gained by getting rid of the guy with a week to go?"


Little Neck Journal; 2 Views, 2 Camps, On Building Going Up
Taking the short view, one might say the clash in Little Neck, Queens, dates back to last October, when a reddish-brick building began rising next to the Long Island Rail Road station.
Taking the longer view, one might say the seeds of conflict were planted 400 years ago in Armenia, when the Shah of Persia forcibly relocated tens of thousands of Armenians to his country in what would be the first of several major migrations in recent centuries leading to a sizable Armenian minority in what is now Iran.
Whatever.
Now the Iranian-Armenian Society is building what it says will be a community center for its members and others of Armenian heritage who have settled in the New York City area.
Many residents of Little Neck are not pleased.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about dilemmas posed by premature births misidentified the bearded man in some copies.
He was Dr.
Alan Fleischman of Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.


AG Services of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


As Bank Legislation Evolves, the Bankers Worry
As historic banking legislation moves through Congress, many bankers who once enthusiastically welcomed the overhaul of their industry are beginning to worry that the measures could ultimately hurt them as much as help.
The sweeping package intended to modernize the banking industry would lift regulations that have been in place since the Depression.
But the complexity of the issues, along with the political forces at play, make it difficult to predict what will emerge from Congress.
And what has moved forward so far is a mixed picture -- particularly for the banking industry.


Review/Opera; Met's 'Idomeneo' Strikes a Balance
Exemplary performances of Mozart operas are hard to come by.
They require singers of the very first rank, masters of rhetoric and phrasing who can also negotiate intricate passages.
They require a conductor who pays as much attention to articulation of detail as to long dramatic lines.
They require a production that is subtly attuned to the work's manners and implications.
Finally, more than any other operas in the repertory, they require a finely wrought sense of ensemble.
Such exemplars may be hard to come by, but as this season's first performance of "Idomeneo" at the Metropolitan Opera showed on Saturday afternoon, they do exist.
This was one of those occasions when the pleasures were not primarily in the voices (although such pleasures were extravagantly at hand), but in what the singers and players made of the work as a whole.
The tale of the Greek king condemned by his hasty vow to sacrifice his own son to the god Neptune is not one of Mozart's best-loved works, but such performances cannot fail to raise it in public esteem.


Pacific Aqua Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Two Celebrities In Campaigns
Two celebrities on opposite ends of the age spectrum are appearing in new advertising campaigns.
Neil Patrick Harris, the 18-year-old star of the ABC-TV sitcom "Doogie Howser, M.D." is featured in two campaigns.
One, created in-house by the Sasson Licensing Corporation, New York, sells Sasson's new line of young men's and men's athletic footwear.
The other, created in-house by the Gitano Group Inc., New York, promotes a family literacy program sponsered by Gitano.
And Jessica Tandy, the 82-year-old stage and screen actress, is the latest star to appear swathed in mink in the long-running print campaign for Blackglama by the Peter Rogers Agency, New York.
Ms.
Tandy is the 60th person to participate in the campaign, said Peter Rogers, president and creative director, if Claudette Colbert, the Grover Cleveland of Blackglama, is counted twice for separate ads in 1971 and 1978.


Andrea Jadick Has Wedding
Andrea Gayle Jadick, a sales associate at Gucci-America in Philadelphia, and Franklin Perry Hodge 3d, a sales representative for the Phoenix Mutual Life Insurance Company in Bala Cynwyd, Pa., were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford Village, N.Y., by the Rev.
Owen Raymond Jackson.
A graduate of Villanova University, Mrs.
Hodge, 23 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Jadick of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Her father is a partner in Heidrick &amp; Struggles, a New York executive search firm.
Her mother, Rosemary Jadick, is a travel consultant in Chappaqua.


A.T.&amp;T. Joins Rivals on Aid
Still smarting from the recent disruption of its long-distance telephone service in Manhattan, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company has agreed to team up with its rivals to craft a contingency plan for redirecting telephone traffic to other long-distance carriers in the event of future breakdowns.
Until the power failure at a key switching station on Sept. 17, A.T.&amp; T. had been the only long-distance carrier that opposed such a plan.
New York City officials have advocated a "mutual aid and restoration plan" for the last year, but A.T.&amp; T. had argued that it would end up making the biggest investment in backup equipment, which would primarily benefit its competitors.


Grandmother of Beaten Girl Defends Mother Charged With Abuse


People's Savings Assoc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rally by Foes Of Abortion Is Outjeered In Manhattan
About 1,200 abortion opponents formed a vast, sparse human cross on Fifth Avenue and 34th Street in midtown Manhattan yesterday, but their quiet protest was overwhelmed by 4,000 militant abortion-rights demonstrators who marched down their ranks and engulfed them in a roar of chants, shouts and anger.
"New York is pro-choice! New York is pro-choice!" the marchers chanted again and again, waving a profusion of signs as they moved down Fifth Avenue in a throng five blocks long and rounded the corner of 34th Street to confront the main body of abortion opponents in the shadow of the Empire State Building.


Pinkerton's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 6


Melinda Ann Lederstein Is Married
Melinda Ann Lederstein, an assistant media director, and Mark John McLaughlin, a senior vice president and an associate media director, both at the New York advertising agency D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Abraham Weisman officiated at Le Chambord in Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
Mrs.
McLaughlin, 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Syracuse University.
She is the daughter of Libbie Gillis Lederstein of Wappingers Falls, N.Y., an assistant principal at John Jay Senior High School in Fishkill, N.Y., and the late Harvey Sherwood Lederstein, who was the director of music education for the Wappingers Falls Central School District.


City Opera Tries the Step Beyond Supertitles
Under normal conditions, the New York City Opera's performance of Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" on Friday evening might have been an ideal time to look in on the group of singers who have taken over the principal roles in recent weeks.
And as it turned out, they proved a generally appealing and well-matched cast.
But there were other things afoot on Friday.
To either side of the stage were large Sony television monitors, and before the curtain rose, Christopher Keene, the company's general director, stepped out to explain them.


Western Energy Management reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Burkett Blocks That Kick, And Much More for Jets
The Jets had a lot of big plays in today's 41-23 rout of the Miami Dolphins, and making some of the biggest ones was Chris Burkett.
Burkett's best play, of course, was his block of a Reggie Roby punt just before halftime.
He picked up the ball and ran it 11 yards into the end zone for a touchdown as the Jets took a 21-10 lead with 12 seconds on the clock.
Miami never got closer than 8 points after that.


Gail Ascher Is Wed
Gail Ascher, a daughter of Irma Ascher of New York and Alan Ascher of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Minnock, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Minnock Jr. of Delmar, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joyce Fuchs-Gioia of the Association of Nondenominational Ministers officiated at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.
The bride, 28 years old, is an architect at Armstrong Cummings Architects in New York.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis and received a master's degree in architecture from Syracuse University.
Mr.
Minnock, 36, graduated from the Georgia Institute of Technology and received a master's degree in architecture from Washington University.
He is an associate architect at the Planned Expansion Group in White Plains.


No Headline
International A3-9
The President's nuclear forces cuts may lead to cuts in other military programs he would like to keep, like the B-2 bomber, and could affect domestic spending as well, highly placed Democrats said.
Page A1


American Safety Closures reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


China Welcomes Bush's Proposal on Arms
China announced today that it welcomed President Bush's initiative on nuclear arms reduction, but it gave no indication that it too was prepared to cut back on its nuclear arsenal.
The New China News Agency said in a brief dispatch that China has always supported a "complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons," and that it hopes that Mr.
Bush's proposal may help realize those objectives.


Harrelson's Critics Have the Last Word
Just before a game in late May, Bud Harrelson stepped into an elevator at Shea Stadium.
During the ride, Harrelson's ears were not exactly filled with elevator music.
Instead, the manager of the Mets heard one listener on WFAN criticize his handling of the team, and that listener insisted that Harrelson was not the right man for the job.
The ride was brief, but long enough to make Harrelson blush.
Just before he departed, Harrelson turned to the elevator operator, and, with a wry smile on his face, said softly, "I never listen to that station, anyway."


Dance in Review
Denishawn Repertory Dancers St. Mark's Church
Last year, at the International Dance Biennial in Lyons, France, Ted Shawn and Ruth St.
Denis were called the Adam and Eve of modern dance.
That they were.


National Technical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Uproar in New Haven On Public Housing Role
Real-estate for-sale signs line the streets of this worn-looking city, offering what some see as an opportunity but others see as a threat.
The New Haven Housing Authority is shopping for bargains in the glut of condominiums and houses on the market.
Under pressure from Federal officials to replace public housing lost when the city demolished its notorious Elm Haven high-rises, the authority has decided that buying houses rather than building them is the fastest way to get started.


T Cell Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


They Do Run, Run: Their Same Old Song
The Giants' offense played two different games today.
One was open and aggressive, imaginative football en route to their opponent's 20-yard line.
The other was run, run and run again, predictable power football inside the 20.
Guess which one worked and which did not?


California Governor Vetoes Gay Rights Measure
Gov.
Pete Wilson today vetoed a gay rights bill that was bitterly opposed by many conservatives and church groups.
The bill would have outlawed job discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
Before final passage by the Legislature, housing discrimination had been eliminated from the measure by its sponsor, Assemblyman Terry Friedman, Democrat of Sherman Oaks, to try to ease opposition.


Timmins Nickel reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Material Sciences Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Kool Cigarettes to Test New Campaign in Ohio
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Company is testing a campaign and a new look for its venerable Kool cigarettes in northern Ohio.
The campaign is being created by an agency that handles other Brown &amp; Williamson brands rather than by the agency that handles Kool.
The test campaign for the country's second-best-selling menthol brand, after Salem, carries the theme "What Kool is today." Print and outdoor ads, and in-store promotional material, introduce redesigned packages for Kools and a name change for Kool Milds to Kool Filters.


Deford Moves To Newsweek
FRANK DEFORD, editor of The National sports daily until it ceased operations last June, will join Newsweek next January.
"But I won't write every week," Deford said.
"Hopefully, I can give it a sports voice." He will cover the Summer Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, and expects to do cover stories and essays.
And the National?
"I thought we had a deal with Sports Eye the beginning of August to revive it," Deford said of a Great Neck, L.I., publisher.
"But because we missed the football season, if it comes out it won't be until next year. And by then, why do you need the name The National?"


Moleculon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Burned and Beaten Girl, 8, Found in Bronx Apartment
The world of 8-year-old Tiesha Carter included the living room where she slept with her grandmother and a dozen stuffed animals under pictures of a suffering Jesus.
It also included the bathroom where her mother sometimes handcuffed her to a rail, and the closet where the police found the bruised and burned girl hiding.
Yesterday Tiesha was listed in stable condition in Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx, "and not in any pain," a hospital official said.
Her stepfather, John Medina, and her mother, Marilyn Carter, who has a previous child-abuse conviction, were in police custody, facing arraignment on a variety of charges involving long-term abuse of the girl, including second-degree attempted murder and unlawful imprisonment.


Eyes on the Skies, and the Taps
It didn't rain much during New York City's endless summer, and even when Hurricane Bob roared up the Atlantic coast, it dumped water in all the wrong places.
As a result, the city's reservoirs now contain only 53.4 percent of capacity instead of their normal September level of 76 percent.
With that in mind, Mayor David Dinkins has called, prudently, for a "water watch."
This is a warning signal that imposes no specific restraints on water usage.
Indeed, the Mayor, who is said to like showers, insists he will go on taking as many as he usually does.


CBS Acts To Control Its Baseball Damage
CBS paid $1.06 billion for the television rights to Major League Baseball three years ago in an effort to shore up its lackluster prime-time programming.
Now, the network is using shows like "Rescue 911" and "The Royal Family," a new comedy starring Della Reese and Redd Foxx, to protect itself from lackluster baseball programming.
CBS, which after taxes lost $55 million last year on baseball and wrote off another $115 million for future losses, has instituted what amounts to a baseball damage-control strategy.


Twins Lose, but Still Clinch
The Minnesota Twins were bound to clinch the American League West sooner or later and the way the Toronto Blue Jays figured, it would be just as well if they did it elsewhere.
Both teams got their wish today.
First, Toronto defeated the Twins, 2-1, thus denying the Twins a victory in the game and in the American League West that would have led to an immediate on-field celebration and champagne-swigging clubhouse party.
But the Twins did get to party, most likely in the skies above North America.
Because, as they made their way out of town and out of Canada, headed for Chicago, news came that the second-place White Sox had lost, 2-1, to Seattle.
That defeat eliminated the White Sox from contention in the American League West and catapulted the Twins to their first division title since 1987.
Hold the Bubbly
The Twins, as businesslike as ever, opted to leave the Skydome with champagne corks untouched for a couple reasons, Manager Tom Kelly explained.
"I think we'll just go to Chicago instead of waiting for someone else to lose a ball game," Kelly said before departing.
"We'll just go about preparing to play."


Sports of The Times; The Short, Unhappy Reign of Harrelson
THE Mets did the obvious thing, they did the expected thing, they did the oldest and easiest thing.
They fired the manager.
They didn't fire the first baseman, or the second baseman, or the left fielder, or any of the pitchers.
They fired the manager because the players were inept, and he didn't seem to be doing anything to make them ept.
Buddy Harrelson, the manager for a year and a half, is gone, told by Frank Cashen Saturday evening that as skipper of this third-place team he was history.
How much Harrelson is to blame for "this bitterly disappointing season," as it was characterized by Al Harazin, the incoming general manager, is debatable.
"Anybody who says it's entirely the manager's fault," said Cashen, the outgoing general manager, "is being unfair. All of us have to share the blame."


Sierra Tahoe Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nonsense Clouds Affirmative Action Debate
To the Editor:
The debate on affirmative action presents many examples of the creation of realities that have no objective existence.
Reverse discrimination, quotas, race norming, the stigmatization of black success and political correctness are excellent illustrations of how easily serious writers, reporters and social commentators will accept nonsense and elevate it to respectability by characterizing this nonsense as representing serious issues that require critical intellectual discourse.
The issue you raise in "Remedy for Racism of Past Has New Kind of Shackles" (front page, Sept. 15) shows the trivialization of this important subject.


Parking Rules
Alternate-side rules will be suspended for the Jewish holidays Shemini Atzereth today and Simhath Torah tomorrow.


Craftmade International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Amy Handler Weds Andrew Levine
Amy Lynn Handler, the special events coordinator for the Museum of Television and Radio in New York, was married yesterday to Andrew Grant Levine, the director of auditing and accounting for the Campaign Finance Board of the City of New York.
Cantor Theodore Aronson officiated at Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel in South Orange, N.J.
Mrs.
Levine, 31 years old, is a daughter of Robert Handler of East Hanover, N.J., and Linda Handler of Hoboken, N.J.
She graduated from Emerson College.
Her father, who is retired, was a fiberglass manufacturer.
Her mother is the director of the Phoenix Gallery in New York and president of the New Jersey Sculptors Association.


Review/Television; Behind the Scenes in 'L.B.J.' To Catch the Good and the Bad
For a few minutes of "L. B. J.," David Grubin's four-hour biography of Lyndon B. Johnson tonight and tomorrow at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, two aides of the former President recall a 1965 conversation between Johnson and Gov.
George C. Wallace of Alabama.
It was shortly after the nation had been outraged by "bloody Sunday," the beatings of black marchers in Selma by state troopers, in plain view of network cameras.
Johnson was under pressure to crack down but was worried about his political support in the South and wanted to work a deal with Mr.
Wallace.
To photographs of the big President physically dominating the short Governor, Richard N. Goodwin and Nicholas deB.
Katzenbach tell how Johnson maneuvered Mr.
Wallace into a joint public appearance to deplore violence.
That eased the way for calling out the National Guard to protect marchers on their return to Selma and for the 1965 Voting Rights Act, probably the most important civil-rights measure in American history.


Visual Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quotation of the Day
"They should have fired him before the All-Star break. What good is all of this now?" -- Kara Ezrin, 9-year-old Mets fan, on Bud Harrelson's dismissal.  [ C3:4. ]


In Paris Protest, Farmers Sing Blues
Angry over falling prices for their products and fearful that change in Europe will hurt them still more, the farmers of France marched in the tens of thousands through Paris today to dramatize their warning that the French countryside is slowly dying.
Many wooed Parisians with gifts of wine, sausage and cheese, while others wore regional costumes and played music from home to add color.


Alpha Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25


Jobs Outlook Mostly Grim For Industry
WHEN Time Warner Inc. announced earlier this month that it would lay off 105 editorial employees at six magazines, on top of the 500 positions on the business side that it had recently eliminated, a collective shudder ran through the magazine world.
Not because the news was unexpected.
But because the industry's unhappy little secret had finally been voiced so loudly and so publicly.
In the last 18 months, hundreds of magazine employees have lost their jobs, mostly quietly and unannounced.
Edward Koller, president of the Howard-Sloan-Koller Group, a national recruiting firm for magazine publishers, estimates that since Aug. 1 a minimum of 1,200 industry employees have either been dismissed or have left and not been replaced.
He says he receives 500 resumes a week.


Protesters Urge an End to Violence Against Immigrants in Germany


Emons Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Taking a Punch, Making Millions
Three of the four top-grossing athletes in the United States this year are not basketball players or one-man conglomerates named PALMER or NICKLAUS.
They are boxers, says Forbes magazine.


Olco Petroleum Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Don't Punish Military Women
America's military women can fight for their country.
They can die for their country.
But in another respect they -- and servicemen's wives and daughters -- are second-class citizens.
Since 1988 the Department of Defense has banned most abortions in American military hospitals, even though no Federal funds have been used for such procedures since 1979.
Last week the Senate voted to lift that ban, reversing a punitive policy.
Since the House approved similar legislation in June, chances are that the abortion measure will be part of the military spending bill and reach the President's desk.
Sadly for service personnel and their families, it may stop right there.
President Bush has threatened to veto the entire bill if it includes the abortion measure.


Trimel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Data-Design Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Moscow, Usual Reaction To Bush Arms Plan Is Muted
President Bush's sweeping arms initiative has played softly in the country that in principle stood most to gain from it, partly from old habit, partly from mixed feelings and partly from simple fatigue.
No newspapers were published today, though both the Russian republic and national television news programs carried reports on the development.
The main news program declared the initiative to be the main event of the last week, while the Russian program, Vesti, said the American move "gives the Soviet Union a chance to get rid of its tactical weapons."


Bridge
Players from five continents converged here today on the Pacifico Yokohama Convention Center, where the World Team Championships will be played during the next 12 days.
The organization is by the World Bridge Federation, and the sponsor is NEC, the Japanese computer corporation.
At the opening ceremonies there were varied prophecies about the likely outcome.
In the Bermuda Bowl for open teams, the expanded field, with two teams or more from nearly all the geographical zones, is in two qualifying groups.
In Group I the United States II team, although relatively inexperienced at this level, is likely to qualify for quarterfinal playoffs along with Sweden, Poland and the defending champion, Brazil.
Also in this group are Pakistan, Surinam, Hong Kong and Canada.


Regis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nooney Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


When the Disabled Face Rejection From Churches That Nurtured Them
When Sharon Yunker-Deatz, an associate minister, contracted multiple sclerosis in 1988, she felt that her congregation at the Central Presbyterian Church in Montclair, N.J., was "very supportive and very loving." But that was when Ms.
Deatz only had to use a cane.
As her condition worsened, so did the relationship with her flock.
Forced eventually to use a wheelchair, Ms.
Deatz confronted a congregation that refused to build ramps or to make other structural alterations in the church that would allow her to perform her duties.
The congregation said the alterations would either cost too much or spoil the beauty of the sanctuary.


Zaire's Dictator Agrees to Share Power With Foe
President Mobutu Sese Seko, who has held absolute power in this impoverished Central African country for 26 years while amassing a personal fortune, today agreed to let an opposition leader form a new coalition government that could mark the end of his autocratic reign.
President Mobutu's agreement to share power was first announced Saturday night and confirmed when a deadlock in negotiations over the choice of a new prime minister was broken today.


Silence Campaign Protects Moviegoer Rights
To the Editor:
We couldn't agree more with "Go to the Movies. And Shut Up!" (Op-Ed, Sept. 11), Thomas J. Meyer's assessment of the moviegoing experience.
As the country's second largest theater chain (1,600 screens in 23 major markets), we felt the problem important enough to devote an all-out effort to bring the magic back to moviegoing -- magic that is lost when a fellow patron is loudly explaining the plot to a companion next to you, or an infant is crying uncontrollably.


Metro Matters; Race Relations: Despite Gains, A Frustration
"We live in two worlds," Percy Sutton said the other day.
"You live in your world and I live in my own world."
Mr.
Sutton, founder of Inner City Broadcasting and mentor of Mayor David N. Dinkins, was not just referring to geography, although most of his audience was white, as is
their
world.


After Buddy System, A Star Search Is Next
Suddenly the Mets seem to be in the market for the kind of manager the Yankees always sought under George Steinbrenner: a man who not only can manage but who also is a personality, someone who could attract the attention of the fans, whose numbers dwindled at Shea Stadium this season.
Who is that man?
The club's braintrust itself apparently doesn't know at this point, although the Mets are prepared to depart from past practice and go outside the organization for the man they hope can restore them to contending status.


Reversal of Fortune: Jets Romp, Giants Flop; Abject Failure Near the End Zone Costs Champions Another Game
When the Giants win, some fans say they do it without style.
Today, the Giants played with style.
They lost.
A week ago, when they beat the Cleveland Browns, they passed for only 65 yards.
Today, Coach Ray Handley opened up the offense, and Jeff Hostetler passed for 368 yards, his career high.


Dithering About AIDS
As AIDS spreads farther and deeper, the campaign against the epidemic has become mired in peripheral issues while neglecting life-saving opportunities.
An appalling lack of courageous leadership at the top of Government has allowed the AIDS campaign to lose its way.
Last week, the political process showed its disturbing tendency to focus on inflammatory but marginal issues.
In a highly publicized visit to Capitol Hill, Kimberly Bergalis, a young woman who had been infected with the AIDS virus by her dentist, urged Congress to require testing of health care workers and patients.
The dying woman, so frail she could barely talk, made an affecting, powerful witness.


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Lillian Vernon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Extra Point Or Extra Hype?
JACQUELINE GAINERgot a toehold on history Saturday.
She became the first girl on a New York State high school varsity football team to score a point when, in democratic fashion, she booted an extra point for Valley Stream (L.I.) Central.


Abroad at Home; Lessons of Thomas
Whatever happens now to Judge Clarence Thomas, the confirmation process in his case has suggested some lessons.
They are for both of the parties constitutionally concerned with judicial appointments, the President and the Senate.
President Bush, if he were prepared to approach this kind of political experience with an open mind, would see that cynicism is not a good idea in choosing members of the Supreme Court.
In saying that he picked Judge Thomas because he was the best-qualified person in the country, Mr.
Bush only shamed himself.


Lisa Vasiliadis Has a Wedding
Lisa Sophia Vasiliadis, a daughter of Constantine G. Vasiliadis of Mahwah, N.J., and Therissa E. Vasiliadis of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Reynaldo Luis Pella, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reynaldo Lazaro Pella of West New York, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Allen performed the ceremony at St.
Anthony's Orthodox Church in Bergenfield, N.J.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about the medical treatment of a Hasidic scholar killed during the violence in Crown Heights last month misstated the affiliation of a hospital official incorrectly.
Janet Sarsfield is a spokeswoman for the Nassau County Medical Center, not Kings County Hospital.


Athens Journal; 2,500 Years Old, and My, How the Child Has Grown
"Poor democracy," said Virginia Tsouderas with a sigh.
"Is there any other word that has been so widely misused?"
As a member of the Greek Parliament she was raising a glass this weekend as Athens celebrated what is being called democracy's 2,500th anniversary.


Glacier Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


CHRONICLE
If nothing else, the cast of the show that brings the centennial celebration of Stanford University to a close tonight is eclectic, including WHOOPI GOLDBERG, JOAN BAEZ, JAMES GALWAY, Silicon Valley pioneers WILLIAM HEWLETT and DAVID PACKARD, the DOOBIE BROTHERS and GEORGE P. SHULTZ.
George Shultz?
Although he is to be part of an extravaganza six months in the planning that is to be staged in the university stadium in Palo Alto, Calif., before an audience of 40,000 and that relates the history and traditions of the school, the former secretary of state is not expected to step out of character.


G.R.I. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Frustrated by Federal Courts, A.C.L.U. Looks to States on Individual Rights
In a frank admission that it now considers taking cases before the Supreme Court virtually a lost cause, the American Civil Liberties Union says it will concentrate more of its resources in bringing issues before state courts, relying on state constitutions to secure an expansion of civil liberties.
Frustrated by the conservative leaning of the Federal courts in the areas of civil rights, abortion and criminal justice, A.C.L.U. officials say they will accelerate a recent trend of keeping many important issues away from the Federal judiciary and move more aggressively into state courts.


CHRONICLE
On a more serious note, the appointment of Dr.
MICHAEL P. OSBORNE to be director of the Strang Cancer Prevention Center has been announced.
Although he has already taken over his duties, he will be formally installed on Nov.7.


To Cowboys, More Than Just a Victory
For the Dallas Cowboys, it was a signature victory.
"No question," said quarterback Troy Aikman, "this was the biggest win since I've been here."


Four People Are Killed In Fiery L.I. Car Crash
A Wheatley Heights man and his brother stopped on their way to a wedding reception on Saturday to check on an auto accident in West Babylon and learned that their mother, father and sister had been killed in it.
The driver of another car was also killed.
The Suffolk County police said it was unclear what caused Reginald Berry, 43 years old, to lose control of his 1988 Lincoln at 4:55 P.M. as he traveled south on Straight Path.
He was on his way to the wedding reception with his wife, Dorothy, 43, and his daughter, Nicole, 24, when he swerved into the path of a northbound 1984 Chevrolet Blazer driven by Lawrence Colucci, 43, of Westbury, the police said.


Review/Dance; Pina Bausch's 'Palermo, Palermo' Explores a World Beyond Logic
On its fourth visit to the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where it opened the Next Wave Festival on Saturday night, Pina Bausch's Tanztheater Wuppertal from Germany needs no introduction.
The indisputable star of neo-expressionist dance theater, Miss Bausch remains a major choreographer of unlimited imagination even when she is hemmed in by her own formulas, as in "Palermo, Palermo."


Wolf (Howard B.) Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


S.I. Ferry's Homeless: Forgotten Casualties of Fire
The sinewy bewhiskered 26-year-old stood 100 yards from the shuttered Staten Island Ferry Terminal and pointed out his new home.
"That bench right there is it," he said.
"Gets brisk at night. The wind does a real number on the bones. So I'm going to have to find something better pretty soon. That big blaze was a pretty sudden eviction notice."
With a long circling stare, he drowsily watched as a squat ferry brimming with commuters plowed through the choppy waters.
The late-afternoon sun bathed the scene in dreamy light.
Brushing wisps of hair out of his eyes, he fastened his gaze on the sea-green terminal at the southern tip of Manhattan, with police sawhorses blocking its doors.


Market Place; The Outlook For Rails Is Still Mixed
"As far as the recession, it's over for us," Pete P. Locke, the manager of terminal operations for the Union Pacific Railroad said as he looked over thousands of rail cars being sorted at the Bailey rail yard.
The railroad's traffic has risen 3.7 percent since January.
In August, the increase slowed to 1.1 percent, but some goods surged.


BE Avionics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 28


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT BUSH , after giving one of the biggest speeches of his career, spent the weekend in seclusion with his wife, BARBARA, at the site of their honeymoon nearly 47 years ago.
The Bushes were spending a relaxed weekend at a beach-front suite at the Cloister hotel resort on Sea Island, one of southeastern Georgia's coastal islands, Reuters reported.
The couple were married in January 1945 in Rye, N.Y., and then went to Sea Island for their honeymoon.


Public Storage Properties XVIII reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


50 Years Helping Disabled Fans
TESS HYMAN is 87 years old, but yesterday she was at her steady job at Giants Stadium when the Jets played the Miami Dolphins.
As much as she loves it, Hyman is looking for a replacement.
She'd like to rest.


Canada Southern Petroleum reports earnings for Year to June 30


Melinda B. Henneberger Is Married
Melinda Bleidt Henneberger, a reporter at New York Newsday, was married yesterday to William Irwin Turque, an editor at Newsweek magazine in New York.
The Rev.
John S. Dunne, a Roman Catholic priest and an author, officiated at the Roofless Church in New Harmony, Ind.
The bride, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Notre Dame and received a master's degree in European studies from the University of Louvain in Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
She is a daughter of John and Freida Henneberger of Mount Carmel, Ill., where her father is chairman of Security Bank and Trust Company and her mother owns Things Past, an antique and gift shop.


Xicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 8


Selectronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Penobscot Shoe Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Rangers Canceled
Unsafe ice at the Charlotte Coliseum forced officials to cancel tonight's exhibition game between the Los Angeles Kings and the Rangers.
Some 10,000 fans were sent home at 6:18 P.M., more than an hour after the scheduled 5 P.M. start.
It was the second National Hockey League exhibition game in three days canceled because of poor ice conditions.
A game was called off Friday night in St.
Petersburg, Fla., between the Boston Bruins and the Islanders.


Time Was (Is) Of the Essence
Where were you when life in Brooklyn changed forever?
The French class at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn ended at 3:50 P.M.
Everyone dashed into the hallway and someone hauled out a portable radio -- in 1951, yet!


As Election Year Nears, Bush Counts on the Fed
President Bush held an economic summit conference of sorts last week, and the bond market rallied.
The continued soft economy that prompted the conference may be good news for interest rates.
But some credit market analysts say economic growth might not come as soon as Mr.
Bush would like, with a Presidential election year drawing closer.
The meeting seemed to underscore what appears to be a working assumption at the White House: monetary policy will provide enough stimulus to produce real growth in the economy of 2 to 2.5 percent over the next 13 months.
Yet the assumption that the Federal Reserve board can provide the cure, these analysts said, is a big gamble.


Books of The Times; Runyon's Life as Written by His Spiritual Son
Damon Runyon By Jimmy Breslin 410 pages. Ticknor &amp; Fields. $24.95.
In many ways, Jimmy Breslin's life of Damon Runyon (1880-1946) is an ideal biography.
As a newspaper columnist and chronicler of New York City nether life, Mr.
Breslin is a spiritual heir to Runyon, who of course was William Randolph Hearst's star reporter on The New York American and as a short-story writer the creator of all those shady Broadway characters who found their way into the pages of collections like "Guys and Dolls" (1932) and "Blue Plate Special" (1934).


Stranded Whales Freed on Cape Cod


Tiverton Petroleums reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Howell Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Mexican Patio Cafes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Primerica Corp., New York, said its Commercial Credit Co. unit was offering $200 million in three-year 6.95 percent notes through Morgan, Stanley &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.932 to yield 6.975, or 70 basis points more than the comparable Treasury issues.  *
Safeway Inc., Oakland, Calif., said it would redeem on Nov. 25 all of its 14.5 percent junior subordinated debentures due in 2006 through First National Bank of Boston.


Police Officer Is Shot in Queens
A police officer was shot at 1:43 A.M. yesterday in an exchange of gunfire with a 19-year-old who was trying to rob a gasoline station in Laurelton, Queens, the police said.
The officer, John Gordon, 33 years old, was struck by a bullet in the left thigh after a quick struggle with the youth, who was shot in the left side of the torso, the police said.
Stolen money and a 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun were seized at the Exxon station at 219-07 North Conduit Avenue .


Grist Mill Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


U.S.-Saudi Alliance Against Iraq Faces Obstacles
The United States has encountered significant differences with its key Persian Gulf ally, Saudi Arabia, over the scope and scale of secret American military plans to force compliance with United Nations demands for destroying Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, United States and allied officials say.
The officials said in interviews that miscommunications between the Pentagon and Saudi officials have been further complicated by a debate within the Administration over the limits of American military power in dealing with the kind of standoff that occurred in Baghdad over United Nations inspectors' attempts to collect information on Iraq's nuclear program.


Why Reward China's Slave Labor?
There's a good argument for giving most-favored-nation trade privileges to the hard-line Communist Government in Beijing: Trade with the West mainly helps private businesses and reform-minded leaders in China's capitalist enclaves.
But that argument fails miserably when applied to trade in goods manufactured under appalling conditions by inmates in China's vast
laogai
prison system.
China's prison-made exports, made in effect by slave labor, blatantly violate U.S. law.
And State Department and Customs Service officials have now assembled substantial evidence that the Chinese now export such goods routinely.
But the Customs Service says it has been unable to act because U.S. regulations require it to track individual shipments from Chinese prisons to U.S. ports.


2 Republican Factions on Abortion Gird for Battle on Party's '92 Platform
Republicans have an incumbent President, a disorganized Democratic opposition and a chance to mount a political convention in Houston next year showcasing their party's unity and seriousness of purpose.
But the party faces a fight within its own ranks as abortion opponents prepare to do battle with supporters of abortion rights over the platform that will represent the party's thinking in the general election campaign.


Viola and Victory: A Reunion
On the day that Bud Harrelson's reign as the Mets' manager ended, Frank Viola's losing streak did, too.
Viola (13-15) ended a seven-game losing streak and Keith Miller drove in three runs yesterday as the Mets beat the Phillies, 4-3, in their 1991 Shea Stadium finale.
The Mets will finish the season in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia.


Less May Be More in Some TV Ads
As television screens have become bigger and bigger, a number of advertising executives have decided that the best way to catch a viewer's eye is to make the picture smaller.
Recent commercials promoting Amtrak and Alaska tourism, among others, are framed by dark bars at the top and the bottom of the screen.
The technique, known as letter-boxing, can reduce the visual image by as much as a third.


Regional Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
The Soviet Union's gold reserves are far smaller than the West believed, a Soviet economic policymaker has asserted.
As the country prepares for a tough winter, sharply lower reserves would mean the Government has a far smaller cushion to help make payments on foreign debt and provide for emergency imports.  [ Page A1. ]


Arrhythmia Research Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Western Publishing Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Angeion Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Showcase Cosmetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Abby B. Hirsch Has a Wedding
Abby Beth Hirsch, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Gersten Hirsh of Woodcliff, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert M. Price, a son of Stanton and Janet Price of Henderson, Nev.
Rabbi H. Philip Berkowitz and Cantor Miranda Kark Beckenstein officiated at Temple Beth Or, Township of Washington, N.J.
Mrs.
Price., 30 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is director of human resources for Americana Portraits in West Orange, N.J.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior partner at the accounting firm of KPMG Peat Marwick, and her mother, Julie Hirsh, is an associate with Drake Beam Morin, career development consultants.


Quarterback's Beer Focuses Town on Drinking Rule
A glass of beer and the family of a high school quarterback have forced this town to confront issues of teen-age drinking that many communities fail to recognize or choose to ignore.
It began on Labor Day, when an assistant coach of the town's high school football team saw the quarterback, Matthew J. Plauman, 17 years old, drinking a beer at a Fire Department picnic and reported him to school officials, who decided to enforce the rule that a student caught drinking be banned from athletic teams for an entire season.


Pennington's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Qume Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Parents of Tiny Infants Find Care Choices Are Not Theirs
Sarah Thorson's triplets were born on Thursday, Feb. 19, 1987, after just 27 weeks of pregnancy.
Unable to breathe on their own, the three boys were put on ventilators.
The next day, Bobby, the middle-sized triplet, who weighed 2 pounds, 2 ounces, hemorrhaged into his brain and lungs.
It was what doctors call a Grade 4 bleed, one that often leads to cerebral palsy and severe mental retardation.
"There was a roomful of doctors around this tiny baby, trying to resuscitate him," said Mrs.
Thorson, 35 years old, of Minneapolis.
"After it was over, I looked at the neonatologist and said, 'At what point do we say enough is enough for this little boy?' "


Partech Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 29: MONDAY Ameron Inc Unocal Expl TUESDAY Acme Cleveland Great Atl&amp;Pac Tea Carolina Fght Nevada Pwr Cipsco Inc Pacific Enterprises Walt Disney Co WEDNESDAY Houston Inds Murphy Oil Corp Mercantile Stores THURSDAY Amax Inc Orange&amp;Rockland Utils Amer Water Wks Pnc Finl Corp Excelsior Incm Shs Rite Aid Corp Gen Pub Utils Sierra Pac Res W R Grace Sun Inc FRIDAY Travelers Corp U S West Inc


Dr. Anne Supple Gurian Is Married
Dr.
Anne Supple Gurian and Dr.
Don Condie, child psychiatrists in Boston, were married yesterday at the Vale in Waltham, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas Mikelson, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 33 years old, graduated from Yale University and the Medical College of Pennsylvania and is a fellow at McLean Hospital.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Harvey and Helen Supple Gurian of Cooperstown, N.Y.
Her father, a retired psychiatrist in chief of the Mary Imogene Bassett Hospital in Cooperstown, is an associate clinical professor of psychiatry at Columbia University.
Her mother is a retired psychiatric social worker.


Alcide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bills Go Snap and Out Pops a Victory
This is how the Buffalo Bills score points: just like that.
And so it hardly seemed to matter today that they spent virtually the entire first half on their side of the field against the Chicago Bears; had produced little movement and were trailing by 6-0 in a battle of the unbeatens.


Skadden, Arps Drops 45
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, the big New York-based law firm, says it laid off about 45 lawyers last week.
The firm's executive director, Earl Yaffa, said last week that some of the dismissals were related to the quality of the employees' work.
But this is the first time Skadden, Arps has dismissed a sizable number of employees because of a business slump, he added.
The firm employs about 1,050 lawyers nationwide.


Cascade International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Waterhouse Investor Services reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Flight Attendants Toast Their Pan Am as It Flies Into the Sunset
Other Pan Am attendants were swapping business cards in the ladies' room Saturday night at El Morocco, but in the cavernous bar Susan Walstrom was remembering the happier times: Omar Sharif at her parties, Spiro T. Agnew conked out on her couch, gin bottles in her flight bag.
"I'm the wrong person to interview because it makes it sound too wild," Ms.
Walstrom said of the life she might soon have to give up.
After a moment, she added with a smile, "But it was."


Put the Grand Back in Grandparents Day
To the Editor:
Your comments about the decline of Grandparents Day are correct as far as they go (editorial, Sept. 13).
The day was meaningful and worthwhile before it became commercialized, and it could be again, but few people remember how it began.


Concord Camera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Waste Technology reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


TSC Shannock reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
An article on Sept. 16 about the firing of a bullet into a Crown Heights synagogue misattributed criticism of the Police Department and Mayor David N. Dinkins.
The criticism was offered by a member of the congregation, Morton Ettelson, not by the rabbi, Eli Blachman.


The Gun Uncocked At Bases
In an underground capsule on Whiteman Air Force Base, Lieut.
George Farfour was on the alert Friday evening, as usual, near the knobs, switches and dials that could send nuclear missiles shooting from beneath the farm fields of western Missouri and toward the Soviet Union.
The cramped, submarinelike control room is also equipped with a television, and the 27-year-old missileer, as missile crew members are called, had it turned to President Bush's address.


Susan Brender Has a Wedding
Susan Edith Brender, a daughter of William and Claire Brender of Suffern, N.Y., was married yesterday to Charles Stevenson Biener, a son of Lawrence and Muriel Biener of Merritt Island, Fla.
Rabbi Daniel Pernick officiated at the Pearl River Hilton Hotel in Pearl River, N.Y.
Mrs.
Biener, 32 years old, is a project manager for the Insurance Archeology Group Ltd. in New York and a graduate of Michigan State University.
Her parents own Stateline Business Machines Inc. in Mahwah, N.J.


Transat A.T. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ex-Rebel Leader Returns to Luanda
More than 16 years after he left the Angolan capital for guerrilla war in the African bush, Jonas Savimbi, the leader of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, returned here today to promise Angolans peace and reconstruction of their war-ravaged nation.
Though he wore a revolver slung from a cartridge-studded belt and was protected by armed bodyguards, Mr.
Savimbi came not in military triumph but as a policitian already campaigning for the country's leadership in multi-party elections expected in Angola in a year.
His return was a result of a cease-fire carried out four months ago between the southwest African country's once-Marxist Government and Mr.
Savimbi's guerrilla movement, popularly known by its Portuguese acronym as Unita.
The truce accord was concluded in Portugal on May 1 and is being monitored by the United States, the Soviet Union and Portugal, Angola's former colonial ruler.
Mr.
Savimbi flew in today on a jet provided by Felix Houphouet-Boigny, the President of the Ivory Coast, after appearances in three provincial capitals last week.
He saved his return to Luanda as the symbol of his emergence from the bush as one of Africa's most enduring guerrilla fighters.
The 57-year-old Mr.
Savimbi, who carried a walking stick with a white handle, left the jetliner last, wearing an olive-drab uniform and maroon beret adorned with four general's stars.  'Luanda Is Filthy'
"Luanda was once the most beautiful city in the continent and now it is filthy," he told the 40,000 to 50,000 Angolans who had gathered, to hear him speak in a dusty square.
"We must make Luanda beautiful again and economically viable," Mr.
Savimbi said in Portuguese.
He reiterated themes that he has been stating around the country -- that the peace process in Angola is irreversible and that his movement will use its new role as an opposition party to offer economic alternatives to the Marxist policies only recently scrapped by the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola.
"We have to affirm Unita as an opposition force," Mr.
Savimbi said earlier at an airport news conference.
After so many years of brutal civil war, it was testimony to the reconciliation under way that the Government did not move to frustrate or diminish what Unita presented as a ceremonial arrival worthy of a head of state.
Anatomy of Decolonization
Mr.
Savimbi led one of three guerrilla movements against Portuguese rule in Angola.
After Portugal granted its African colonies independence in 1975, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola seized power before elections could be held and secured Cuban and Soviet backing.
A third group, the National Front for the Liberation of Angola, led by Holden Roberto, became dormant, with some of its fighters joining the Savimbi group.
Mr.
Savimbi salvaged his movement on a punishing march from Luanda to the interior in southeastern Angola.
He won military aid from South Africa and the United States by emphasizing opposition to Communism, and his disciplined guerrillas beat back Government offensives.
As many as 50,000 Cuban soldiers fought for the Government, and South African forces crossed into Angola to buttress Unita.
The civil war has been costly, killing tens of thousands and crippling basic installations and services.
A peace accord was concluded in Portugal in May in the wake of a similar agreement in neighboring Namibia.
Mr.
Savimbi said today that he expected to see President Jose Eduardo dos Santos, his foremost rival for power, before leaving for the United States to meet President Bush next week.
The Angolans who turned up to watch Mr.
Savimbi arrive expressed relief that the war had stopped.
"There is a time for everything in life," said a 27-year-old man named Francisco.
"The time for war is past, and now in the country we have to organize and start our lives."
Other Savimbi supporters expressed unhappiness with the Marxist policies now repudiated by the Government, which they said had contributed to Luanda's decline.
"This was what I was waiting for a long time ago because I have never liked the socialist system," Joaquim Federico, 26, said of Mr.
Savimbi's return.
But Mr.
Savimbi's speech attracted more curiosity than fervor toward a leader portrayed for years by the Government as the archenemy of Angola.
A middle-aged man clutching a newspaper said he had come "just to see what is going on." Asked which side he favored, he replied with a shrug, "I don't support anyone."
Elsewhere in the city, a cluster of youths said they did not care about watching Mr.
Savimbi.
"He kills people," one of them said.


Sports of The Times; 'All We Got to Do Is Tie This Hole'
UP on the sand dunes around the 17th green, thousands were chanting, "U.S.A.! U.S.A.!" and waving American flags as Hale Irwin strode toward his ball.
And now, as Bernhard Langer's 50-foot putt from the left of the green rolled quickly toward the cup not too far from a marshy lagoon, an American voice yelled, "Go in the water."
It didn't, but this is Ryder Cup golf: my country right or wrong, my golfer birdie or bogey.


Nina Keller Marries Richard Adago
Nina Giselle Keller and Richard James Adago, assistant district attorneys in the Manhattan District Attorney's office, were married yesterday by Rabbi Amiel Wohl at Temple Israel in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Ms.
Keller, 35 years old, will keep her name.
A cum laude graduate of Vassar College and Brooklyn Law School, she is a daughter of Peter and Norma Keller of New Rochelle.
Her father is a retired news editor at The Wall Street Journal.
Her mother is a retired teacher at Highview Elementary School in Hartsdale, N.Y.


The Fax on LaFontaine
The message was as subtle as a want ad for a used car.
It went by facsimile machine from Bill Torrey, the Islanders' general manager, to his counterparts around the National Hockey League.
Pat LaFontaine has not reported to training camp, Torrey's message said last Friday, and he has made it known he wants to be traded.


Colonel Guilty In Jesuit Deaths In El Salvador
A Salvadoran Army colonel has been found guilty of murder and terrorism for sending a patrol to raid a university residence where six Jesuit priests, their cook and her daughter were gunned down in 1989.
The verdict, delivered by a five-member jury late Saturday night, was hailed by many as a precedent in a country where army officers have never been punished for crimes against civilians.


Accounts
*
The China External Trade and Development Council to Grey Advertising Inc., New York, and the GCI Group, Grey's public relations subsidiary, for an advertising and public relations program to promote Taiwanese products internationally.
A Grey spokeswoman said the program had a five-year budget of $35 million.
The advertising portion will be coordinated by Hwa Wei &amp; Grey, Grey's local agency in Taipei, while the public relations portion will be coordinated by GCI in New York. *
Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Combined Shows, Vienna, Va., to the Richards Group, Dallas.
Media spending last year was $7 million.
The account was previously handled on a project basis, a company spokeswoman said.


Rev. Raymond Hill, 66, A Maryknoll Official
The Rev.
Raymond A. Hill, head of United States operations for the Maryknoll Fathers and Brothers, died on Saturday at the Maryknoll St.
Teresa's Residence in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 66 years old and lived at the residence.
He died of cancer, officials of the order said.


Occupational Medical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Casey Ready as Bailout's Top Gun
He had a keen eye for controlling costs and a gambler's touch in cutting deals.
But the talent that most shaped Albert V. Casey's long career in the transportation, newspaper and airline industries was his knack for wringing success from managers in big organizations.
Now the hard-driving Mr.
Casey, who is 71 years old, is about to tackle Washington's biggest management mess, the much-criticized Resolution Trust Corporation that is charged with cleaning up the nation's failed savings and loans.
And Mr.
Casey's view about the job the bailout agency is doing puts him in agreement with a distinct minority of lawmakers, bankers and real estate investors.


Rochester Community Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


NRP Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Universal Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SHAMIR QUESTIONS U.S. IMPARTIALITY
As a result of Israel's battle with President Bush over housing loan guarantees, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said today that he had "many doubts" about the United States' ability to be an impartial mediator at a planned Middle East peace conference.
Not that any other country could do a better job, Mr.
Shamir said.
Nonetheless, he suggested in a newspaper interview that it might be time for Israel to look for other benefactors besides Washington.


Panel Shifts Focus on Gates and C.I.A.
The confirmation of Robert M. Gates as Director of Central Intelligence now hinges on three issues that many people who worked for him had been concerned about all along: his management skills, his ideological views and his intellectual integrity.
Until last week, the main issue of the Senate Intelligence Committee hearings was whether the nominee was truthful when he stated over and over that his knowledge of the Iran-contra affair was limited and that his actions were appropriate.
The laborious questioning so resembled reruns of the 1987 Congressional hearings into the affair that C-Span and the Cable News Network pulled the plug on live coverage.


Past Deadline, Street Families Remain in Hotels
Four years ago, after a Federal official angered by a television report threatened to cut off millions in aid, the Government set today as a deadline for New York City to get homeless families out of welfare hotels.
Setting the deadline did many things, including spurring a huge reorganization of the city's programs for the homeless.
But it did not end the city's reliance on the expensive, often squalid hotels.


Ramsay-HMO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sally Edwards Preate Is Married To Peter Q. Bohlin in Pennsylvania
Sally Edwards Preate, a former vice president for development of the Pennsylvania Ballet, was married yesterday to Peter Quarfordt Bohlin, an architect.
The Rev.
Norman D. Stanton, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Fern Hall in Crystal Lake, Pa.
Mrs.
Bohlin, 51 years old, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is the daughter of Vivian P. Edwards of Branford, Conn., and the late Mary Dartt Edwards.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of the Northeastern Bank of Pennsylvania in Scranton.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Dance in Review
'Deportment' Performance Space 122
Beneath their masks of manners, people are beasts.
That was the message of Jane Comfort's "Deportment," the dance-theater work that Jane Comfort and Company brought to Performance Space 122 on Saturday night.
The choreography was amusing.
So was the text the dancers spoke while they moved.


Shermag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Nicaragua Election Wasn't Contra Policy's Goal
To the Editor:
The former Central Intelligence Agency official Alan Fiers in his testimony before the Senate (news article, Sept. 20) sought to minimize the illegalities of the Reagan Administration's support for the contras in Nicaragua by calling the policy "fully successful." He added, "There is now an elected democratic government in Nicaragua." Mr.
Fiers is trying to rewrite history.


ESTIMATE ON GOLD WORSENS OUTLOOK FOR SOVIET UNION
In a development that adds more gloom to the Soviet Union's economic outlook, a key economic policy maker has announced that the nation's gold reserves are far smaller than the West believed.
As the Soviets prepare for a tough winter amid fears of widespread hunger, sharply lower reserves would mean the Government has a far smaller cushion to help make the payments on its $70 billion in foreign debt and to provide for emergency imports of food and other goods.


Review/Film Festival; Religion Taken to the Breaking Point
By night Sharon (Mimi Rogers) leads a life of studied decadence, a response to the perfect emptiness of her days.
When not tethered to her anonymous job as a telephone operator, she engages in mate-swapping sex with strangers, doing so in the impersonal confines of a friend's furniture store.
"What if things go out of control?" asks a propective partner at the start of one such event.
"What's control got to do with it?" Sharon tauntingly replies.
"I think he wants to know if you have any limits," suggests Vic (Patrick Bauchau), the friend who joins Sharon for these sexual adventures and whose own motives have more to do with libido than self-loathing.
"I haven't found them yet," Sharon says.


Shorewood Packaging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Grim Signal on Investment
The International Monetary Fund is warning that the world economy will suffer if industrial nations do not cut back on military spending.
Page A8.


Goodyear To Introduce 4 Products
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company is expected to introduce four new tires today aimed at raising the company's market share and lifting its sagging fortunes.
Goodyear, based in Akron, Ohio, is betting heavily on a new type of tire, the Aquatred, which is designed to provide better handling on slick roads.
Company officials say the Aquatred will virtually prevent hydroplaning -- tires gliding over wet surfaces without making full contact with the road, causing difficulty in handling a vehicle.


Autoclave Engineers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING Gant's Streak Is Halted by Earnhardt
Harry Gant's magic ended nine laps from the end of the Tyson Holly Farms 400 yesterday when Dale Earnhardt darted into the lead and went on to end Gant's four-race winning streak.
Gant dominated the 400-lap event in North Wilkesboro, N.C., leading 350 laps and appearing on the way to a modern-record fifth Nascar Winston Cup victory in a row until a broken brake lining opened the way for Earnhardt, the series leader.
Gant came out of the final pit stop, on lap 358, holding the lead and seemingly in command.
But Earnhardt got past Morgan Shepherd to take second place in the pits, then went after Gant on the track.
With his brakes nearly gone, the 51-year-old Gant, the oldest driver to win a Winston Cup race, was no match for Earnhardt, who moved up right behind Gant's rear bumper, then dived past on the outside on lap 392. (AP)


New Questions Raised on Stanford Research Costs
Stanford University could lose $20 million more in Federal financing for research as a result of a new Government audit that questions its practices in billing for employee benefits, the university's chief financial officer said today.
The audit, issued last week by the Defense Contract Audit Agency, recommended that Federal payments for benefits like health insurance, social security taxes and pensions as well as tuition costs for research assistants be cut by about one-third, to $40 million from about $60 million annually.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alliance Pharmaceutical Corp., two million common shares. Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
Allied Irish Bank P.L.C., 4.7 million American depository shares, each worth 6 common shares.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.


Monetary Fund Warns Of Shortage in Savings
The International Monetary Fund is increasingly concerned about a worldwide shortage of money for productive investments like building factories and says that unless industrial nations cut military spending and curtail trade subsidies, the world economy will suffer.
"The present tendency toward recovery could be affected," said a senior official, presenting a stronger and gloomier vision of the world economy than only a few months ago.
"A number of investment projects would have to be abandoned."


Nonsense Clouds Affirmative Action Debate; 'Less Rabid'?
To the Editor:
As a graduate of the City College of New York, I applaud "Don't Punish City College" (editorial, Sept. 19), which urges my fellow alumni not to punish the school because of the despicable statements of Prof.
Leonard Jeffries or Prof.
Michael Levin.
But your description of Professor Levin as "less rabid" plays into the hands of those who would make Professor Jeffries a hero.


Bush's Jump Start
The appalling slowness with which the arms control engine kicks over is the first explanation for President Bush's astonishing and commendable jump start.
In 1982, when Ronald Reagan and Leonid Brezhnev were in charge, the U.S. proposed slashing nuclear weapons stockpiles.
Nine years later, in July, Presidents Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev signed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, which phased out many -- but not nearly all -- of the weapons Mr.
Reagan sought to eliminate.


Lennar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Putt Goes Awry and U.S. Wins Ryder Cup
By the width of a golf ball as it coursed over the edge of the final hole of the final match, the United States regained the Ryder Cup today by defeating Europe, 14 1/2 to 13 1/2.
After 10 hard-fought singles matches, the entire competition came down to a five-foot par putt Bernhard Langer had to make to win his match against Hale Irwin.
Had he made it, the Europeans would have won the hole and had the 14 points they needed to tie the competition and retain the cup.


Cuomo Arrives in Japan To Foster Business Ties
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signaled to Japanese officials this morning that he would use his visit here to promote economic cooperation with Japan.
He also said "many Americans are unhappy" about the economic relationship between Japan and the United States.
"It is true that there is difficulty in the relationship," Mr.
Cuomo told the Governor of Tokyo, Shunichi Suzuki, at a meeting this morning at the giant new office of the Tokyo government.
He said American dissatisfaction stemmed from rising unemployment and other economic pressures and "that's something we need to address."


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late in the day Friday the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.14 percent, as was the six-month bill.


Mayflower Co-Operative Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Essay; Cleaning Housegate
It was a one-day embarrassment: the General Accounting Office revealed that 134 members of the House of Representatives had "bounced" some 581 checks of over $1,000 each at the House's private bank in the first six months of 1990.
The media had some fun; talk-show hosts railed at the spectacle; Speaker Tom Foley announced that the names of the check-kiters would be kept confidential because "this is now a matter that is over . . . definitely concluded." On to more serious things.


Inside Churches, Few Cheers And Some Jeers on Arms Plan
In Bonn, Moscow and Washington, President Bush's announcement of unilateral cuts in nuclear arms may be seen as momentous and historic.
But at the Pilgrim Baptist Church in Chicago, where people scurried along dark corridors to choir rehearsal and to usher- board meetings, yesterday was just another Sunday, not the second chapter in the new world order.
Children in navy suits, crisp white dresses and gloves passed the collection plate, deacons announced a bake sale and midweek prayer service and the news that some nuclear weapons would soon be eliminated merited not a word from the guest preacher, the Rev.
Yvonne Lee Wilson.
Only when pressed did members even vaguely recall that President Bush had made some remarks about nuclear weapons.


NEW WEAPONS CUTS MAY PROMPT MORE THAN BUSH WANTS
President Bush's dramatic moves to reduce American nuclear forces may lead to cuts in other military programs that he would like to keep and could affect domestic spending as well, highly placed Democrats said today.
Senator Sam Nunn, the influential chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said that reductions in spending that Mr.
Bush specifically warned against in his speech on Friday were now likely, including cuts in spending for long-range weapons like the B-2 bomber, for the "Star Wars" anti-missile system and for the military budget generally.
Focus on Military Budget
Focusing on the military budget for the fiscal year that begins Tuesday, the Georgia Democrat said Mr.
Bush's discussion of the reduced Soviet threat would affect the "dynamics" of a Senate-House conference on military spending legislation.
And for himself, Mr.
Nunn said he would like to see a sharp reduction in eventual purchases of the B-2, which he has championed, to about half of the 75 bombers the Air Force has sought.
Mr.
Bush's speech was seen by highly placed Capitol Hill aides and leading Democratic politicians as also likely to weigh heavily on Congressional budget actions next year and to make it much easier for Democrats campaigning for President to urge that the cuts in military spending be used for domestic programs.
The Congressional aides said the speech was also very likely to lead a review of last year's budget agreement, which bars using money from military budget cuts for domestic programs, when Congress reviews spending decisions next year.
Cuts in Nuclear Weapons
And Democrats maintained that since Mr.
Bush had made cuts in nuclear weapons without waiting for reciprocal Soviet action, it would now be much easier for Democrats to call for arms reductions without fearing that the Republicans would accuse them of favoring unilateral disarmament.
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who is expected to announce his Presidential candidacy on Thursday, said he thought that Mr.
Bush had "opened an area of opportunity politically," provided that Democrats made carefully thought-out arguments about military cuts.
In an interview, he said his party should also pay attention to converting military bases, manpower and technical expertise to civilian uses.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia, a Presidential candidate, said in an interview that he thought that Mr.
Bush's move would add authority to his own calls for reductions in American troop strength overseas.
Meanwhile, Administration officials went on national television to warn that Mr.
Bush's moves would not provide any substantial savings soon and indeed would cost money in the short run.
"In the short term over the next few months," Dick Cheney, the Secretary of Defense, said on the ABC News program "This Week," there would be "added costs with terminating contracts, moving systems around, destroying warheads, et cetera, that had not previously been expected."
Brent Scowcroft, Mr.
Bush's national security adviser, said on the NBC News program "Meet the Press, "In the first year it will certainly cost money.
"It costs money to bring these weapons home. You have to bring them home very carefully. It costs money to deactivate units."
The two men both predicted long-term savings.
"Five years out, I think there will be a peace dividend," Mr.
Scowcroft said.
"I honestly don't know," he said "what the size will be." Mr.
Cheney would only say that "the most recent initiatives will produce long-term savings."
Senator Nunn, appearing on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," did not disagree with their judgments about costs and savings.
But he said his efforts to support Mr.
Bush's calls for spending on the B-2, which the House seeks to eliminate, and on the strategic defense initiative, which the House would finance at a lower level, had been undercut by Mr.
Bush's announcement.
Abandoned Programs
He said the President had abandoned programs, like the mobile MX and Minuteman missiles, that "we were going to have to give away" in the House-Senate conference on the $291 billion Department of Defense authorization bill, but that he had expected to trade those programs to get House conferees to back the B-2 and strategic defense initiative.
"Right now, the Senate conferees are not going to have the leverage we did," said Mr.
Nunn, who is one of the conferees.
On the $865 million B-2 bomber, Mr.
Nunn said its strategic, nuclear mission had been reduced and while it would remain important to drop conventional bombs, "I think we have to re-examine the number of B-2's. I don't think we can afford 75."
"My guess it will be somewhere in the range of half of that," he said.
Mr.
Nunn also called for savings of about $1 billion a year by mothballing the B-1 bomber fleet, currently grounded for safety reasons.
And he said that since there would no longer be a nuclear mission for aircraft carriers, "the carrier numbers have to be re-examined."
The cuts that Mr.
Nunn foresaw are for the 1992 fiscal year, which begins this Tuesday.
The re-examinations of how many aircraft carriers and B-2 bombers are needed would apply to future years, and could lead to additional reductions.
Overall Spending Limits
So could efforts to change last year's budget act, which set overall spending limits for five years.
For the first three years, or through Sept. 30, 1993, it provided that savings in one category of spending, like defense, could not be used to finance greater spending in other areas, like domestic programs.
That agreement has been under growing attack for the last few months, especially since the failure of the Soviet coup last month, as Democrats and a few Republicans have argued to reduce defense spending levels that were based on a Soviet threat that no longer seems real.
Several Congressional aides, speaking on condition that their names not be used, said today that Mr.
Bush has made a new look at the budget law almost inevitable by acknowledging the reduced Soviet threat.
Democratic politicians saw the same arguments applying to their role in next year's campaigns.
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, supported what Mr.
Bush announced, but was blunt in his call for other cuts.
He said Friday that the logic of Mr.
Bush's analysis of the Soviet threat meant that "if our security needs have lessened, our level of military spending should reflect that change."


'Harlot's Ghost' Is Revising Fiction's Role as Cheap Date
In the pricing of American books, Hemingway has traditionally taken a back seat to historians, and a reader is likely to spend more for a fix-it book or a collection of inspirational ditties than for a book by Proust.
But when Norman Mailer's new novel "Harlot's Ghost" hit the bookstores last week with a price tag of $30, readers were put on notice that they may soon have to start paying what novels actually cost to produce.


Faradyne Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Washington at Work; Michigan Democrat Presides As Capital's Grand Inquisitor
This year alone, Representative John D. Dingell's investigations helped force the resignation of the president of Stanford University and led a Nobel Prize-winning scientist to retract a research paper.
The Congressman also uncovered mismanagement at the Food and Drug Administration and overbilling at Humana hospitals.
And that was just this year.
Over the last decade, his hearings have led to criminal convictions of top Government officials and the resignation of many others and have exposed fraud and corruption in corporate boardrooms and Government agencies.


Celutel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sound Advice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economic Calendar
Below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday Leading Indicators....August Construction Spending....August Purchasing Managers' Report....Sept.
Wednesday New-Home Sales....August Thursday Factory Orders....August Auto Sales....Sept.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Unemployment....Sept.


Risa Sonenshine, Ad Manager, Wed
Risa Sonenshine, an advertising account manager for McCall's magazine, was married yesterday to Matthew Crandall, an assistant product manager at American Home Products, both in New York.
Earle Zaidins, an administrative law judge in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., officiated at the Riverview Restaurant there.
Mrs.
Crandall, 26 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Albany.
She is a daughter of Sol Sonenshine of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., a security consultant for the Visitrak Corporation in New York, and the late Eunice Sonenshine.


Paging Mr. Taylor, Mr. Chuck Taylor
Ever wonder what's going to happen when MICHAEL JORDAN, who is paid to wear Nikes; PATRICK EWING, who wears his own label of Phoenix, and KARL MALONE, who represents L.A.
Gear, lace on their basketball sneakers in the Olympics for the United States team, which is sponsored by Converse.


Strawberry Keeps Dodgers in First
In the last, electrifying moment of the night, it came down to this: New York, New York.
Darryl Strawberry, the former Met, stepped up to the plate in the ninth inning tonight with the game tied.
Dave Righetti, the former Yankee, peered in and threw a 1-and-2 fastball.
Strawberry, booed earlier for his failures, lined a single to center.


Valley Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Book Proves Divisive For Christian Scientists
A fierce dispute has broken out in the Church of Christ, Scientist, over an obscure 44-year-old book about the church's founder, Mary Baker Eddy.
At stake is a $90 million bequest, a growing media empire and, some say, the future of the church itself.
Critics in the church accuse the church's leaders of propagating heresy to secure the bequest and use it to shore up the church's new and costly expansion into television, radio and magazine enterprises.
The leadership dismisses those assertions as the complaints of disgruntled former employees.


Abortion Debate Takes Center Stage in Manhattan


Blast Rocks TV Center In the Soviet Caucasus
An explosion blasted a television center today that is serving as the headquarters of the opposition to the Georgian republic's President, slightly injuring several people, witnesses and doctors said.
The explosion blew out windows and sent people fleeing.
Some witnesses said it was caused by an object thrown at the building, but the cause was not immediately established.
Doctors said that several people were cut by flying glass and that two had been taken to a hospital.


How Schools Might Use Volunteer Physicians
To the Editor:
Thousands of New York City children are deprived of basic health care, which diminishes the quality of their daily lives.
They come from overwhelmed, often drug-involved parents.


Miss Marksfield Has a Wedding
Karen Joy Marksfield was married yesterday to James Michael Gerard at the United Nations Plaza Hotel by Rabbi Charles Agin.
Mrs.
Gerard, 28 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Albany and received a master's degree in international trade from the State University at Buffalo.
She is a daughter of Faye Marksfield of Brooklyn and the late Herman Leonard Marksfield.


Oshman's Sporting Goods reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


People
*
John Babcock Jr., president of the publications group of BPI Communications, New York, today assumes direct management control of Adweek and other magazines of BPI's A/S/M Communications subsidiary.
According to a staff memorandum, Kenneth Fadner, A/S/M's president and chief executive, will leave management and remain a board member. *
Eric Fredericks, regional director for East Asia at Dentsu, Young &amp; Rubicam, has been appointed executive vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam, New York, responsible for Kraft General Foods business in Europe.
David Sia, regional director for South Asia and India, will assume Mr.
Fredericks's duties and become regional director for South and East Asia.


Can Syracuse Turn Off The Florida State Faucet?
A few hours after Florida State decimated Michigan, 51-31, on Saturday afternoon, the Seminoles' next opponent, Syracuse, completed a quiet shutout of Tulane, 24-0, before a crowd of only 19,729 spectators in the Superdome at New Orleans.
Those results set up another match of undefeated teams.
One, Florida State, is the best in the nation, according to The Associated Press poll.
The other, Syracuse, is possibly the best team in the East.
The confrontation will take place in Tallahassee, where no Syracuse squad has played before.
There have been three games between the schools before, the last in 1989, when the Seminoles cruised, 41-10, in the Carrier Dome.


Rebel Leader Returns to Run in Angolan Elections


New Yorker Trade Effort Uses Photos
AN agency known for its creativity will use photographs to sell advertisers on a magazine that almost never publishes them.
A week from today, Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein will introduce its trade ad campaign for The New Yorker.
The campaign, the first that the weekly magazine has run in almost a year, carries a new theme: "The New Yorker. When you read it, you'll see." Its ambitious goal is to convince advertising decision-makers that a thousand words is worth one picture.


Gelman Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Cutco Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Werner Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Three Homes in 150 Years For a Reform Synagogue
Simhath Torah, the joyful Jewish holiday that celebrates the Hebrew Scripture, arrived several hours early yesterday for Congregation Rodeph Sholom, a Reform temple on the West Side of Manhattan that used the occasion to celebrate a milestone, the start of its 150th year.
At 2:30 P.M. the rabbi and about 75 members from the congregation gathered at Houston and Clinton Streets on the Lower East Side, the site of the congregation's first building, to say a prayer and begin a six-mile march uptown.


Two Out: Harrelson Joins Cashen
With the calculation made long ago and the need for mercy increasingly urgent, the Mets announced yesterday that they had dismissed Manager Bud Harrelson.
The move came after a relatively brief, regularly strained and ultimately failed tenure.
"I do not blame the total downfall of the team on Bud Harrelson," said General Manager Frank Cashen, who installed third-base coach Mike Cubbage as the manager for the final week of the season.
"And I'm not here to indict Bud Harrelson as a man or as a manager. But I felt the club needed a new beginning, a new start. I wasn't pleased with the direction it was going."


Weak Dollar Magnifies Gains of Foreign Stock Exchanges
World markets continued to move sideways in the third quarter.
The Mexican, British and French exchanges led a sluggish pack, but the biggest gains came to those investors who made the best of a slipping dollar.
Of 24 world stock markets listed on the Financial Times index, only 8 rose by at least 1 percent measured in their own currencies.
But with the dollar falling 7.8 percent against the mark and about 3.1 percent against the yen, 18 of the 24 rose in terms of the dollar.


TSI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ukraine Chief Faces Hurdles In Quest for U.S. Recognition
In a pointed exchange with American scholars the other day, President Leonid M. Kravchuk of the Soviet Ukraine resisted pleas that he quickly phase out the traditional Communist system of price controls.
"There would be a social explosion," he told his questioners, who urged him to abandon the controls and other vestiges of the Communist centralized economy in an effort to institute a free-market system in his republic.


VTX Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chamber Music Society Planning 3 Premieres
The 1991-92 season of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, which begins on Oct. 20, will include premieres of works by Bruce Adolphe, Richard Danielpour and Oliver Knussen.
New artists of the society this season include the flutist Ransom Wilson and the oboist Stephen Taylor.
The violinist Joseph Silverstein will perform in the opening concert, which is to include Schoenberg's "Verklarte Nacht" and the Mendelssohn Octet, as well as works by Wolf, Shostakovich and Telemann.


Facing Germany's Newer Past
The past throws longer shadows in Germany than elsewhere.
The united Federal Republic is just celebrating its first birthday, and a second 40-year-old past is already awaiting clarification.
One of the last great Nazi trials, that of camp commandant Josef Schwamberger, isn't yet over.
Yet in Berlin the first trial against border guards of the Communist regime of Erich Honecker has begun.
Four border troops are charged with having machine-gunned 20-year-old Chris Gueffroy during his attempt to escape over the wall at Berlin-Treptow on Feb. 5, 1989.
Public feeling is running high.
Supporters and opponents of the trial bitterly oppose one another.
Almost everyone agrees that, if this is to happen at all, it should start with indictments against those who instigated and gave the orders: the Honeckers, Mielkes, Wolfs and associates.


Keith Robertson, 77; Wrote 5-Book Series For Schoolchildren
Keith Carlton Robertson, who wrote murder mysteries as well as children's books over 40 years, died last Monday at his house in Hopewell, N.J.
He was 77 years old.
He died of cancer, his daughter Hope said.
Mr.
Robertson began writing children's books in 1948 with "Ticktock and Jim." The five books of his "Henry Reed" series began with "Henry Reed Inc." in 1958 and ended with "Henry Reed's Think Tank" in 1986.


Dr. E.D. Leef Is Wed
Dr.
Elizabeth Deborah Leef, a resident in internal medicine, and Dr.
Michael William Jacobson, a cardiologist, both at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York, were married yesterday.
Judge Gerald Breitenstein of Closter (N.J.) Municipal Court officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Leef of Alpine, N.J.
The bride, 30 years old, graduated from Bryn Mawr College and the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School.
Dr.
Jacobson, 41, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received an M.D. degree from the Universite Louis Pasteur in Strasbourg, France.
He is the son of Mary Jay Jacobson of New York and the late Fred Jay Jacobson.


